<<<BEGIN_CORPUS>>>
CORPUS_TITLE: ++OPENINGS
CREATED_AT: 2026-01-12 23:02:20
TEXT_COUNT: 6
NOTES:
- Each text starts with <<<BEGIN_TEXT>>> and ends with <<<END_TEXT>>>.
- Use TITLE: lines to locate a text quickly, then jump upward to the nearest preceding <<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>.
- [diagram] markers indicate removed diagram/board blocks in CLEAN sources (when present).

TABLE_OF_CONTENTS:
01. Understanding the Chess Openings - Sam Collins - (1st ed, 2005) | file: 1. Understanding the Chess Openings - Sam Collins - (1st ed, 2005)_CLEAN.txt
02. Winning Chess Openings - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2003) | file: 2. Winning Chess Openings - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2003)_CLEAN.txt
03. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 1 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007) | file: 3. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 1 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007)_CLEAN.txt
04. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 2 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007) | file: 4. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 2 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007)_CLEAN.txt
05. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 3 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2008) | file: 5. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 3 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2008)_CLEAN.txt
06. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 4 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2010) | file: 6. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 4 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2010)_CLEAN.txt
<<<END_CORPUS_HEADER>>>
<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Understanding the Chess Openings - Sam Collins - (1st ed, 2005)
FILENAME: 1. Understanding the Chess Openings - Sam Collins - (1st ed, 2005)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 1
SHA256: 01e890f3131f884d22f84497ef1bf010d3fa4b72d5350c9757ac09c1890034a7
BYTES: 16
<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Winning Chess Openings - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2003)
FILENAME: 2. Winning Chess Openings - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2003)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 2
SHA256: 3b64958f007eecc460fe0dd5a3597c994bc7bbe0a0f2a44f710e5f0b84a5ca4c
BYTES: 320033
Introduction (And yes, my karate lessons were getting in the way of my chess studies.) There was only one solution: to try to avoid the sharpest theoretical varia- tions and instead create a solid hiding place for my King. Once that had been done, I turned to dealing with the center, finding a plan, and con- ducting possible attacks. These lessons are contained in Chapters Seven, Eight, and Nine. Beginning players will always get wiped out by more experienced opponents. One of the major reasons is that the King lacks protection. These chapters are specifically designed to prevent all further short losses. You'll be taught to have a safe King and you will be well sup- plied with the insights of classical and modern openings and defenses. Throughout the book, I've diligently tried to state the names of the openings, defenses, variations, and attacks that I describe. This has led to a number of awkward moments. The word opening often refers to what White is doing and defense refers to what Black is doing, but sometimes a favored variation as White is tried with the colors reversed. "I like this opening as White, so I'll play it as Black!" Of course, the converse is also true. A difficult one is the King's Indian Defense, a line of defense favored by a number of World Champions when playing the Black pieces. But if White adopts the King's Indian Defense setup, is it a King's Indian Defense or a King's Indian Opening? In such cases the term reversed is often used. Although the words opening, defense, variation, and attack are often used interchangeably, I've tried to reserve opening for White's play and defense for Black's play. With a game that's 1400 years old, expect some strange nomenclature to have been incorporated along the way. As always, I wish you the very best of success in your endeavors and I hope that this book will stimulate you into buying further books that are more specific about the openings and defenses that you might enjoy. xi

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

As always, I wish you the very best of success in your endeavors and I hope that this book will stimulate you into buying further books that are more specific about the openings and defenses that you might enjoy. xii

CHAPTER ONE

Early Days Take a look at Diagram 1, the starting position of a chess game. It is the most complicated position in chess. Believe me. Grandmaster David Bronstein, who drew a match for the World Chess Champion- ship in 1951, oftentimes would come to a major tournament game and sit in wonderment staring at this very position. He once spent over 50 minutes on his very first move! And what on earth was this chess genius, this titan, this virtual co-champion of the entire chess world thinking about? "I was wondering what to play," David said. Is the starting position really that complex? The answer is more compli- cated than a simple yes or no. And the complexity grows as the student learns more! When I was playing my first games of chess, I was absolutely certain what was the best move. (Of course, I was dead wrong.) Now as an International Grandmaster, I find myself weighing the pros and cons of the multiple openings I play and I try to imagine which one would give my opponent the most discomfort. As a player's style of play matures, the player's choice of openings goes through subtle changes. When a pet favorite that used to bring home the victories is no longer scoring as well, a shift often proves successful. After trying out different formations, the player makes more changes. Thus the starting position becomes ever

DIAGRAM 1 .

CHAPTER ONE

more complex as an experienced player starts to seriously juggle the possi- ble openings and defenses. Some chess positions with a mere half-dozen pieces seem unsolvable. The starting position with all 32 pieces on the board becomes overwhelm- ing. There are so many moves to think about, and every one of our pieces cries out for attention. It can lead to paralysis of the mind. "Move me!" shouts the e2-pawn. "I'm Bobby Fischer's favorite move!" "Look," says our King's Rook, "I'm cramped and boxed in. Get me into the action and I'll show you why I'm called a cannon!" "Don't be silly!" states our noble Queen. "I'm the most powerful of all! Bring me into the battle. The entire board will bow before me." As I started to play my earliest games, a jumble of voices confused my poor brain. Such a chorus of demands, my goodness! Willy-nilly, I'd choose my favorite piece of the moment. The chosen piece gets to move, jump, or stumble around until the lucky chosen one gets removed from the board. I thought, "What a pity! Just when things were getting good! Well, let's see... That plan was working really well! If only my poor fellow hadn't been captured. Bad luck that. Well, there is another one, let's use it!" And off I would go, until the newly chosen gets slaughtered. How unlucky our pawns and pieces seem to be. "What's this? A check? How on earth did my King get checked? Looks like his majesty has to take a stroll..." If the above thoughts reflect your early efforts, you now realize that your despairs have been shared. I did the very same thing. These early thoughts of victory accurately describe how I got clobbered. Those early losses came quickly and furiously! While most of my very earliest games are thankfully lost to posterity, I remember a number of them quite well. I still recall that some of these losses really hurt. I was so certain of the cor- rectness of my approach, and I'd stubbornly cling to my earliest beliefs. In fact, I was so stubborn, I'm rather disbelieving that I actually became a grandmaster! 2 Early Days Copying the Opponent The following is the earliest game that I can recall. Yasser Seirawan versus Unknown, Unfriendly Foe Follow my moves in silent fascination.

1.d3?

Why this mistaken move? Actually I wasn't sure what to do. Of the chorus this one little pawn seemed to cry loudest. I make this "pass" move as I had already "discovered" a brilliant strategy, which I will soon reveal.

1.. .d5

My more experienced opponent makes a very reasonable move.

2.d4?

This was my brilliant discovery! I would merely duplicate my opponent's move, thereby negating the need for any thought on my part. Clever, no? I would keep a careful eye on my opponent's moves, deduce an error in his plan, and then deviate at the critical moment to score a brilliant victory.

[diagram]
My opponent tries a speculative gambit.

3. e4?

Continuing to ape my opponent, my clever strategy begins to unfold.

3.. .Bg4?

My opponent blunders by putting a Bishop in capture (the French term en prise is the chess vernacular, but I was too inexperienced to have learned this term) to my Queen.

4.dxe5?

Of course, I was attracted to the possibility of duplicating my opponent's move with 4.Bg5, but already my natural talent began to expose itself. Somehow I "sensed" the critical moment to deviate had come. My oppo- nent's move had to be an error and I took advantage of the moment to grab a central pawn. I never considered the best move, 4.Qxg4, for a 3

CHAPTER ONE

single moment. At that time I didn't have a complete grasp of how my pieces were supposed to move.

4...Bb4+?

With this eye-popping move, my opponent announced Checkmate! Hap- pily my opponent began explaining to me how his Bishops were scissor- ing my position and that my King had no moves. He said I shouldn't be upset by this premature loss, because I was his fourth victim of this devas- tating trap. Diagram 2 shows the final position from this game. Today I can only stare at this position with open-mouthed horror. White isn't checkmated at all! By playing any of the moves 5.c3, 5.Nc3, 5.Nd2, 5.Bd2, or 5.Qd2, the check to my King is stopped. Of course, White will lose his Queen and probably the game, so let us quickly turn the page! Now is the time for the first critical lesson from this book: Write down the moves to all your games and save your game scores. Oftentimes you will play quick games or five-minute chess. I can only encourage you to record these games as best you can. Try to record the moves as they are made, but if this is inconvenient, try to reconstruct the game afterward and make a written record. I improved my play enor- mously by doing this simple exer- cise and charting my own progress. The importance of this lesson and its impact on my understanding of chess didn't manifest itself for several months. First it was neces- sary to lose dozens of games. Cannon Fire Another game that typified my earli- est "style" was demonstrated in the following encounter. DlAGRAM 2. 4 Early Days Yasser Seirawan versus Known Unfriendly Fiend In viewing Diagram 1, the starting position, I imagined myself to be Napo- leon -a fine general in charge of an army ready to defy all opposition for their commander. The air is fresh and clean as the individual units stamp their fury, anxious to engage the enemy. Being a commander concerned for each individual unit, I decide to lob the enemy using my cannons! Of course, a little tenderizing of the enemy with cannons is just the right strategy before sending in the cavalry. From the starting position, I formed an image of my Rooks as cannons. They were born to fire their salvos up the files and along the ranks. Backed by my fantasy of com- manding an army, I make use of my Hollywood movie-viewing experi- ences and come to the only possible conclusion: "Light the cannons!" 1,h4? This was my favorite opening move!

1.. .d5

With the advantage of many victories backing his choice, my opponent makes a particularly powerful move. 2,Rh3? I bring my cannons into battle right away so that the enemy ranks would be softened up.

2.. .Bxh3!

This truly excellent move should have been discouraging. Not to be deterred, I conjure up yet another fabulous effort. 3,a4?? This mistake gets a second question mark. After blundering my Rook I should have played 3.Nxh3, capturing the Black Bishop as compensation.

[diagram]
Complacency born from the firm knowledge of previous victories leads to a mistake. Black should retreat his endangered Bishop. 4,Ra3?? 5

CHAPTER ONE

I had a dim awareness that this mind-boggling move was a mistake, but, what the heck, consistency is the hallmark of genius and I was deter- mined to have my cannons blaze away!

4...Bxa3!

What is up with this jerk anyway? He hasn't missed a trick! Now that my Rooks have disappeared, a sudden fear grips my heart. My h4-pawn is open to attack by the Black Queen. Feeling sympathy for the valiant foot soldier, I see no reason to allow its capture. Yes! I see the point of my play clearly now. First I play:

5.h5?

If he misses my point I will play 6.h6 and 7.hxg7 and gxh8=Q winning. . . Diagram 3 shows how I would lose many, many games. It seemed like a cruel fate, but my cannons were hardly ever around after the first dozen moves! By now you should be getting the idea of what a truly hopeless chess player I was when I started out. Later I would create my own philosophy that went like this: "Every mistake should be repeated at least once. In that way the original mistake could be confirmed." How could you be sure if you made a mistake based upon a single loss? So now you're beginning to see that I was a hopeless, stub- born chess player! This brings me to the second critical lesson: Believe in your own ideas. Not all your ideas will be bright ones. In fact, you'll probably have ten false trails for every true one you find. Fine! So be it! But believe in your ideas. Cling to them stub- bornly. Give up on them slowly, only after severe trial and tribula- DIAGRAM 3. tions. If you keep getting clobbered, 6 Early Days then seek an adjustment, but don't be afraid to play your own moves. They might be bad, but you'll learn a lot faster playing your own moves instead of mimicking others. Adjust your ideas by the results of your own practice. At this early point in my career, I still hadn't learned the first critical lesson, but I sure had mastered the second. I knew my ideas were clever; they just needed some slight fine tuning. After about 30 losses of "cannon positioning," I discovered my real powerhouse: my Queen. A whole new array of losses awaited me. Queen Raid After determining that my cannon-fire ideas weren't doing the job, a careful rethink of my opening approach was necessary. This was a criti- cal phase of my chess development. It seemed that chess was far too dif- ficult for my poor mind. Was trying to get better worth getting stomped by my friends? All chess players at one time in their very early career are struck by this telling question. Many decide that, indeed, chess isn't their shtick. Fortu- nately for me, a serendipitous outside influence played a crucial role at this phase in my development. My interest was rekindled when America's own Robert James (Bobby) Fischer defeated the Soviet Union's Boris Spassky for the World Chess Championship in 1972. It was a heady moment for chess players around the world, and for American chess players in particular. While most Americans were undoubtedly proud of their new champion, I had a question: "How could Bobby be champion? He didn't beat me!" Renewing myself, I applied the formidable powers of my young mind to my opening strategy. Carefully penetrating the mysterious veil of the chess pieces, I deduced something wonderful and extraordinary: My Queen is the most powerful piece on the board! 7

CHAPTER ONE

My fault had been not to develop it quickly enough. How simple and obvious: My Queen was a natural-born bully! All that was necessary was to introduce it into the game as early as possible. This faulty strategy is one of the most insidious pitfalls in chess! I fell into it headlong, as every untrained beginner has done! The problem, dear reader, is simply this: The Queen Raid strategy worked! My results against my circle of chess friends immediately improved. Two early examples of victorious play convinced me that I was on the right track. Yasser Seirawan versus Known Unfriendly Fiend This game begins with a good opening move-played with the completely wrong strategy in mind. The intention should be to grab control of the center, not to make room for my Queen! Controlling the center certainly wasn't my intention. 1 .e4 e5 This is the classical answer and a good move. Even beginners occasion- ally find good moves!

2.Qh5?

This was my "new and improved" idea. As the new neighborhood bully, my Queen would knock heads together.

[diagram]
My opponent seizes the opportunity to attack my Queen, but overlooks my real threat.

3.Qxe5+

Simply brilliant! My Queen spears Black's position. Now Black's cannon (Rook) will be eaten.

3.. .Qe7

Black copies my plan of bringing out the Queen. My turn!

4.Qxh8

My Queen happily munches the trapped Rook.

4.. .Qxe4+

8 Early Days What's this? The capture presents danger, but I can block the check and my Rook is safe.

5. Ne2

With this good move, I develop a piece and block the check.

5.. .Qxc2(?)

What a sly devil my opponent is! Now he is conducting his own raid. My goodness, how do I defend the threat of 6...Qxcl Checkmate? A sudden panic overcomes me, followed by a sigh of relief. No! My brilliant fifth move with my Knight protects my cl-Bishop! Happily, I continue my own raid.

6.Qxg8

In a greedy (and good, I might add) move, a mighty Knight is slaugh- tered. My marauding Queen is picking apart Black's army. Isn't chess easy and fun? I'm sure such gleeful thoughts were printed on my face.

6.. .Nc6

Black makes a good move and develops a piece. Now, at the position shown in Diagram 4, 1 had a real think about what to do next. By this time I was experienced enough to make a realization. I had a won position! I've grabbed enough loot-a Rook and a Knight-to have a big edge. Do I need to win more material? The h7-pawn is a very tempting grab as my raid on the Kingside would be completed. How- ever, Black's Queen is quite worry- ing and I must pay attention so that I don't blow my win. Resisting my strong inclination to play 7.Qxh7, I instead decide to attack Black's raiding Queen.

7. Na3!

In another surprisingly good move, and without understanding what I

DIAGRAM 4.

CHAPTER ONE

was doing, I've developed a Knight with tempo. That is, I mobilize one of my pieces and attack Black's Queen at the same time. The realization that "Black's Queen will have to move because I've attacked the Queen!" planted a seed that would take root and grow. This seed would lead me to reevaluate my new Queen strategy.

7.. .Qa4

This is a move I could fully understand and appreciate. Beginners like myself who have discovered the Queen strategy try to throw the Queen right into the middle of the battle. When the Queen is attacked, my natu- ral reaction is to return the favor at once! As my Knight attacks Black's Queen, the Queen responds by attacking my White Knight. Just what I would do! My admiration for my opponent's play was growing. I looked at the captured pieces to restore my confidence. I'm still a Rook and Knight ahead! I love what has just taken place. I've gobbled up nearly half of my opponent's army and I had just attacked Black's Queen. It felt so good that I only considered two moves: taking the h7-pawn or the move I chose.

8. b3!

Playing 8.Qxh7 was nearly irresistible. But attacking Black's Queen had brought such pleasure previously, I just couldn't resist. This time, the thought behind the move was correct. My cl-Bishop protects the Knight and the Black Queen is given another boot.

8.. .Qb4

Black tries to keep his Queen as close to the action as possible. Once more my opponent had completed the very move I would have played. At this stage of my chess career, I rarely saw more than one move ahead. My move always seemed to be spur of the moment and at this moment I was on a roll. Black's Queen has had to react to my previous moves. Without hesitation I plunked down my next move.

9. Nc2?

Early Days What joy, attacking Black's Queen again! My pieces are being brought into play and the game is won. (With the benefit of 25 years' hindsight,

9.Nc4 is a far better move.)

9,..Qc5? I thought this move to be an excellent retort because it follows the reason- ing, "When attacked, counter with an attack of your own." In fact, this move just loses. While Black is quite lost because of his material deficit, a better choice is 9. . .Qe4 to get out of harm's way. Diagram 5 shows the position as we come to one of the proudest moments of my early career: my first combination. Of course, I didn't call my next move a combination (I didn't know what the word meant); it was simply wonderful. 1O.Ba3! I continue harassing the Black Queen. This was the very first move I con- sidered, but because Black's last move attacked my c2-Knight, I was going to give up on this move when I spotted- by sheer luck - that the move has a deeper purpose then merely attacking Black's Queen. 1O...Qxc2 Played with a near yelp of delight, my fiendish opponent wasn't about to be chivalrous and say, "Look here young Yasser, you've overlooked my threat to capture your Knight. Why don't you reconsider?" 1 1 .Qxf8 Checkmate This stunning denouement had an extraordinary effect on my enjoyment of chess. I was as dumbfounded as my opponent, who could only stare in helpless reflection at the final position. I had actually anticipated two moves in a row. I had consciously sacrificed a Knight in order to win back a Bishop! DIAGRAM 5.

CHAPTER ONE

You must understand that at this stage of my chess understanding, captures came only as a result of an oversight by myself or my opponent or due to a mutually recognized immediate trade of pieces. Sometimes captures were ignored all together. This little trick caused a near explo- sion in my cranium. It was possible to sacrifice a piece with a higher pur- pose in mind! From this victory I deduced all the wrong lessons. Now I was more convinced then ever that I was close to solving the mystery of chess and what to do in the opening. I now believed that the key to victory was devel- oping the Queen early in order to raid the flanks, and that in this way an early checkmate was possible. As experience would prove, I was completely wrong. At this time, most of my games were usually lopsided affairs where my opponents would delight in taking my entire army first, before check- mating my King! That was simply the way it was done. Most of the time, I was checkmated without the aid of any of my pieces or pawns on the board. This was another reason why the victory just described resonated so loudly: Black's very own pieces blocked Black's King from escaping. Thus I came to arguably the greatest pitfail for all beginners: an over- whelming fascination with the Queen's power. My concern for its wellbe- ing became so great that the game ceased to be interesting when Queens were traded or-worst of all-lost! Let's look at one more of my typical victories from this period. First I must confess that I wasn't entirely com- fortable with White. I was unsure if I should play l.e4 and 2.Qh5 or 2.Qf3, l.d4 and 2.Qd3, or l.c4 and 2.Qb3. My rate of success was pretty good with all three tries but I was dy-no-mite with the Black pieces! Witness the following epic. Known Fiend versus Yasser Seirawan My chess-playing friends and I fell into a pattern of playing certain open- ing formations that we liked. My friends liked this move because they had Early Days seen Bobby Fischer play it. None of us knew why. My answer would come like lightning. 1 ,e4 d5 This is actually not a bad opening move, and it goes by the name of the Scandinavian Defense-although at the time I didn't know that.

2.exd5 Qxd5

I was already in my glory. My Queen had been introduced into the game with a wide-open field. Now I'd ferret out a weakness to capture.

3. Nc3

This good move attacks my Queen and forces it to move again. This move hadn't yet made an impression upon my young mind, as it had always been my intention to play with my Queen. 3,..Qe6+? My Queen is misplaced here and will be forced to move again. The open- ing theory of the Scandinavian Defense is that 3...Qa5, keeping Black's Queen out of danger, is the recommended move. My choice of move is typical of beginning players. The expression "patzer (weak player) sees a check, patzer plays a check" is appropriate for this move.

4. Be2 Qg6

I've discovered a potential weakness in White's g2-pawn and immediately take aim, as shown in Diagram 6.

5. Bb5+?

Played in true patzer style, this move ignores the obvious threat to capture the g2-pawn. White should defend the g2-pawn by 5.Bf3. In this case White would look to play Ngl- e2-f4 in order to attack Black's Queen.

5...C6! DIAGRAM 6.

CHAPTER ONE

The venerable grandmaster Victor Kortchnoi would describe this very good move as "a blind hand finding a seed." I block the check to my King while returning the threat to White's Bishop.

6.Ba4?

White again overlooks the threat to the g2-pawn; the retreat 6.Bfl is the best move.

6.. .b5

I seize the opportunity to attack White's Bishop once again. A better move is 6...Qxg2, following through on the planned raid.

7. Nxb5?

White sacrifices a Knight for doubtful compensation. After 7.Bb3 Qxg2

8.Qf3 White could have limited his losses to a pawn.

7.. .Qxg2! 8.Nc7+

White happily forks King and Rook. After 8.Qf3 Qxf3 9.Nxf3 cxb5

10.Bxb5+ Bd7, Black would have a clear advantage in force as he has won

a Knight for a pawn. Of course, at this point in my career, this advantage was by no means decisive!

8.. .Kd8 9.Nxa8 Qxh1

As shown in Diagram 7, the Rook trade leaves White in a desperate situa- tion, as his King will soon be exposed. 1O.Kf1 Bh3+! 11.Ke1?? This terrible move loses the game almost at once. After the forced ll.Ke2 Bg4+ 12.f3 (the move my opponent had overlooked)

12...Qg2+ 13.Kd3 Bf5+ 14.Kc3,

White's King is trotting around the board, but it is still a fight.

11...Qxg1+ 12.Ke2 Bg4+

13.f3 Bxf3+!

DIAGRAM 7.

Early Days This fine move separates White's Queen from the protection of the King.

14.Kxf3 Qxd1 +

At the position shown in Diagram 8, White resigns. Unhappy about the loss of his Queen and with no ambitions for the remaining pieces, my opponent gave up. A number of similar victories convinced me of the correctness of my new approach. Developing my Queen as quickly as possible gave chances for an early knockout raid. It was certainly more successful than my Cannon Opening! Destroying the Queen Raid It was at this point that I discovered a coffeehouse in Seattle's University Dis- trict called The Last Exit on Brooklyn. The chess players who met here were far more experienced players than my usual circle of friends. It was here that my Queen Raid approach received a number of nasty setbacks. The harshest lesson was the following game, which left a deep impression. Yasser Seirawan versus Known Experienced Player This was a big game for me. I was playing an experienced adult chess player and was anxious to prove my newfound understanding of opening play. My opening had but one aim: creating an avenue for my Queen to develop. 1 .e4 e5 Black responds with the Classical King Pawn Defense. I didn't know the defense had a name, but it was a standard counter in my circle of friends.

DIAGRAM 8.

CHAPTER ONE

2.Qh5?

Of course I was very happy to play this mistake, allowing my Queen to immediately begin its attack. Naturally, I'm poised to grab Black's eS- pawn.

2.. .NC6

This reaction put the brakes to my plan. Black easily defends my one and only threat. It was time to create another.

3. Bc4

White threatens 4.Qxf7, which is well known as the Scholar's Mate. The term wasn't known to me, but the threat certainly was! How would my experienced opponent react?

[diagram]
In a good move, Black blocks my threat to the f7-pawn and attacks my Queen as well. Undeterred, I retreat my Queen and renew the same threat.

4. Qf3

Thus far I was very proud of my play. Aggressive from the start, I had held the initiative and was really taking the game to my opponent! Surely he felt the same way too?

4.. .Nf6!

Black calmly blocks my threat to the fZ-pawn and develops another piece. Now I fully concentrated to find something creative. After some intense thought, I found a nifty idea.

5.Qb3?

As I was about to discover, this was a mistake. At the time, I really liked this move because it fit perfectly with my newfound knowledge. The fZ- pawn is attacked yet again-how brilliant I am!-and my Queen is per- fectly positioned to grab the b7-pawn if opportunity allows. Yes indeed, things are really going my way!

5.. .Nd4!

Black's excellent response is one my young mind didn't appreciate. Of course Black's Knight attacks my Queen, but my opponent apparently Early Days hadn't realized my threat so I eagerly seize the opportunity to cap- ture a pawn with check, as shown in Diagram 9. 6,Bxf7+ I was certainly proud of this move. My opponent is forced to move his King, I'm a pawn up, and I'd be vic- torious after just a few more stern moves. I was a bit perplexed that my esteemed opponent was not per- turbed by the need to move his King.

6.. .Ke7 7.Qc4

In the far recesses of my mind a doubt appeared. I was surprised that I didn't have an immediate checkmate. What a pity that 7.Qe6 isn't check- mate! In that case, either the d7-pawn or the d4-Knight would capture my Queen. My first idea was to play 7.Qb4+. (My second check in a row! I would be on a roll.) But after 7...Kxf7, I'd lose my Bishop and my Queen would be under attack.

[diagram]
Where did this unexpected move come from? Wasn't I the one making all the threats? Black's move attacking my Queen forces me to give up the protection of my Bishop. 8, Qc5+ Kxf7 I was very sorry to see the capture of my valiant Bishop. After all, this Bishop had forced Black's King to move. Now my hand faltered. I had intended to grab Black's e5-pawn when my attention was drawn to my c2- pawn. My goodness! After 9.Qxe5 Nxc2+ lO.Kdl Nxal, my King will have been checked and I would lose a Rook. 9,Qc3

DIAGRAM 9.

CHAPTER ONE

A rather painful retreat, but I couldn't allow the capture of the c2-pawn and my Queen had to move.

9...Bb4!

Black unleashes another powerful and unexpected move! I had been warned that my opponent was a "good player." But this apparently wasn't true; my opponent has just blundered a Bishop. My hand reached out to grab the Bishop but faltered. Why? Well, my Queen protects my c2-pawn and if I take the Bishop... Yikes! It dawns on me that with 10.Qxb4 Nxc2+, my King and Queen are forked by a Knight. I'd lose my Queen. This means that I can't capture Black's Bishop. What's even worse is that my Queen is attacked again and I must move. I revise my evaluation of my opponent: He is good! He had just set a trap of two moves. He had actually anticipated my move. How on earth had he figured that out? Now my har- ried Queen must move again, but I can't allow the capture of my c2-pawn.

10.Qd3 d5!

At last, a mistake! My opponent has missed my threat of c2-c3 forking Bishop and Knight. Now I'd get the chance to win back the piece I'd lost. Finally, for the last time, my hand faltered yet again. Surely my crafty opponent would not overlook losing a piece? Right, that was the trick! Black's last move introduces the threat of ll...dxe4, winning a pawn, and worse, attacking my Queen yet again!

11. exd5

Fearful of ll...dxe4, I couldn't allow my pawn to be captured. I still had my ambitions. Given the chance, the move c2-c3 would win back my piece. I couldn't believe what had just happened. With another fine attacking move, my Queen was again under attack and had to move. My game is ter- rible. Black's pieces are buzzing about the board and all I have developed is my Queen. The Queen, which I thought was a bully, was getting pushed around. With a heavy heart I abandoned the defense of my c2-pawn and accepted the loss of a Rook. Early Days

12.Qg3

I recall being quite proud of this move. I realized that 12.Qe3 Nxc2+ would fork my King and Queen. Unblinking, my opponent immedi- ately attacked my Queen yet again!

12.. .NH5!

I couldn't believe my opponent had resisted the temptation to play

12...Nxc2+, which I evaluated as

winning. So why this move? Once again my Queen would have to move, but where? Take a look at Diagram 10 and you'll realize my discomfort. Nearly all the squares avail- able to my Queen are guarded!

13.Qxe5

I avoid stepping into the same ...Nd4xc2+ Knight fork, and I console myself with the thought that I have wiped out a pawn. I saw Black's next move but there was nothing I could do.

13.. .Re8!

By pinning my Queen to my King, the cannon had never seemed more powerful! Knowing my Queen was lost, I captured the Rook. 1 4.Qxe8+ Qxe8+ What a disaster! My Queen is captured and my King is checked. Flus- tered by the suddenness of my losing position, I found my last bad move.

15. Kd1? Bxc2 Checkmate

My experienced opponent didn't bother to announce checkmate and instead left it to me to find a move. (See Diagram 11, on the next page.) With my hand on my King and a puzzled expression, I tried moving my King to a few squares. When I couldn't find a square, I looked at my oppo- nent. He gave me a knowing smile and then said, "Checkmate."

DIAGRAM 10.

CHAPTER ONE

This game left me shaking my head. After 1 returned home, I went over the game very carefully and came to some startling conclusions:

[diagram]
Queen had actually been chased around the board, having to respond to every threat against it.

[diagram]
developing his forces, I was falling behind. The final position, shown in Diagram 11, was a forceful reminder of how lopsided the victory was. Not a single White piece had been developed. I had played 15 moves and nearly all my pieces were on their original squares. The only two pieces that had managed to make it into the game, my Queen and Bishop, had been captured. This sparked a whole new way of thinking and I discovered another principle: While an early Queen Raid against a beginner is effective, a Queen Raid will not work against an experienced opponent who knows how to coordinate pieces. Chess coaches all over the world understand this truism! Beginners are very vulnerable to Queen Raids. Qnce they learn how to coordinate their pieces and pawns and ward off an early Queen Raid, the strategy fails. The early development of the Queen is a detriment for the other pieces and the strategy boomerangs against the raider. Early Days Danny Noble versus Allison Borngesser,

1998 National Elementary Championships

Before moving on to Chapter Two, I'd like to share the following game. During the time I spent writing this book, I received the June 1998 issue of Northwest Chess, the monthly publication for the Washington and Ore- gon State Chess Federations, which reported on the 1998 National Ele- mentary Championships that had been held in April. National Chess Master Carl Haessler, who has been successfully teaching chess to scho- lastic players for years, accompanied several of his students to the 1998 Nationals and shared their successes and sorrows. Carl's report featured the following game.

1.e4e5 2,Qh5

I look at this move with a knowing smile of understanding. How exciting! Will Black see the threat to the e5-pawn?

2.. .Nf6?

No, the threat is overlooked! As I've previously demonstrated, there is no reason not to protect the e5-pawn.

3.Qxe5+ Be7 4.Bc4 Nc6!

Very good. The raiding Queen is attacked and a piece is developed with tempo.

5.Qf4 O-O 6.e5?

Played in the spirit of the raiding Queen opening, White makes threats as quickly as possible. Much better is developing a piece with 6.Nc3.

6.. .Nxe5??

This mistake costs a Knight. As Black's f6-Knight is attacked by a pawn, it should simply move. Black's choices are 6...Ne8, which is a safe retreat, or she can move and simultaneously attack White's Queen with the ambi- tious 6...Nh5. If White plays 7.Qf3 or 7.Qg4, then 7...Nxe5! 8.Qxh5 Nxc4 allows Black to win back the pawn with a superior game.

7.Qxe5

Things are certainly going in White's favor. He has now won a piece and enjoys a winning position. All of this in only seven moves!

CHAPTER ONE

7...d6

Undeterred by the early setback of material loss, Black continues by developing a pawn with tempo. Unfortunately, this move has a drawback: The e7-Bishop is locked in behind Black's f6-Knight and d6-pawn. This is important because the only open file in the position is the e-file and the e7- Bishop is therefore misplaced. A Rook belongs on the e-file! Stronger therefore is 7...d5!, attacking White's Bishop. After 8.Be2 Bd6! White's Queen is forced to move yet again. In this case, Black is coordinating her pawns and pieces and is beginning to get some play for the lost piece.

8.Qf4 Ng4?

The idea behind the move is to play 9...Bg5, attacking White's Queen. As pointed out before, a stronger move is 8...d5! 9.Be2 Bd6, developing Black's forces with gain of time. Diagram 12 shows the current position.

9.h4?

This looks like the start of a bad idea. Is White combining a Queen Raid and a Cannon Opening? Simplest is 9.Nf3, which develops a piece and pre- vents a 9...Bg5 attack on White's Queen. 9,..Ne5 1O.h5? Inis continues to waste time pursuing an attack that is going nowhere. Again, 10.Nf3 is the correct move. White's wasted moves allow Black to get back into the game. 1O...Nxc4?! Although it's not a bad move, it's not the best. Black could make White's position uncomfortable by attacking White's Queen with 10...Bg5!. The Queen is forced to move and to still lend protection to the c4-Bishop. After 10.Qe4 Re8, the e-file has been cleared with tempo and Black has developed some threats.

DIAGRAM 12.

Early Days 1 1 .Qxc4 Be6 A fine move. While Black has mixed good and bad moves, young Allison has a fine understanding of attacking White's Queen while developing her pawns and pieces. Still, it must be pointed out that the e6-Bishop's new station occupies the e-file. Once again the move 11... d5! should have been preferred.

12.Qc3?

White continues to flounder. The Queen is getting bumped around pretty severely. It would have been better to get out of the way by 12.Qa4, or play

12.Qb5 with a potential capture of the b7-pawn. This latter move could

have been expected as it neatly fits the concept of the Queen Raid. White might have been attracted to 12.Qc3? because in combination with the move h5-h6, a checkmating threat against the g7-pawn would have been created.

12.. .Bf6!

Black is on a roll! She attacks White's Queen yet again.

13. Qd3?

White is losing valuable time. He should play 13.d4, blocking the threat to his Queen and releasing his cl-Bishop for action.

13.. .Re8!

With another fine move, Black brings her Rook to the open e-file and creates a tactical threat, as shown in Diagram 13.

[diagram]
Filled with dreams of glory, White is oblivious to Black's threat. White should develop with 14.Ne2, blocking the e-file. This move is typical of inex- perienced players who concentrate only on what they are doing-not what the opponent might be thinking.

DIAGRAM 1 3.

CHAPTER ONE

14...Bf5+!

A shocking double attack, the discovered check by the e8-Rook doesn't allow the capture of the f5-Bishop. White is forced to lose his Queen.

15.Qe2 Rxe2+ 16.Nxe2g6

Black won the game in 39 moves. Many lessons can be drawn from the above game fragment:

[diagram]
Rooks, early -often to the exclusion of all the other pieces.

[diagram]
often left stranded.

CHAPTER TWO

Basic Opening Principles Journeying often to the Last Exit coffeehouse, I found that a whole new understanding of the chess world opened up to me. By playing against experienced players, I gained a new appreciation for the game. All my opening "innovations" were being neatly refuted, and I was completely unable to survive the opening stages. I'm extremely grateful to all the chess players at the Last Exit who took pity on my poor efforts and began to dissect my opening mistakes. I'd especially like to thank Jeffrey Par- sons and James Blackwood, who happily spent many hours teaching me the game's many mysteries. I soon learned the important principles of opening play. These principles were laid down as follows and they are as valid as ever: A chess game has three phases: the opening, the middle game, and the endgame. In the opening, pawns and minarpieces play the key roles. The major pieces-the Queen and the Rooks-do not. This principle brought a newfound awareness. If I was to have any chance against an experienced player, I had to learn how to use my pawns and to develop my Knights and Bishops first. I had to resist the impulse to raid with my Queen or to expect my cannons to blaze away. Of course I could not do this! Only countless telling losses made me understand this principle. My opponents at the Last Exit beat me like a drum. The word "victory" seemed to apply only to my opponent. Finally, like a stubborn mule, I chose to accept the well-worn path to chess mastery and I learned a slew of new opening ideas.

CHAPTER TWO

While I continued to lose many games, I was also fortunate to witness many games between strong players. One thing that confounded me was how vulnerable the King is in the opening. Time and time again a King was checkmated within 10 to 20 moves. Often a player didn't go after the win of a pawn or a piece but instead launched an all-out assault on an enemy King. This invariably happened when the victim neglected to develop his pieces. The idea that a player intentionally sacrificed mate- rial-usually a pawn -for superior development was quite charming. The concept of sacrificing material for a gain in development is called a gambit. This strategy instantly became one of my favorites. First I had to learn a few more opening principles. The purpose of the opening is to get a safe King and an equal middle game. This principle at first saddened me very much. When I sat down to play a new game of chess, I was charged. I wanted to win right away; the sooner the better! That was the purpose of my Queen Raid and I delighted whenever an opponent fell into the Scholar's Mate. It was Jeffrey who con- vinced me of the correctness of this principle. He asked me how often I had checkmated one of my beginner friends in a Scholar's Mate and I proudly stated, "Lots of times!" Jeffrey nodded and seemed to take some time considering my answer and then asked me, "The last time you won that way, what did you learn?" Actually-except for the fact that my oppo- nent was vulnerable to this well-known trick -I hadn't learned a darned thing! Jeffrey made me start to think of new opening ideas and encouraged me to learn a lot of new pawn formations. Until this time, I had never thought of pawn structures at all. Didn't pawns just get in the way? Or get wiped out? I'm as surprised today as I was then to learn how many chess openings there are -each with an unpronounceable name. Before delving into the enormous complexities of these openings, I'll share another prin- ciple I learned: The underlying goal for all openings and defenses is to control the center. Basic Opening Principles This principle had not occurred to my earliest circle of chess friends. We happily traded pieces, pushed a pawn, delighted in a check, and hacked away at the opponent's army of chessmen. The idea that there should be an all-encompassing way of playing any opening was quite a sur- prise. The key squares are the four in the middle of the board: e4, d4, d5, and e5. Diagram 14 shows the key central squares on the board, each marked with an X. The explanation for this principle is astonishingly simple: Put any piece on one of these squares, and it is at its most powerful. That's because the piece controls or influences more vital squares than if it's placed anywhere else. By controlling or occupying these squares, your pieces are more powerful than your opponent's-an advantage you can use to create attacks and win material! Beyond the key central squares, a greater center covers sixteen squares (c3-c6-f6-f3) , as shown in Diagram 15. By controlling this area of the board with pieces and pawns, a player is better able to conduct an attack on the Kingside or the Queenside flanks. Armed with this understanding of the need to control the center, it became much easier for me to understand why some of the moves for

CHAPTER TWO

those peculiar-sounding openings were played. It was at this point that game notation-writing down the moves of my games- became an impor- tant part of my development. I was able to analyze my games at home and learn if what I played was right or wrong. Along with writing down the moves to my own games, I now discovered that I could replay the games of other players. And some of these players were really good! Early Opening Influences The classic book, Alexander Alekhine's Best Games, by Alexander Alekhine (1982-1946, World Champion 1927-35, 1937-46), was inspiring to me. Ale- khine had a turbulent style of play that I could not understand. His tactical flair was marvelous and he played a wide variety of openings and defenses. His play was beyond me, and his books helped me realize that I had a lot to learn. America's Robert James (Bobby) Fischer (1943-, World Champion 1972-75) was another early influence. The 21 games played in his match against Boris Spassky (1937-, World Champion 1969-72) match brought endless hours of analysis with many players offering their suggestions and answering my questions. (If you use a computer program such as Chess Assistant or ChessBase, these games are probably in the database, which makes them easy to study.) During these analysis sessions I learned about the Sicilian Defense, Poisoned Pawn variation, the Queen's Gambit Declined (QGD), the Pirc Defense, and others. Bobby's favorite opening move was l.e4 and it became mine too. One further and important influence was a booklet called "The Max Lange Attack." The Max Lange Attack became my pet variation because of a pattern known as Legall's (Check) Mate. Jeffrey enjoyed testing his young pupil and nearly every day he would set up a tactical quiz of some sort for me to solve. After setting up the pieces, he had me sit on the Black side. He would then let me ask ques- tions about the game that he would select to be replayed. This aspect of Basic Opening Principles chess thrilled me. We could replay any game that had been recorded exactly as it was first played. It was better than watching a movie because Jeffrey brought the play to life by indicating why a movement had been played. The following game is a classic, but sadly I have no idea who the players were. Unknown Opponent versus Unknown Opponent My Cannon and Queen Raid Openings had taken a back seat forever. I now fully appreciated the importance of developing the minor pieces as early as possible.

1.e4e5 2.Nf3!

White develops a piece and attacks Black's e5-pawn.

2.. .d6

Black adopts a defense known as the Philidor Defense. Today's players consider the Philidor to be too passive, preferring instead to defend the e5-pawn with the classical 2...Nc6, or to counterattack White's e4-pawn with 2...Nf6, known as the Petroff Defense.

3.Bc4

White develops a piece while eyeing the f7-pawn. White's other major choice is 3.d4, attacking the e5-pawn and trying to gain a lead in development.

3.. .Bg4?!

Black is playing rather ambitiously by crossing into White's half of the board without the development necessary to back him up- not a particu- larly good idea. A better continuation is 3...Be7, intending to play ...Ng8- f6 and then castle kingside as soon as possible.

4.Nc3

White continues his development, but he has a number of more purpose- ful moves available. Any of the moves 4.h3, 4.d4, or 4.c3 lead to the estab- lishment of a classical pawn center with d2-d4.

[diagram]
Black will be severely punished for this wasted move. Much better is

4. . .Nc6, which develops a piece and controls the e5 and d4 squares.

CHAPTER TWO

Openings

5.Nxe5!

This stunning move completely amazed me. This move puts White's Queen in jeopardy which was all I needed to know to keep me from playing such a move. Without a second's hesitation, I showed my understanding of the position by capturing White's Queen, failing Jeffrey's quiz for that day.

5...Bxd1?

A bad error. Black should accept the loss of a pawn and play 5...dxe5

6.Qxg4 Nf6 7.Qg3 when White has won a pawn with advantage.

6. Bxf7 + Ke7 7.Nd5 Checkmate!

The final position, shown in Diagram 16, thrilled and delighted me. What a checkmate! Wow! Known as Legall's Mate, this mating pattern seemed to brand itself on my mind. I spent my next few games trying to repeat this same pattern on all my opponents! Unfortunately, no one ever gave me such an opportunity and so I was cast back to learning more abouit open- ings from Jeffrey. Readers of the Everyman Chess series will recognize this game from Play Winning Chess. Repeating the pattern again emphasizes what an impact this sacrifice had on my chess development. White willingly lost his queen - a whole Queen! and pulled off a check-mate. Wow! Some beginners give up when they lose their Queen, the only piece they learned how to move. Introduction to Classical Openings As soon as I began to compete with more experienced players, I had a new outlook: I really began to understand chess openings, the principles of play, pawn structures, controlling the center, protecting

DIAGRAM 16.

Basic Opening Principles my King, open files, outposts, gambits, tactics, combinations-and even the names for most of them. Although the task of learning all this seemed Herculean at first, the opening principles are so clear that the moves just seemed to logically follow one another. This brings us to my next principle: Strive to play stronger opponents. Playing stronger opponents means losing lots of games and I certainly don't like losing! So to begin with, I shied away from opponents who would stomp on me with ease. On the other hand, I realized that I learned a lot more from my losses. Summoning up my courage, I began to play those who I knew would clobber me. The effort certainly paid off. Playing stronger opponents is simply the best way of improving your game. Study- ing is fine, but forging yourself in the fires of competition is the best. The term opening refers to moves initiated by White (for example, 'White opens the game with..."), and the term defense refers to Black's reaction. Classical openings fall into two separate groups:

[diagram]
Classical King Pawn openings and Queen Pawn openings, as well as their respective defenses, create different types of middle games. The nature of the play between the two groups of classical openings and defenses are very distinct. I can make some general comparisons: King Pawn Openings Sharp play ensues immediately Queen Pawn Openings The fight is delayed until later in the game The King is less vulnerable Strategic play is fundamental Opening slips aren't as meaningful Memorizing lines is less necessary The game usually lasts longer The King is more vulnerable Calculating variations is fundamental An opening slip can cost the game Certain lines require memorization The game is often shorter

CHAPTER TWO

As you can see, each of the two classical openings has different appealing aspects. If by nature you prefer to attack and you enjoy sharp forcing lines, then a King Pawn opening is a natural choice. If you prefer to build up your position by collecting small advantages, then a Queen Pawn opening is just your ticket. In the next two chapters, I take a deeper look at the Classics. If, dear reader, you find these opening lines overwhelming, you're right! Panic! Chess openings are maddeningly complex. Mastering all the openings mentioned in this work requires years or even decades of study. My aim in this book is to point out these complexities and to offer you a solution. The solution will come later, as you must first understand the challenges faced!

WWWWWWWWWWV WWWM

Classical King Pawn Openings Yoou now understand that the key to getting a good position from the pening is to control the center-especially the four most central squares sometimes called "the sweet center"- with pawns and minor pieces. I'll now introduce a new concept: the idea of equilibrium. Take a fresh look at Diagram 17, the starting position. Both armies are per- fect mirrors of one another. The opposing armies are in balance, or what Wilhelm Steinitz (1836-1900, World Champion 1886-94), the first officially recognized World Champion, called the equilibrium. Generations of chess players have debated the outcome of a game that was perfectly played by both sides. Would the games always be drawn? Because White disturbs the equilibrium by moving first, he gains the advantage of being able to develop his army as well as to lay claim to a piece of the center. Black reacts in such a way as to restore the equilib- rium. Thus there is a constant shift- ing in this elusive concept of the equilibrium. If White plays perfectly, then Black should always be playing catch up until the forces of both armies are exhausted (traded) and the game drawn. Theoretically then, a victory occurs when one side has made a mistake and the equilibrium can no longer be restored. DIAGRAM 17.

Just because White moves first doesn't mean that he can only disturb the equilibrium in his favor. Can't White make a mistake? He certainly can. From the perspective of playing for control over the center, my Can- non Opening (l.h4) disturbs the equilibrium, but is a serious error! By my failing to play for control over the center, Black is given a free hand there and after l...d5, Black has gained a central advantage and White's h4- pawn is a potential target. After many generations of chess players have come and gone and with millions of games being played and recorded, we still resort to the most common opening moves:

1.e4

This opening move makes perfect sense. White's pawn occupies the e4- square and further controls the d5-square- the sweet center. White also opens up the diagonal for the fl-Bishop for quick development. White's Queen also has an avenue for possible development. However, you'll recall that one of the principles introduced in Chapter Two tells us to defer such a decision for now. This opening move is called a King Pawn Opening, because the pawn directly in front of the King moves first. Black now faces a dilemma. White's opening move has seized half of the sweet center. If allowed. White will seize the other half of the sweet center with 2.d4. Black's dilemma is how to combat White's opening move. What should be his approach to taking the center? The classical response is to match White's.

1...e5

The equilibrium is restored. Black's response has all the advantages of White's opening move, and now it is up to White to find a way to disturb the equilibrium in his favor. What do you. dear reader, think of Black's move? Black's move should provoke your thoughts, and you might find it is a very worthwhile exercise to look at this move and ask a number of questions. What has Black accom- plished by this move? What can White do? Black has taken a key foothold in Classical King Pawn Openings the center: wouldn't it be wonderful to attack and remove the e5-pawn as soon as possible? Indeed it would. Virtually every move that attacks Black's e5-pawn and seeks its destruction has been tried and cate- gorized! In chess openings, it seems that nothing is new under the sun. White's most common and I believe best move is:

2.Nf3

As shown in Diagram 18, White develops a Knight, attacks the eS- pawn and covers the d4-square. White uses his move wisely, always with an eye toward controlling the sweet center and developing his forces. Attacking the e5-pawn Before I continue with the main line, consider a few of White's major options:

[diagram]
Although these are viable options, the tries that I'll focus upon are those that seek to destroy the e5-pawn at once. The most consequent is:

2.d4

White immediately attacks the e5-pawn with his d4-pawn and seeks its removal. Black's choices are very limited. Defending the e5-pawn, in gen- eral, puts Black at a disadvantage.

2...d6?! 3.dxe5! dxe5

4.Qxd8+ Kxd8

DIAGRAM 18.

In this resulting position, White has achieved a lot. Black has lost the opportunity to castle and his King has been forced to move.

5. Bc4

White attacks the f7-pawn, develops a piece, and has the superior game. Now consider another line:

2.d4 Bd6?!

Black defends the e5-pawn, but the Bishop move allows White the oppor- tunity to develop with tempo.

3.dxe5! Bxe5

4. Nf3

White attacks the Bishop. If the Bishop retreats by:

4...Bf6 5,e5! Be7

White has seized the advantage. Observe White's control over the sweet center. Furthermore, notice that White has developed two units of his army, his e5-pawn and f3-Knight, whereas Black has developed only one, his e7-Bishop.

6. Bc4!

White has developed his Kingside pieces and is prepared to play 7.O-O, thereby safely tucking away his King and allowing him to face the future with confidence. Examine another approach to defending the e5-pawn:

2. d4 Nc6

Illis move defends the e5-pawn and counters with an attack against White's d4-pawn. This defense by Black is called the Nimzovich Defense. White has two choices. 3.d5 attacks Black's Knight and forces it to move again. The better alternative is:

3.dxe5 Nxe5

White succeeds in knocking Black's e5-pawn off the board, and in its place is a Knight that is vulnerable to attack. White can attack the e5- Knight with 4.Bf4, 4.f4, or:

4. Nf3 Nxf3+ 5.Qxf3

Classical King Pawn Openings White has eliminated Black's developed forces and has two units devel- oped himself. White has gained the advantage. Danish Gambit The preceding lines show that when facing 2.d4, Black should not defend his e5-pawn on move two. Instead he should capture the d4-pawn:

1.e4e5 2.d4 exd4!

This is Black's best move. He wins a pawn and leaves it up to White to decide how to get it back.

3.c3 dxc3 4.Nxc3

This is known as the Danish Gambit. White sacrifices a pawn but has developed two units, the e4-pawn and the c3-Knight. Black will have to catch up in development and comfort himself with the thought that he has won a pawn. The Danish Gambit is a particularly powerful gambit against beginning players. Center Game If White is not inclined to sacrifice a pawn he can try: 1 .e4 e5 2.d4 exd4!

3.Qxd4

White has developed two units, whereas Black has developed none! On the surface this looks like a pretty good deal for White, except for one fac- tor: White's Queen is vulnerable to attack and Black responds by develop- ing his Knights.

3...Nc6!

This move develops his Knight and forces White to move his Queen again. In this way, Black develops with tempo.

4. Qe3 Nf6

Black has now caught up in development. This opening variation is called the Center Game and its main line continues:

5. Nc3

ChWPTfR THRH While it seems like a good idea to attack Black's Knight with 5.e5, continu- ing with 5...Nd5 6.Qe4 Nb6 gives Black a fair game. Enterprising players might also like the gambit 5...Ng4 6.Qe2 d6! 7.exd6+ Be6 8,dxc7 Qxc7, in which Black sacrifices a pawn for a significant lead in development. We can conclude that 5.e5 would be premature.

5.. .Bb4 6.Bd2 O-O

7 .O-O-O Re8! This is the main line of the Center Game. Both sides have their trumps: White, with his e4-pawn, has more central influence with excellent attack- ing chances on the Kingside; Black has a ready-made attack on the e4- pawn with a possibility of further attacks upon White's Queen. King's Gambit As an alternative to attacking Black's e5-pawn with 2.d4, White has the centuries-old option of initiating the King's Gambit. 1 .e4 e5 2.f4 This line of play is fantastically complicated and dozens of books have been written on this popular gambit. Black can initiate King's Gambit Accepted by playing:

2.. .exf4

White hopes to play Bclxf4, thereby regaining the pawn with a superior position. White's position is considered superior because Black's e-pawn has moved twice (,..e7-e5 and ...e5xf4), while White will have eliminated Black's e-pawn and developed a piece of his own. The two tempi that Black spent moving his pawn would be history. Black doesn't have to accept the gambit. He can play 2...Bc5 to initiate the King's Gambit Classical Declined, or he can try the Falkbeer Counter Gambit with 2...d5. Both variations have been greatly scrutinized by opening theorists who claim that Black gains a reasonable position with either move.

3.Nf3

Classical King Pawn Openings This develops a piece and blocks the possibility of ...Qd8-h4+, which would disturb White's King.

3.. .g5

Black shows his determination to hang onto his extra pawn. Black wants to rule out the possibility of Bclxf4.

4.Bc4

White calmly develops his pieces and plays for the attack. A main alterna- tive is 4.h4, which attempts to break up Black's Kingside.

4.. .g4

In a surprising move, Black also plays for the attack. By giving White's f3- Knight the boot, Black intends to play ...Qd8-h4+ the moment the f3- Knight moves.

5.O-O!?

White initiates the Muzio Gambit and willingly offers a Knight to increase his development. Playing 5.Ne5 Qh4+ 6.Kfl Nf6 with the intention of play- ing ...Nf6-h5-g3+ can be dangerous for White. Such variations require careful study of the opening manuals.

5.. .gxf3

Black accepts the offered sacrifice.

6.Qxf3

White recaptures a pawn for the Knight, arriving at the position shown in Diagram 19. The Muzio Gambit has been analyzed by generations of players. Does White have sufficient compen- sation for his Knight? The answer seems to be yes. Does he have enough compensation for the advan- tage? The answer is no. Most

DIAGRAM 19.

theorists consider the Muzio Gambit to be a draw. I encourage you to read other books to find out why! Main Line, continued To deal with White's crucial attempts to attack and obliterate the e5-pawn on move two, we've wandered a bit afield from the main line:

1.e4e5 2.Nf3

Now reset the pieces and see the most common reaction:

2.. .Nc6

Black defends the eb-pawn and simultaneously guards the d4-square. Petroff (or Russian) Defense Even on move two, Black has another possible defensive move:

2.. .Nf6

This move initiates the Petroff Defense. (In Russia, it's called the Russian Defense'.) Instead of busying himself with the defense of his e5-pawn, Black counters with an attack of his own against White's e4-pawn. The Petroff Defense, while considered a solid choice, is also considered a bit passive. White has two major options for attacking the e5-pawn once more: 3.Nxe5 or 3.d4. The choices are a matter of taste and study!

3.Nxe5 d6! 4.Nf3 Nxe4

Black has regained his pawn. White can muster a small advantage in a symmetrical position by:

5.Qe2 Qe7 6.d3 Nf6

7.Bg5 Qxe2+ 8.Bxe2 Be7

White has a slight lead in development. Although this is not the best play for White, this line shows that White can ensure himself of a small open- ing advantage against the Petroff Defense. Classical King Pawn Openings Ruy Lopez (Main Line, continued) Return once again to the main line:

1.e4e5 2,Nf3 Nc6

These moves lead to the position shown in Diagram 20. White now faces a major theo- retical crossroad. The main line is:

3.Bb5

This move initiates the Ruy Lopez Opening. Most players simply call it "the Ruy." (Another common name for this line is the Spanish Game.) The Ruy is arguably the oldest opening in chess. It can be traced to the sixteenth century, a time when the best players came from Spain. The opening is credited to Spanish priest Ruy Lopez (1530-80), who hailed from Estremadura, Spain. The idea makes perfect sense. White wants to destroy the e5-pawn, which has one defender, the c6-Knight. So if White can capture the c6- Knight, the e5-pawn will likely wobble and fall. Of course, White has other options for move three, which I describe in the following sections.

DIAGRAM 20.

Scotch Game Once again the most direct style of play is to attack the e5-pawn.

3.d4 exd4 4,Nxd4

The opening is called the Scotch Game. Today's highest-rated player, Garry Kasparov (1963-, World Champion 1985-present), has employed the Scotch Game from time to time with enormous success. Black gains noth- ing from trading Knights by 4...Nxd4? 5.Qxd4. White's Queen-although

prematurely developed-is hardly assailable in the middle of the board in this position. Black's best play is thought to be an attack on the e4-pawn:

4.. .Nf6 5.Nxc6

White feels obligated to make this trade. After 5.Nc3 Bb4, the e4-pawn comes under attack yet again.

5.. .bxc6 6.e5

White makes the most of his e4-pawn. After 6.Bd3 d5 7.exd5 cxd5 the game is considered dynamically balanced.

6.. .Qe7

Black resumes the attack on White's e-pawn yet again. 7,Qe2 Nd5 At last, Black's Knight is forced to give way. While White has accom- plished his goal of obliterating Black's e5-pawn, the position isn't all that rosy for him. Black stands but one move away from neutralizing the posi- tion with ...d7-d6, which knocks out White's e5-pawn.

8.c4

White now seeks to boot the d5-Knight to a passive square.

8.. .Ba6

Black pins White's c4-pawn to the Queen and brings about the position shown in Diagram 21. This position from the Scotch Game is one of the most awkward positions for either side to play. Once more, I encourage further study of this position from manuals devoted to this fascinating opening. Italian Game When I began my career, my favorite DIAGRAM 21. opening variation was: Classical King Pawn Openings

1.e4e5 2,Nf3 Nc6

3, Bc4 These moves initiate the Italian Game. Diagram 22 shows the start- ing position of the Italian Game. Besides the sound idea of develop- ing a piece and preparing to castle Kingside, the thematic idea behind the Italian Game is to take clear aim at the f7-pawn and, by extension, Black's King. The Italian Game is a dangerous opening for Black and he has to navigate some tricky tactical lines.

3.. .Bc5

This is a reasonable move, as Black also develops his Bishop. Two Knights Defense and Traxler Gambit A key alternative for Black following l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 is:

3.. .Nf6

Black counters with an attack against the e4-pawn, initiating the Two Knights Defense. White can shore up his e4-pawn by 4.d3 or 4.Nc3, or he can initiate a complex attack: 4, Ng5 This attacking move has been debated for centuries! By continuing to attack the f7-pawn, White plays consistently. But with only two pieces developed, is White's attack premature? In my younger days, attacking was the most enjoyable aspect of chess and I certainly didn't hesitate mak- ing this move. Nowadays I'm no longer sure the attack is correct. It seems that the f7-pawn can't be defended, but the attack can be blocked:

4.. .d5

DIAGRAM 22.

As always there is a key alternative. Black can sacrifice the f7-pawn in a gambit! 4. . .Bc5, called the Traxler Gambit, offers the f7-pawn. White should play 5.Bxf7+, because the natural 5.Nxf7 Bxf2+! 6.Kxf2 Nxe4+ 7.Kgl Qh4

8.g3 Nxg3! has been worked out to a draw. Therefore (l.e4 e5 2,Nf3 Nc6

3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 Bc5) 5.BxfZ+ Ke7 6.Bd5 is the often-played line for White.

Black has lost a pawn and compromised his King. By continuing 6...Rf8

7. Nf3 d6 8.d3 Bg4, Black has ample development for his lost pawn. As

always, I encourage further study of the pertinent opening manuals.

5.exd5

Diagram 23 shows the resulting position, the main position of the Two Knights Defense. Black has a number of ways to play the position, all of which have been scrutinized at great length. One alternative is 5...Na5 6.Bb5+ c6 7.dxc6 bxc6

8.Be2 h6 9.Nf3. White's pieces have been beaten backwards, but Black has

lost a pawn. Play most often continues 9...e4 10.Ne5 Qd4 ll.f4 Bc5 12.Rfl, with a complex game ahead as both players have their trumps. Another major choice from Diagram 23 is 5...b5, the Ulvestad Varia- tion, a surprising move that aims to deflect White's Bishop away from the f7-pawn. Continuing: 6.Bxb5 Qxd5 7.Nc3 Qxg2 8.Qf3 Qxf3 9.Nxf3 Bd7

10.O-O Bd6 ll.Bxc6 Bxc6 12.Nxe5

Bxe5 13.Rel. This line is consid- ered slightly advantageous for White. Fried Liver Attack Return to Diagram 23 and play the main line. To recap:

1.e4e5 2.Nf3 Nc6

3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5

5.exd5 Nxd5

Black has sensibly recaptured the DIAGRAM 23. pawn and is now eyeballing White's Classical King Pawn Openings g5-Knight. Not to be deterred, White boldly plunges ahead:

6.Nxf7 Kxf7 7.Qf3+

With this move, White initiates the colorfully named Fried Liver Attack. White has a double attack against King and the d5-Knight, forcing Black's King into the center.

7.. .Ke6

By placing his monarch in the midst of the battle, Black hangs onto the extra Knight at a dangerous price. White continues to attack the d5- Knight, which is a feint. Black's King soon becomes a target as well!

8.Nc3 Nce7 9.d4!

White makes an excellent move in an attempt to pry open the center.

[diagram]
It would be a mistake to play 9...exd4 10.Nxd5 Nxd5 ll.Qe4+!, whereby White regains his sacrificed Knight. Diagram 24 shows the current position, where Black has defended the Knight once more. Playing the Fried Liver Attack as White brought me hours of joy. I'd do my best to bring my pieces into play as quickly as possi- ble, while Black would try to hang onto his extra piece and to bring his King back to the relatively safe c7-square. Diagram 24 deserves close study, and I recommend playing the position out with your friends to determine which side has best disturbed the equilib- rium! Evans Gambit Return now to Diagram 22 and the Italian Game, which starts l.e4 e5

2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4. Continue with:

3...Bc5

From this position, White has four main options:

[diagram]
I'll discuss each option in turn. The first option, 4.O-O, brings his King to safety, which is quite rea- sonable, but the move isn't considered that dynamic. Black plays 4...Nf6, continuing a balanced game.

4.b4!?

This energetic pawn sacrifice is known as the Evans Gambit. As usual, the idea behind the gambit is to pick up a lead in development. Black must accept the gambit:

4.. .Bxb4 5.c3

White attacks the Bishop in order to support the central thrust, d2-d4.

5.. .Ba5 6.d4

White reveals his strategy. He wants to open up the center, anticipating that his development will bring him the superior game.

6.. .exd4

Some theorists prefer 6...d6! 7.Qb3 Qd7 as the correct defensive continuation.

7.O-O dxc3

Black greedily captures all the morsels being offered. Diagram 25 shows the current position. Black has captured three pawns, but his position is dangerously behind in development. White quickly goes on the offensive:

8.Qb3! Qf6 9.e5!

With a move that is even stronger than 9.Bg5, White also gains a tempo. Black's Queen must now guard the f7-pawn:

9.. .Qg6 1O.Nxc3 Nge7

11.Ba3!O-O 12.Rad1

White's development is a thing of beauty. His pieces are poised for central domination and Black's position is under a great deal of pressure. The two Classical King Pawn Openings pawns are a heavy investment, but Black will almost certainly have to give back his material gains to neu- tralize White's pressure. This is another position with which you should challenge your friends, play- ing alternating sides. Giuoco Piano Another option for White's move four in the Italian Game, which starts l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Bc5, is:

DIAGRAM 25.

4.c3

This is quite a direct attempt by White to grab the center. Just as in the Evans Gambit, White insists on playing d2-d4, which attacks the e5-pawn and, as an added bonus, the c5-Bishop. This move is known as the Giuoco Piano. Black is quick to respond in the center too:

4.. .Nf6 5.d4

White continues to play in the cen- ter.

5.. .exd4 6.cxd4

The position in Diagram 26 makes a very agreeable impression. White's two central e4- and d4-pawns create a formation called the classical pawn center. It seems that White has achieved all that he could hope for and best of all, with tempo! Further- more, Black's c5-Bishop is attacked. But before dismissing Diagram 26 as superior for White, let me ask

DIAGRAM 26.

you a question: Has Black made a mistake? I can't see how Black's previ- ous moves were wrong. Therefore, if Black hasn't made a mistake, has the equilibrium been disturbed to his disadvantage? The answer can only be no! It is these very fundamental, basic questions which will help you in your quest for opening understanding. By constantly asking such ques- tions, you will help yourself find the truth in your favorite openings. How should Black continue?

6.. .Bb4+ 7.Bd2

White blocks the check. White could try 7.Nc3 Nxe4 8.O-O Bxc3 9.d5, ini- tiating the Moeller Attack. Theorists consider this line to be all bark and no bite. By continuing 9...Bf6 lO.Rel Ne7 ll.Rxe4 d6, Black has a fine game.

7.. .Bxd2+ 8.Nbxd2 d5!

In a crucial reaction, White's classic center is destroyed.

9.exd5 Nxd5 1O.Qb3 Nce7

Diagram 27 shows the main position of the Giuoco Piano, which practice has shown to be roughly equal. Max Lange Attack My favorite choice for move four in the Italian Game (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6

3.Bc4 Bc5) is:

4,d4!? This move starts the Max Lange Attack. I enjoy making this para- doxical sacrifice. Black has geared his development toward control- ling the d4-square and undeterred, White places a pawn squarely in Black's jaws. This startling move makes a lot of sense in the Italian DIAGRAM 27. Game. With the Evans Gambit and Classical King Pawn Openings Giuoco Piano, White aims for d2-d4 with a preparatory move, spending a tempo. My attitude: Why waste a move? Black gleefully accepts the offering:

4.. .exd4

This is the main line of the Max Lange. A key alternative is 4...Bxd4

5.Bg5 Nf6 (5...f6 6.Nxd4 Nxd4 7.Be3 Ne6 8.O-O completes White's devel-

opment and gives him a chance to attack with Qdl-h5+) 6.Nxd4 Nxd4 7.f4 d6 8.f5, in which White has sacrificed a pawn for an annoying bind. My opponents usually preferred the main line:

5.O-O Nf6

Once more, Black can avoid the main line by 5...d6 6.c3 dxc3 7.Nxc3, when White has shed a pawn for a dangerous lead in development.

6.e5 d5!

In many variations of the classical King Pawn openings, this rejoinder is a key counterpunch. If Black is forced to move his f6-Knight, disaster strikes quickly: 6...Ng4? 7.Bxf7+ Kxf7 8.Ng5+ Kg8 9.Qxg4 Nxe5 10.Qe4 d6 ll.Qd5+ Kf8 12.f4!, when White wins.

7.exf6 dxc4 8.Re1+ Be6

9.Ng5

This was my early favorite line of opening play. What a joy it was to play this position (shown in Dia- gram 28) as White! Black has but one saving move:

9.. .Qd5!

I enjoyed a number of victories after the weaker 9...Qxf6? 10.Nxe6 fxe6 ll.Qh5+ g6 12.Qxc5! spears a Bishop. Another bad mistake is

9... O-O? 10.fxg7 Kxg7 (10...Re8

ll.Qh5 Bf5?? 12.Qxf7 Checkmate!) ll.Rxe6! White wins a Bishop with a

DIAGRAM 28.

raging attack, and Black can't regain the lost piece by 11... h6? 12.Rxh6! because White's Rook seems to enjoy a charmed life. Every time Black tries to capture the invading Rook, he loses his Queen. From Diagram 28, the Max Lange Attack continues:

10. Nc3!

A wonderful move! I derive pleasure from moves where I place my pieces in capture, but they can't be taken. This is life on the edge! In this position, it is a good move; White develops with a gain of tempo. 1O...Qf5 The Queen has to move. The Knight is quite safe: 10...dxc3?? ll.Qxd5 wins the Queen.

11. Nce4 O-O-O

Black escapes the center and the Ringside while he has the chance. Cap- turing the f6-pawn by ll...gxf6? 12.g4! Qe5 (keeping the c5-Bishop pro- tected) 13.f4! d3+ 14.Kfl Qd4 15.Be3 is excellent for White.

12.g4!Qe5 13.fxg7 Rhg8

14.Nxe6fxe6 15.Bh6

The current position is shown in Diagram 29. I enjoy playing this main line Max Lange Attack position, scoring heavily with the White pieces. From this line, you should have gained an appreciation for the complexity of this classical opening variation. Yet it isn't even the main variation! I've led us far astray. Alternatives to the Ruy Lopez Main Line Return with me to Diagram 20 (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6). From this position,

DIAGRAM 29.

Classical King Pawn Openings

3.Bb5 initiates the Ruy Lopez Opening. It has long been held that White's

third move puts the most pressure on Black's position. There is the con- stant threat of White's capturing the c6-Knight and snipping the e5-pawn. Black's earliest defenses include:

[diagram]
Steinitz Defense Making a sensible decision, Black reinforces his e5-pawn.

3.. .d6

Nowadays this move, called the Steinitz Defense, is considered too passive. Black locks in his f8-Bishop and gives White a free hand in the center:

4.d4! exd4 5.Nxd4 Bd7

The effects of the opening moves have favored White. He has better con- trol of the center and freer piece play. Many games continue thus:

6.O-O Nf6 7.Nc3 Be7

8.Re1 O-O

Practice has shown that White has the advantage. Cozio Defense Black covers his c6-Knight but also compromises his f8-Bishop in a line called the Cozio Defense, which is favored by few players today.

3.. .Nge7 4.O-O d6

5.d4 Bd7

Black reveals his point. He hasn't been forced to trade his strong e5-pawn.

6.Re1 Ng6

Black continues to keep his e5-pawn protected. In return, however, White now gains a d5-outpost:

7.Nc3! Be7 8,Nd5 O-O

Black has a safe, if passive, game. Berlin Defense Not concerning himself with the e5-pawn, Black attacks White's e4-pawn as in the Petroff Defense.

3.. .Nf6

This move initiates the Berlin Defense, which continues to be popular even in modern chess tournaments. Theoretically, White should avoid playing 4.d3 Bc5! because he will need to utilize the strike d2-d4 to prove an advantage.

4.O-O

White leaves the e4-pawn en prise, reasoning that he will soon win the pawn back.

4.. .Nxe4 5,d4!

This is White's point. With Black's King still in the center, White wants to rip open the e-file. The Berlin Defense continues:

5.. .Nd6

It would be unwise to play 5...exd4? 6.Rel d5 7.Nxd4, leaving White with the dangerous threats of Nd4xc6 and f2-f3.

6.Bxc6 bxc6

The Berlin also offers the intriguing ending 6...dxc6 7.dxe5 Nf5 8.Qxd8+ Kxd8, which at first glance seems bad for Black. This line was champi- oned by Emanuel Lasker (1868-1941, World Champion 1894-1921), the second official World Champion, who felt that Black's two Bishops were sufficient compensation for losing the right to castle and the doubled Queenside pawns.

7.dxe5 Nb7 8,Re1 Be7

9,Nc3 O-O 1O.Qe2 Nc5 Classical King Pawn Openings Diagram 30 shows the main position of the Berlin Defense. Theory con- siders the position slightly better for White. Bird Defense A second leap of the Knight, called the Bird Defense, represents a radi- cal solution by Black.

3.. .Nd4(?!)

He moves the same developed piece twice, which gives me a chance to introduce another principle: Whenever possible, avoid moving the same piece twice in the opening. This principle should serve as a guide and a warning. It is not to be taken as a rule! If a piece is attacked and is forced to move, then by all means do so! The principle is that players should develop all their forces as quickly as possible. By singling out just one piece, a player is neglect- ing the rest of the crowd. The purpose of the Bird Defense is to get away from White's Bishop and to control the d4-square. Play continues: 4,Nxd4! exd4 5.O-O c6

6.Ba4

White moves his developed Bishop twice-violating my latest principle- but is forced to do so. The Bishop is attacked.

6.. .Nf6 7,d3d5

8, Bg5 dxe4 Weaker is 8...Be7 9.Bxf6 Bxf6 10.exd5 Qxd5 ll.Rel+ Be6?! 12.Bb3, which gives the advantage to White.

9.dxe4 Be7 1O.e5 Nd5

11,Bxe7Nxe7 12,Bb3 O-O 13,Nd2

DIAGRAM 30.

Diagram 31 shows the result of the Bird Defense, which theorists con- sider advantageous for White. Classical Defense Another response to the Ruy Lopez Opening is the Classical Defense.

3...Bc5

Black ignores White's play and instead develops his own Bishop. This reasonable decision asks White how he intends to further his DIAGRAM 31. central influence.

4.c3

As we've seen, White prepares to establish a classical pawn center with d2-d4.

4.. .Nf6

Unimpressed, Black responds with a counterattack to the e4-pawn. This line is quite comparable with the Giuoco Piano variation (Diagram 26); the key difference is that White's Bishop is on the b5-square instead of the c4- square. This difference means that the sting of a possible . . ,d7-d5 counter will be missing.

5.d4 exd4 6.e5!

Now Black's f6-Knight is forced to move. The counter 6. . .d5? 7.exf6 would cost Black a piece.

6.. .Ne4 7.O-O!

White exploits a crucial nuance. Black's forces in the center are awkward. Black had expected 7.cxd4 Bb4+ 8.Bd2 Nxd2 9.Nbxd2 O-O ll.a3 Bxd2

12.Qxd2 d6 with a balanced game.

7.. .d5

Capturing by 7...dxc3? 8.Qd5! c2 9.Qxe4 cxbl=Q (this is a busy pawn!) lO.Rxbl gives White a grand lead in development for the price of a pawn. Classical King Pawn Openings

8. Nxd4!

This move is even stronger than

8.cxd4 Bb6 9.Nc3, which is also

favorable for White.

[diagram]
Diagram 32 shows the current posi- tion.

9. Bxc6!

White avoids 9.Nxc6 bxc6 10.Bxc6 Ba6!, rightfully concerned that the coordinated attack on the f2-pawn would be good for Black.

9.. .bxc6 1O.f3!

This is stronger than 10.Nxc6 Qh4, where Black again attacks the f2- pawn.

10.. .Ng5 11.Be3 Ne6

12.f4

White has the advantage. Schliemann Defense The Schliemann Defense is a plain old ornery reaction to the Ruy. Black reasons that since White's Bishop isn't patrolling the a2-g8 diagonal, he can counterattack White's center with this dangerous pawn thrust.

[diagram]
Black takes a risk by loosening up the defenses around his King, but White has to be careful to prove an opening advantage:

4.Nc3

The cautious 4.d3 fxe4 5.dxe4 Nf6 6.O-O d6 7.Qd3 Be7 8.Qc4 is slightly bet- ter for White because Black has weakened himself on the a2-g8 diagonal.

4.. .fxe4 5.Nxe4d5

Black goes all out for the fight for the initiative. White can no longer play cautiously and must ride the tiger.

DIAGRAM 32.

6.Nxe5 dxe4 7.Nxc6Qd5!

This leads to Diagram 33, which is a mess. Theorists have wrestled with this position for some time. White should continue:

8.c4 Qd6 9.Qh5+ g6

1O.Qe5+Qxe5 11.Nxe5+c6

12.Ba4

There is an important trick worth memorizing: After 12.Nxc6? a6!

13.Ba4 Bd7!, Black snares a piece.

12...Bg7 13.d4exd3

14.Bf4

These moves provide a sharp game that isn't unfavorable for Black. The Schliemann Defense remains one of the sharpest adventures in the Ruy. Players be warned! This variation requires careful preparation! Morphy's Defense (Main Line, continued) Return now to the Ruy Lopez main line (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5).

3...a6!

This move, introduced by Paul Morphy (1837-84), puts the question to White's Bishop of its intentions. It is based upon the tactical resource 4.Bxc6 dxc6 5.Nxe5 Qd4!, when Black recaptures the e-pawn under favorable cir- cumstances. Morphy's Defense has become the favored move for a century. White is faced with a choice: Should he trade his Bishop for a Knight, or should the Bishop retreat? Ruy Lopez Exchange Variation The Ruy Lopez Exchange Variation has had entire books devoted to it.

4.Bxc6 dxc6

DIAGRAM 33.

Classical King Pawn Openings Diagram 34 shows quite an enigma. Which player profits best from the trade? Most grandmasters prefer Bishops to Knights, but no less a player than Bobby Fischer liked to trot out the Exchange Variation on occasion. White has a long-term endgame advantage due to the dou- bled pawns, but Black has a middle game with two Bishops before him. Standard play continues:

5.O-O

5.Nxe5 Qd4 6.Nf3 Qxe4+ 7.Qe2

Qxe2+ 8.Kxe2 Bg4 is a comfortable variation for the second player.

5.. .Bg4!

Black puts his Bishop to work immediately. Another favored choice is

5...f6 6.d4 Bg4 7.dxe5 Qxdl 8.Rxdl fxe5 9.Rd3 Bd6, with approximately

equal play. 6,h3 White borrows a page from Black's opening book by questioning the Bishop's intentions.

[diagram]
A snappy retort! Black wants to keep the pin as long as he can. White has a small plus after 6...Bxf3 7.Qxf3 Qd7 because Black's pawn structure has been compromised. Worse, 6...Bh5?

7.g4 Bg6 8.Nxe5 Bxe4? 9.Rel will be

disastrous for Black. Diagram 35 shows the current position. White has to navigate his

DIAGRAM 35.

way to an advantage with care. It is easy to go wrong. As you might guess, capturing Black's Bishop is a direct path to disaster. (Take heart, I took the Bishop and lost the first time I reached this position.) Best is:

7. d3!

Capturing the Bishop opens up the h-file to a checkmating attack: 7.hxg4? hxg4 8.Nxe5? Qh4! 9.f4 g3 and White can resign with confidence. There are no hidden brilliant moves to stave off checkmate. Nor can White pull off a central buildup like in the Italian game: 7.c3 Qd3! Black threatens to capture White's Knight and double up White's pawns. Continuing: 8.hxg4 hxg4

9.Nxe5 Bd6! 10.Nxd3 Bh2+ ll.Khl Bd6+ ends in a draw by perpetual check.

7.. .Qf6

This early development of the Queen is correct in this position. As we've seen. Black aims to double White's pawns. 8, Be3 White develops his pieces and acquiesces to doubled pawns. He could have tried 8.Nbd2, preventing Black from completing his threat, but his development is thereby blocked. Black would continue with 8...Ne7 men- acing ...Ne7-g6-f4. Once more, continuing 9.hxg4? hxg4 10.Nh2? Qh4 works splendidly for Black.

8.. .Bxf3 9,Qxf3 Qxf3

1O.gxf3 Bd6 The position is considered equal. Ruy Lopez (Main Line, continued) Because the Exchange Variation results in an approximately equal position, White's Bishop usually retreats (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6):

4.Ba4

Diagram 36 shows the current position of the main line. White retains his Bishop and keeps up the pressure on the a4-e8 diagonal.

4.. .Nf6

Classical King Pawn Openings Black happily brings his Knight into battle, confronting White with the issue of what he wants to do about his e4-pawn. If he was so inclined, Black could play 4...b5 5.Bb3, with play similar to the Italian Game. Playing 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 b5 5.Bb3 is favorable for White when compared to 3.Bc4 for several reasons. On the b3-square, White's Bishop is less vulnerable than on the c4-square- especially when Black tries varia- tions with the ...d7-d5 shot. Fur- DlAGRAM 36. thermore, the b5-pawn is a potential weakness. White might play a2-a4 to expose such a weakness.

5.O-O

Countless games have proven that only this move offers White a chance for an advantage. Defending the e4-pawn by 5.Nc3 Bc5 6.d3 d6 is a harm- less line. Equally timid is 5.d3 Bc5 6.c3 b5 7.Bc2 d5, when Black has good play. White's final defensive try is

5.Qe2 b5 6.Bb3 Be7 7.a4 Rb8 8.axb5

axb5, with equal play. The current position, shown in Diagram 37, brings Black to a major crossroad. He has to choose between the Ruy Lopez Open Varia- tion with 5. . .Nxe4, or the Ruy Lopez Closed Variation with 5...Be7. The Closed Variation is the deci- sion preferred by most grandmas- ters and constitutes the main line. ire > DS>

DIAGRAM 37.

Ruy Lopez Open Variation How does the Open Ruy work?

5.. .Nxe4 6.d4!

White seeks to open the position to his advantage by forcing pawn trades. Keep in mind that White's King is nice and safe whereas Black's King is several tempi away from vacating the center. Opening the position poten- tially endangers Black's monarch.

6.. .b5

It would be a mistake to play 6...exd4? 7.Rel d5 8.Bg5, as Black would be in a precarious situation.

7. Bb3 d5!

Black reins in his ambitions of winning pawns. Black avoids 7...exd4?

8.Rel d5 9.Nc3! Be6 (9...dxc3 10.Bxd5 Bb7 ll.Bxe4 Be7 12.Qe2 freezes

Black's King in the center) 10.Nxe4 dxe4 ll.Rxe4 Be7 12.Bxe6 fxe6

13.Nxd4! because White would recover his pawns with advantage.

8.dxe5 Be6

This leads to the key starting position of the Open Ruy shown in Diagram 38. The position is extremely dynamic and hard to judge. Black's Queen- side is extended and vulnerable to a possible a2-a4. The d5-pawn is also a possible target but this isn't usually Black's Achilles' heel. Black's advanced d- and b-pawns have left the c5-square lacking protection and as play unfolds, White tries to conquer this square. On the plus side, White's e5-pawn isn't having a disruptive impact. Black's pieces are all potent and he has every expectation of a fighting game. White's three major tries are 9.Qe2,

9.c3, and 9.Nbd2. A number of

these variations have transposi- DlAGRAM 38. Classical King Pawn Openings tions. All three lines are extremely complex and books have been devoted to them! My recommenda- tion for White is to play the forcing:

9.Nbd2

Threatening to capture on e4, White disrupts Black's position. The bene- fit of this move is that it forces play into a narrow line.

9.. .Nc5 1O.c3

White makes room to retreat his b3- Bishop.

10.. .d4 DIAGRAM 39.

Practice shows that this move is required. White gets a favorable bind fol- lowing 10...Nxb3 ll.Nxb3 Be7 12.Nfd4! Nxd4 13.cxd4, and he has control over the c5-square. Diagram 39, after Black's tenth move, shows the key position of the Open Ruy Lopez.

11.Ng5!

Practice has shown that this incredible move makes life difficult for Black. The tactical justification for this move is that ll...Qxg5?! 12.Qf3 Kd7

13.Bd5! is good for White. I encourage you to do further research on this

exciting and dynamic position. Ruy Lopez Closed Variation (Main Line, continued) In the meantime, return to the main line (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6

4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O):

5...Be7

This initiates the Ruy Lopez Closed Variation. Black quite contentedly develops his Bishop and prepares to exit his King to safety. White again is

asked to find a way of disturbing the equilibrium to his favor. The path is rather narrow. Delayed Exchange Ruy Lopez White has two key choices. He can play the main line, 6.Rel, defending the e4-pawn. Or he can play the Delayed Exchange Ruy Lopez:

6. Bxc6

Besides these two main variations, White can play 6.d3, simply shoring up the e4-pawn and planning to complete his development. This, however, is the move that Black has been waiting for. Black so far has avoided ...d7- d6, fearing the immediate reaction d2-d4. Once White has played 6.d3 d6!, Black doesn't have to worry about d2-d4 and the pressure on his position is quite tolerable. The stutter step by White's Bishop, Bb5-a4xc6, seems to lose time.

6.. .dxc6

Isn't Black better off than in the usual Ruy Lopez Exchange Variation? Yes and no. White reasons that the extra moves presented to Black have pre- vented him from utilizing defenses based upon ...Bc8-g4 or ...f7-f6 and that the e5-pawn is under more pressure than before.

7.Re1

After this move, Black is in a bit of a quandary. How will he defend his eS- pawn? Both 7...Bd6 or 7...Qd6 are met by 8.d4, whereupon 8...exd4? 9.e5 will cost Black material. Neither does 7...Bg4 8.h3 suffice. Black can't play 8...h5? 9.hxg4 hxg4 10.Nxe5, as White wins a piece. In this case, Black no longer has an attack down the h-file. Thus the Delayed Exchange Ruy Lopez has its fans. Black's best move is:

7.. .Nd7 8.d4 exd4

9.Nxd4 Nc5

Diagram 40 shows the current position. White has given up the two Bishops for a structural advantage. The position is approximately equal and is another good position to play against a friend. Classical King Pawn Openings Ruy Lopez Closed Variation (Main Line, continued) Most grandmasters prefer not to give up their a4-Bishop at move six and instead continue (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Be7):

6.Re1

This move reinforces the e4-pawn and renews the threat of Ba4xc6 and Nf3xe5, as shown in Diagram

41. While this sixth move of White

is the most common choice and indeed the main line, it also is a violation of my latest principle! White moves the same piece, his Rook, twice. Isn't this move a waste of time? This is one of the great chess debates. When a player castles, he moves both King and Rook at the same time, the only moment when mov- ing two pieces at once is allowed. Many centuries ago, the movement of castling was considered so valuable, the player was charged with two moves. A player would first move his King and then after his opponent had moved, he would then be obliged to move his Rook. Castling is a wonderful privilege that should be coveted. The King sprints to a flank and is usually out of harm's way. The Rook is developed and put into action. The rules of chess clas- sify castling as a movement of the

DIAGRAM 40.

DIAGRAM 41.

King. Thus, players would argue that White doesn't waste a tempo by moving his Rook to the center. I urge you to review the principles listed in Chapter Two in order to form an opinion about this move. Although the move is classified as a King move, I believe that when castling the Rook is also developed. After castling, I much prefer to leave the Rook right on the square where it lands unless I'm obligated to do otherwise. In Diagram 41, White's Rook reinforces control over the sweet center. More importantly, however, White didn't have a convenient way of defend- ing his e4-pawn. As we've seen, White is trying to create a classical pawn center by playing for both e4- and d4-pawns to stand abreast of one another. If White plays 6.d3, then Black responds 6...d6 and has nothing to fear. Similarly, 6.Nc3 b5 7.Bb3 isn't so useful. Black plays 7... O-O and asks White if 8.d4 is his intention. Quiz. Can you figure out what Black would do after l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Be7 6.Nc3 b5 7.Bb3 O-O 8.d4? The solution is at the end of this chapter. This brings me to another opening principle: To be effective, Rooks belong on open files. When there are no open files, centralize your Rooks to the e- and d-files. On the e-file, White's Rook provides potent backup to the e4-pawn. If Black tries to play ...d7-d5 and knock the e4-pawn out of the way, White's Rook will then be open for operations down the e-file. White's 6.Rel restores the lingering threat to capture the c6-Knight and then the e5-pawn. Black addresses this threat with a tempo by:

6...b5 7.Bb3

White moves his Bishop for a third time in the space of seven moves! Is this not terrible? Well, yes it is. White has spent a lot of moves upon his Bishop, but he didn't waste these moves. He moved his Bishop when it Classical King Pawn Openings was attacked by Black's pawns. While Black has developed his pawns with tempo, their advances can also be argued as a potential weakness. The squares that these pawns once controlled have to find other means of protection. Black now moves his King to safety:

7. ..O-O

This move brings us to the position pictured in Diagram 42, a position that has likely been seen more often "

DIAGRAM 42.

than any other opening. The play of both sides has been sensible and straightforward. Both players have been developing their forces and protecting their Kings, all while playing for central control. Which side stands better? This question really has no answer, for the game is still beginning! From this position, reams of analy- sis and opening ideas have been catalogued. White has three main moves: 8.a4, 8.d4, and the main line, 8.c3.

DIAGRAM 42.

Ruy Lopez Anti-Marshall Variation The Ruy Lopez Anti-Marshall Variation offers a bit of a surprise and a marked departure from the usual focus upon the sweet center.

8.a4

This move aims to prove that Black's b-pawn sticks out like a sore thumb and deserves a little attention. White's obvious threat of 9.axb5 provokes a response:

8.. .Bb7

Black protects his a8-Rook and eyes the e4-pawn.

9.d3

At long last, White commits his d-pawn.

9.. .d6

And Black does the same. With the e5-pawn now firmly protected, the question of an advantage is decided by which player will best activate his pieces. 1O.Nc3 White develops with tempo, and the b5-pawn is still a target.

10. ..b4 11.Ne2

Seeking to reposition the Knight on the Kingside, White has fewer pos- sibilities for an advantage after DIAGRAM 43. ll.Nd5?! Nxd5 12.Bxd5 Na5!

11...Na5 12.Ba2 c5

13.Ng3

In this position, shown in Diagram 43, White is considered to have a small advantage due to a likely Kingside attack. Certainly, chess books are filled with games played from this position. Still, most grandmasters prefer to play the main line. One other interesting try is going after the center:

8.d4

This move involves a sacrifice:

8.. .Nxd4! 9.Nxd4

White has to sidestep 9.Nxe5?! Nxb3 10.axb3 Bb7 due to Black's powerful Bishops.

9.. .exd4 1O.e5

White must avoid 10.Qxd4? c5! ll.Qdl c4, which snares the b3-Bishop.

10.. .Ne8 11.c3!dxc3

12.Nxc3

White has sacrificed a pawn for superior development. Theorists don't consider this gambit to be good enough for White. Classical King Pawn Openings Ruy Lopez (Main Line, continued) The main line (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Be7 6.Rel b5

7.Bb3 O-O) remains the most often played moves.

8.c3

White's whole strategy has been geared toward commanding the center and establishing a Classical Pawn Center. This is another major theoretical crossroad for Black. He has the fan- tastically complex choice of the Marshall Gambit, 8...d5, or he can play the main line, 8...d6. Ruy Lopez Marshall Gambit One of America's strongest players was the renowned Frank James Mar- shall (1877-1944). Marshall was a wonderfully inventive player who came up with a number of attacking ideas. He will forever be immortalized due to his discovery of the Marshall Gambit. According to legend, Marshall would sleep with a pencil and paper by his bedside so that in case he woke up in the middle of the night, he could quickly scribble down his inspira- tion. "You never know when you might get an idea," he would intone. In 1909, Marshall was recognized as one of the top players in the world when he agreed to play an exhibition match against the then- unknown Cuban chess talent, Jose Raul Capablanca (1888-1942, World Champion 1921-27). The match was to be a tune-up for the well-known veteran, and the whole chess world was shocked when Capablanca soundly thrashed Marshall by the one-sided score of 8-1 with 14 draws. (In 1921, Capablanca would become World Champion by defeating Eman- uel Lasker.) For Marshall, his loss to Capablanca was a heartfelt one and he prepared his revenge. Marshall came up with the idea for his gambit and spent the intervening years waiting for the moment to spring his sur- prise upon Capablanca. In 1918 the perfect circumstances presented themselves, and Capablanca fell right into Marshall's surprise weapon. However, many years of diligent preparation couldn't match the natural

talents of Capablanca. Over the board, Capablanca played a near- perfect game and won! Marshall Gambit games have been played ever since. The Marshall Gambit is reached by (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6

4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Be7 6.Rel b5 7.Bb3

O-O 8.c3):

8...d5

Diagram 44 shows the current posi- tion. Based on the principles I've described, this move is a fine one -except that Black loses a pawn in free- ing his game. Is it worth it? Play is now forced:

9.exd5 Nxd5 1O.Nxe5 Nxe5

11.Rxe5 c6!

Marshall's original idea was ll...Nf6, aiming at ...Nf6-g4 and ...Be7-d6 with an attack on the h2-pawn. Later it was discovered that the d5-Knight sits on a fine square and should stay put as Black wants to play ...Be7-d6 and ...Qd8-h4, leaping to the attack. The most common moves are 12.d4 Bd6 13.Rel Qh4 14.g3 Qh3 15.Be3, with countless games being played. Go to your local library, check out a book on the Marshall Gambit, and enrich your knowledge of this fascinating gambit.

DIAGRAM 44.

Ruy Lopez (Main Line, continued) Not every player likes to gambit a pawn, especially as Black. While the Mar- shall Gambit is a fearsome weapon, preference is usually given to the solid (l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Be7 6.Rel b5 7.Bb3 O-O 8.c3):

8...d6

Classical King Pawn Openings Black takes a stand in the center, protects his e5-pawn, and prepares to develop his Queenside pieces. White now plays a paradoxical move as his main choice:

9.h3!?

Diagram 45 shows the position and draws us to my next principle: Every opening move should have a purpose. Most opening moves should be motivated by one of the following reasons:

[diagram]
Of the four reasons in this principle, the one that most often guides opening decisions is playing to control the sweet center. Capturing, retreating, and protecting the King will become second nature. Such moves are made automatically and are in the minority. Controlling the center motivates most moves. With this in mind, how can White's ninth move of the main line Ruy Lopez be the culmination of centuries of master games? Certainly, 9.h3 doesn't fit with any of my principles and it might even be argued that this move even weakens the King's pawn shield. Why waste a precious tempo on such a move? White's opening moves are guided by his desire to control the center. For some time he has been winding up for the move d2-d4. Why didn't White just play it? After 9.d4 Bg4!, White faces an awkward pin upon his f3- Knight. This pin in turn puts pressure upon White's center. Many games have continued with 10.Be3 Na5! (10. . .Nxe4? ll.Bd5 wins a piece-another

trap worth remembering!) ll.Bc2 (ll.dxe5 Bxf3 is considered an even game) 11 . . . Nc4, and Black has proven to have an equal position. As this straightforward try failed to prove an advantage, White players tried another tack: l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Be7 6.Rel b5 7.Bb3 O-O 8.c3 d6 9.d4 Bg4 10.d5. In this way, White achieves a central pawn wedge. It took some time, but the way to an even position was dis- covered: 10...Na5 ll.Bc2 c6! 12. h3 Bc8! 13.dxc6 Qc7! After this series of precise defensive moves, Black would recapture the c6-pawn with good piece play. Dissatisfied by the effects of the annoying pin, ...Bc8-g4, White spent a whole tempo stopping it. Diagram 45 is too rich in its choices for Black. It would take a series of opening books just to get through them all. I'm choosing but one and calling it the main line. First let me list popular alternative moves to the main line.

[diagram]
Each of these alternative moves has something unique about it, which makes them all worthy of study. To my mind, the most consequent choice is:

9.. .Na5

Anticipating that White will one day push his d-pawn up the board, Black's Knight gets out of the way while seeking to push the b3-Bishop to a less powerful diagonal. 1O.Bc2 White gets the hint and retreats his Bishop to safety. In general, grand- masters are quite protective of their Bishops and prefer them to Knights.

[diagram]
Classical King Pawn Openings 'Illis was Black's deeper plan. He brings another pawn into the battle for supremacy of the sweet center. Note how often the players aspire to attack the sweet center.

11.d4!

At long last, after what seemed like lengthy delays, White has established his classical center and now seeks to complete his development. The first piece of happy news is that Black's e5-pawn is now under attack.

11.. .Qc7

Having first developed a number of his pieces, Black feels the time has come to introduce his Queen into battle. Black defends the e5-pawn and begins a little pressure along the c-file. His goal is to harass the c2-Bishop.

12. Nbd2

White develops a Knight, with the intent of maneuvering over to the King- side in a classic Ruy Lopez.

12...Bd7

Black has to carefully choose where he wants to develop his Bishop. Both 12,..Bb7 and 12...Be6 invite 13.d5, shutting off the Bishop's future. Black chooses this safe square and vacates the c8-square for a Rook.

13.Nf1

White continues to redirect his Knight toward the Kingside. Brom there, he can use the g3-square to jump to the fb-outpost, or he can use the e3-square with the option for the d5-outpost. White's last move leads to Dia- gram 46 and the end of this survey of classical King Pawn openings. The ideas and plans shared should leave you with the impression that while there is much to learn, the ideas

DIAGRAM 46.

behind the moves are easy to understand, especially when you consider the principles of opening play. SOLUTION. The problem for White after l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3,Bb5 a6

4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Be7 6.Nc3 b5 7.Bb3 O-O 8.d4? is that 8...exd4

9.Nxd4? Nxd4 10.Qxd4 c5! ll.Qc3 c4! snares White's b3-Bishop. A

pattern worth remembering!

CHAPTER FOUR

Classical Queen Pawn Openings Icn the same manner as I did in Chapter Three, in this chapter I survey lassical Queen Pawn openings and their defenses. I'll follow a main line while considering a large number of deviations along the way. At all times, I'll discuss the fundamental ideas and the principles involved. Queen Pawn openings, as their name suggests, begin with White mov- ing the pawn in front of his Queen:

1.d4

Proponents of l.d4 make an excellent argument for their favorite opening move. White's d-pawn strikes and occupies the sweet center, avenues for both the Bishop and Queen are opened, and the pawn is supported by White's Queen. Recall that in Chapter Three, White's e4-pawn was con- stantly besieged and required protection. In Queen Pawn openings, the d4-pawn has built-in protection. Proponents of l.e4 make a counterargument: l.d4 doesn't help the development of White's Kingside forces and White's King must remain in the center for at least an extra tempo or two. So you must weigh the pros and cons in making an opening choice. Using Steinitz's theory of equilibrium, Black's reply is expected:

1...d5

Black establishes a pawn in the center and stakes a claim to White's e4 and c4-squares. How is White to follow up? White has four main options, which I discuss in turn:

[diagram]
CHAPTER FOUR

[diagram]
Chigorin Variation White has taken several approaches in playing for control of the center, including:

2.Nc3

White plays directly in the center, trying for e2-e4 and quick development. This move is called the Chigorin Variation. If White is able to play e2-e4, the variation works well for White and he gains an advantage. Black can put a stop to White's plans by:

2...Nf6

This makes it difficult for White to reinforce his control over the e4- squarc. White now has two direct choices:

[diagram]
Richter Attack The Richter Attack begins (l.d4 d5

2.Nc3 Nf6):

3,Bg5 As shown in Diagram 47, White's aim is to eliminate the f6-Knight so that he can play e2-e4 with a lion's share of the center. Black can respond to this aggres- sive try with 3...Bf5, developing a Bishop while covering the e4-square; or 3. . .Nbd7, defending the f6-Knight.

DIAGRAM 47.

Classical Queen Pawn Openings Black should expect White to sacrifice a pawn and to try to force through e2-e4. Often the f5-Bishop becomes a target.

4. f3

White revs up for his central push and Black doesn't have an easy choice to make. If he tries 4...e6?, 5.e4! will be powerful due to the pinned f6- Knight. Black must play:

4.. .Nbd7

Black's Bishop development is premature.

5.e4 dxe4

6. Bc4

White's lead in development leads to a dangerous gambit. This line is par- ticularly potent against beginning players. The Chigorin Variation in combination with the Richter Attack (l.d4 d5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.Bg5) is not to be trifled with, and Black has to play with care. I prefer the second choice for Black:

3.. .Nbd7!

4. f3

Once more White winds up for his center push.

[diagram]
Black responds with his own counter in the center.

5.dxc5

White could play the defensive 5.e3, but this negates his strategy of play- ing for e2-e4. Black would play 5. . .e6 with a fine game. Neither would the immediate 5.e4 cxd4 6.Qxd4 e5! work, when Black has seized the center and has the better position.

5.. .e6

Black prepares to recapture the c5-pawn.

6.e4

White completes his plan but at a cost. Black's counter in the center has been quite timely.

6.. .Bxc5

CHAPTER FOUR

7.exd5

White has won a pawn but his position is weakened on the gl-a7 diagonal. By continuing:

7.. .Qb6

Black has the superior position. Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Clearly, Black can handle the Richter Attack (l.d4 d5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.Bg5 Nbd7!) with confidence. Therefore a favorite continuation of club players is the Blackmar-Diemer Gambit (l.d4 d5 2.Nc3 Nf6):

3.e4

White immediately gambits a central pawn for quick development. Black should not be intimidated: he has played two reasonable opening moves and collects the offering.

3.. .dxe4

4.f3

White attacks the e4-pawn in order to continue his development.

4.. .exf3

5. Nxf3 Bg4

White has a slight lead in development and open lines for his pieces. It is doubtful that he has full compensation for the pawn. Nevertheless, the Blackmar-Diemer Gambit remains a favorite. Mason and Levitsky Variations Besides developing his Queen Knight on move two, White has also tried developing his Queen Bishop by (l.d4 d5) 2.Bf4 (the Mason Variation) and 2.Bg5 (the Levitsky Variation). Both of these moves have as their aim setting up a solid central position with e2-e3. White wants to first develop his Bishop outside the pawn chain (f2, e3, and d4). The problem with both these moves is that they don't put sufficient pressure on Black's center. By proceeding cautiously, Black obtains a fine game: Classical Queen Pawn Openings

2.Bf4 Bf5 3.e3 e6

4.c4

White tries to disturb Black in the center. Without this move, Black would just play . . .Bf8-d6 with a balanced game. But in view of what happens, the text is too risky for White.

4.. .Bxb1!

In a surprising move, Black trades a developed piece for an undeveloped one. But Black's plan of ...Bf8-b4+ is quite strong.

5.Qa4+

Aware of Black's threat of 5...Bb4+, White first tries to guard the b4- square before capturing the Bishop.

5.. .Nc6 6.Rxb1 Bb4+

7.Kd1 Bd6!

Diagram 48 shows that White cannot castle, and Black can face the future with confidence. Similarly, the Levitsky Variation (l.d4 d5 2.Bg5) isn't much of a prob- lem for Black. Black can play:

2.. .Nf6

3. Bxf6 exf6

With the two Bishops for the dou- bled pawns, Black has the advan- tage. Or he can try the aggressive:

2.. .f6

3,Bh4 Nh6 Black lays plans to eliminate White's h4-Bishop by playing ...Nh6-f5.

DIAGRAM 48.

CHAPTER FOUR

Queen's Gambit (Main Line) By an overwhelming margin, White's favored second move is:

2.c4

White immediately attacks the d5-pawn and threatens to capture and elim- inate Black's center. By commencing the Queen's Gambit, White hopes to entice Black into capturing the c4-pawn, and after a subsequent recapture. White would then have a lead in development. The Queen's Gambit is shown in Diagram 49. If White is allowed to play c4xd5 unimpeded. Black's center is destroyed. Black has several choices:

[diagram]
Queen's Gambit Accepted The Queen's Gambit Accepted (QGA) follows White's plan of knocking Black's d5-pawn out of the center. Play begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4):

2...dxc4

White can play 3.Qa4+, immediately recapturing the c4-pawn. But this action causes a premature develop- ment of White's Queen. It is better for White to try to recapture the c4- pawn with the fl-Bishop. The sim- plest move is: DIAGRAM 49. 3,e3 Classical Queen Pawn Openings A key alternative is 3.e4. Expanding upon the same idea. White gains a larger share of the center. The problem with this is that Black is also quick to react in the center: 3,..e5 attacks the d4-pawn. After 4.Nf3 (it is a mistake to try to win the e5-pawn with 4.dxe5? Qxdl+ 5.Kxdl Nc6, when Black gets a good position) 4...exd4 5.Nxd4 Nf6, Black has an even game. In the QGA, Black usually allows White to recapture the c4-pawn. He hopes that he too will attack the center with his own . . ,c7-c5 to reestablish the equilibrium.

3.. .Nf6

4,Bxc4 White has accomplished his goal: The d5-pawn has been removed and he has gained a lead in development. Play usually proceeds:

4.. .e6 5.Nf3 c5

6.O-O

Diagram 50 pictures the main position of the QGA. White has a lead in development, which gives him an advantage. Black aims to equalize by trading pawns on the d4-square. The QGA is an excellent defense for those players who like to counterattack. Its drawback is that if White plays accurately, he will keep an advantage for a long while. Slav Defense One of the most solid defenses to the Queen Pawn opening is the Slav Defense, which was favored by Vasily Smyslov (1921- World Champion 1957-58) and Mikhail Botvinnik (1911-95, World Champion 1948-57, 1958-60, 1961-63). The Slav Defense begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4):

2...C6

DIAGRAM 50.

CHAPTER FOUR

Black bolsters his d-pawn and offers White a symmetrical position after:

3.cxd5 cxd5

This position, shown in Diagram 51, is known as the Slav Defense Exchange Variation. White has a small advantage in having an extra tempo for development.

4. Nc3 Nf6 5.Nf3 Nc6

6.Bf4

This results in a slightly better posi- tion for White. When confronted with the Slav Defense, many players pre- fer not to trade central pawns. They reason that the c6-pawn blocks Black's b8-Knight from the useful c6-square. However, if White decides not to trade pawns on the d5-square, he has to keep an eye out that Black doesn't capture the c4-pawn and then play . . ,b7-b5, keeping the pawn forever. The preferred way to meet the Slav Defense (l.d4 d5 2.c4 c6) is to pro- tect the c4 and d4-pawns with:

3.e3 Nf6 4.Nc3 e6

5.Nf3 Nbd7

Diagram 52 shows the position reached. This line of the Slav Defense is known as the Merano Variation. It is an extremely rich and fascinating position preferred by the young lions on the interna- tional chess circuit. Black intends to play ...d5xc4 and ...b7-b5-b4, with play similar to the QGA.

DIAGRAM 51.

DIAGRAM 52.

Classical Queen Pawn Openings Besides choosing the Merano Variation, White can also play (l.d4 d5

2.c4 c6):

3. Nc3

This leaves Black with the choice of 3...dxc4 or 3...Nf6. The latter is the most common choice. But White has to be aware that 3...dxc4 4.e4 (the Alekhine Variation) b5 5.a4 b4 6.Na2 e5 leads to a very sharp position, for which he should be prepared!

3.. .Nf6

White often keeps the tension in the position by playing:

4. Nf3

Once again Black faces a crossroad. Should he capture the c4-pawn with

4...dxc4 or reinforce his center once more with 4...e6 (the Semi-Slav

Defense)? This decision seems to be an even split.

4.. .dxc4

Diagram 53 shows the current position. Black's capture is what gives the Slav Defense its unique flavor. Black intends to play ...b7-b5, hanging on to the captured c4-pawn.

5.a4

With this move, the Alapin Variation, White prevents the protection of the c4-pawn. Play now proceeds:

5.. .Bf5 6.e3 e6

7.Bxc4 Bb4 8.O-O O-O

White, with a slight advantage, will try for the central break e3-e4, but for the moment, Black controls the e4-square. Besides the Alapin Variation, White can sacrifice a pawn (l.d4 d5

2.c4 c6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Nf3 dxc4):

5.e4

White doesn't prevent ...b7-b5 and instead grabs the center.

DIAGRAM 53.

CHAPTER FOUR

5.. .b5

6.e5

This is called the Geller Gambit, which is shown in Diagram 54. Play continues:

6.. .Nd5

7.a4

White has a grip in the center but is a pawn behind. After a great deal of practice, theorists consider Black's position to be sound. DIAGRAM 54. Semi-Slav Defense Besides the ...d5xc4 capture which distinguishes the Slav Defense, Black can also play the Semi-Slav Defense (l.d4 d5 2.c4 c6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Nf3):

4.. .e6

Black reinforces the d5-pawn. White could play 5.e3, which transposes into the Merano Variation, or continue with the aggressive:

5. Bg5

White develops his Bishop and threatens to play e2-e4, now that the f6- Knight is pinned. This move, the Anti-Merano Game, is the prelude to one of the most difficult theoretical puzzles in chess:

5.. .dxc4

Black decides that the time is now ripe to capture the c4-pawn. White's move is expected:

6.e4

White grabs the center and is primed to capture the c4-pawn with a large lead in development.

6.. .b5

Black holds onto his c4-pawn.

7.e5

Classical Queen Pawn Openings Taking advantage of the pinned f6- Knight, White threatens to win a piece. Black has to break the h4-d8 pin.

7.. .h6 8.Bh4g5

9.Nxg5!

White isn't about to allow the pin to be broken.

9.. .hxg5

10.Bxg5 Nbd7

This is the Semi-Slav, Botvinnik Gam- bit. Diagram 55 shows the position. Black is temporarily up a pawn, which White will soon recapture. Current opening theory now continues:

11.g3 Bb7 12.Bg2 Qb6

13.exf6 O-O-O 14.O-O

Black has sacrificed a pawn for a Queenside majority, open lines on the King- side, and play in the center. The resulting position is one of the sharpest posi- tions in opening theory. The world's highest-rated player, Garry Kasparov, has played some sparkling games in this variation.

DIAGRAM 55.

Queen's Gambit Declined (Main Line, continued) The oldest line in the classical Queen Pawn openings is the Queen's Gam- bit Declined (QGD), which begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4):

2...e6

Black protects the d5-pawn and prepares to develop his Kingside pieces. The problem with this move is the obvious plight of the c8-Bishop. It is now locked inside Black's pawn chain and will remain inactive for some time.

CHAPTER FOUR

Grau Variation While the QGD is a solid defensive choice, players have looked for ways of activating their c8-Bishop before committing their e-pawn. The most common tries for Black are 2...Bf5 (the Grau Variation) and 2...Nc6 (the Chigorin Defense). The Grau Variation begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4):

2.. .BI5

Black develops a Bishop and controls the sweet center, but this move has a tactical drawback that earns White an advantage. This allows a moment to introduce another opening principle: Develop your Knights before developing your Bishops. This is a principle that is easily violated and not so easily punished. For this reason, many chess teachers don't emphasize this principle. Nei- ther do I. Nonetheless it is a principle worth knowing-even if you don't pay strict attention to it. The idea of the principle is that in the early open- ing, you're not sure how the position will shape up. Will a diagonal remain open or closed? Will the Bishop have to move again soon? Sometimes, as in the Ruy Lopez, the Bishop move on move three is considered White's best. Other times, as in the Mason and Levitsky Variations, the Bishop moves seem premature. In the Blackmar-Diemer Gambit, Black must be very careful in developing his c8-Bishop. In the Grau Variation, White is quick to take the d5-pawn:

3.cxd5!

This is stronger than 3.Nc3 e6 (now Black is comfortable playing this move) 4.Qb3 Nc6 5.e3 Bb4, when White has only a small advantage.

3.. .Bxb1

Black moves his developed Bishop yet again. The move is actually forced, as 3...Qxd5? 4.Nc3 will be a quick disaster. Black's Queen is attacked and is forced to move again. Further, White will soon play e2-e4, grabbing the center and developing with tempo.

4.Qa4+!

Classical Queen Pawn Openings Only this move, which violates the principle of not developing the Queen early, gives White the advantage. After the recapture 4.Rxbl Qxd5, Black's Queen has taken up a stable square in the center. The a2-pawn is attacked and Black can face the future with confidence. The Grau Varia- tion is particularly effective against beginning players who won't see the necessity of White's fourth move.

4.. .c6

Black makes a forced response. After 4...Qd7 5.Qxd7+ Nxd7 6.Rxbl Ngf6

7.Bd2 Nb6 8.f3! Nbxd5 9.e4, White has gained the advantage with his two

Bishops and a classical pawn center.

5.Rxb1

White recaptures the bl-Bishop. He can also consider 5.dxc6 Nxc6 6.Rxbl e5! 7.Bd2 (to prevent ...Bf8-b4+, which would be quite unpleasant!)

7...exd4 8,g3, with a slight advantage for White.

5.. .Qxd5 6.Nf3 Nd7

7.Bd2

White must avoid 7.Bf4?? Qe4!, which launches a double attack against the f4-Bishop and bl-Rook.

7.. .Ngf6

8.e3

Diagram 56 shows the current posi- tion, where White has an advantage due to his two Bishops and superior central control. Chigorin Defense An altogether different and tricky problem is presented by the Chig- orin Defense (l.d4 d5 2.c4):

2...Nc6

DIAGRAM 56.

CHAPTER FOUR

Black plays for piece play and an open game. Unconcerned with the fight for the d5-square. Black plays for a counterattack against the d4-pawn and seeks to play . . .e7-e5 with an explosion in the center. White's most reliable reaction is to cover the e5-square.

3. Nf3 Bg4

Black intensifies the fight for the e5-square.

4. cxd5

White strips Black of his central bulwark. Black must play energetically to stay in the battle.

4.. .Bxf3!

This move weakens the protection of the d4-pawn. Weaker is 4,..Qxd5

5.Nc3, which gives White a nice advantage.

5.gxf3

After 5.dxc6 Bxc6, Black is doing well. He isn't behind in development and he has control over the sweet center.

5.. .Qxd5

6.e3

White would dearly love to play 6.Nc3, developing with tempo, but first he must fortify the d4-pawn.

6...e5!

7. Nc3! Bb4!

Diagram 57 reveals excellent play by both sides. Black is fighting to avoid the loss of a tempo with his Queen.

8. Bd2 Bxc3

9. bxc3 Nge7

White has a broad center and the two Bishops. White's position is considered to be better, but Black will have play against White's

DIAGRAM 57.

Classical Queen Pawn Openings doubled pawns. His aim is to play ...Ne7-g6-h4. The Chigorin remains a viable defense worthy of study. Queen's Gambit Declined (Main Line, continued) The Queen's Gambit Declined (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6) has been a favored defense of nearly every World Champion. That fact alone is enough to convince me of its soundness. White has a hard time knocking out the d5- pawn and he immediately puts pressure on this pawn.

3.Nc3

This is the most aggressive move. White can also play 3.Nf3, which often transposes into the main line. Catalan Variation A crucial alternative at this juncture is:

3.g3

White prepares to fianchetto his fl-Bishop so that it can pressure the d5- pawn. The idea of a fianchetto is considered a modern concept. Classical players preferred to leave their Kingside pawns on their original squares so that after castling, the Kingside has no weak squares. (I'll discuss the Kingside fianchetto at length in later chapters.) I'm quite fond of this third move, which introduces the Catalan Variation. White's fl-Bishop will move to the long diagonal hl-a8, which intensifies White's pressure in the sweet center. The drawback of the Catalan is that White's c4-pawn no longer receives the protection of the fl-Bishop. Thus, if Black captures the c4- pawn, White will have to find another piece to recapture with. Black can meet the Catalan by capturing the c4-pawn with ...d5xc4 (the Open Cata- lan) or by blocking the long diagonal with ...c7-c6 (the Closed Catalan).

CHAPTER FOUR

Open Catalan Variation Deciding to capture the c4-pawn is a sensible reaction because the c4- pawn lacks protection.

3.. .dxc4

White intends to recapture the pawn soon. First he completes the fian- chetto:

4.Bg2

White shouldn't be too anxious to recapture the pawn; 4.Qa4+ Bd7 5.Qxc4 Bc6 6.Nf3 Bxf3! 7.exf3 Nc6 8.Be3 Qd5! leaves a fine game for Black.

4.. .Nf6

Black proceeds with his development. He can also consider 4...c5 5.Qa4+ Bd7 6.Qxc4 Bc6 with approximate equality.

5.Nf3

After 5.Qa4+ Nbd7 6,Qxc4 c5, it is highly likely that the game will trans- pose to the line we are investigating.

5.. .Be7

This is the solid choice for Black because he intends quick castling. Black has also tried 5...c5, 5...Nc6, and 5...a6. These enterprising alternatives aim to retain the captured c4-pawn.

6.O-O O-O

7.Qa4

At last White decides it is time to recapture the c4-pawn. In the tempi that it costs White to complete this task, Black aims to neutralize White's fianchetto with one of his own.

[diagram]
Black threatens to secure the c4-pawn with ...b7-b5.

8.Qxc4 b5

9.Qc2 Bb7

In Diagram 58, we see a key starting position of the Open Catalan. Many games have been contested from this position with White playing 10.Bd2,

10.Bf4, and 10.Bg5 as his most popular choices.

Classical Queen Pawn Openings The battle lines are fairly simple: White will try to establish a classical pawn center and outposts on the c5 and e5-squares. Black will play for ...c7-c5, trying to create a symmetri- cal pawn structure and an equal game. Closed Catalan Variation The Closed Catalan is designed to keep the long diagonal blocked. It begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.g3):

3.. .C6

Black hopes that in this way the g2- Bishop will bite on granite. Black's last move, however, contains a trace of poison. White must be watchful for a change of plans by Black. He might grab the c4-pawn and then play ...b7-b5, holding the extra pawn as in the Slav Defense. Worried for the safety of the c4-pawn, White plays:

4.Qc2

Although White is uncomfortable moving his Queen so early, the Queen isn't easily attacked. White has to be aware of a dangerous trap in this line. White can't just play 4.b3? to defend the c4-pawn, because after 4...dxc4

5.bxc4? Bb4+!, White will lose the d4-pawn.

4...Nf6

Black has another major choice at this moment. He can radically change the complexion of the game by trying to control the e4-square.

DIAGRAM 58.

Dutch Stonewall Defense What a marvelous name for a defense: the Dutch Stonewall. Just as the name implies, Black creates a fortress of pawns (d5, f5, c6, and e6) in the center and plays for control over the e4-square. Play begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.g3 c6 4.Qc2):

4...f5

CHAPTER FOUR

Diagram 59 shows the position after Black's fourth move. Clearly, White is going to have a hard time liberat- ing the center with e2-e4, but on the other hand, Black has created a hole, the e5-square, which beckons a White Knight. Play usually proceeds:

5.Nf3 Nf6 6.Bg2 Bd6

7.Bf4

Despite the blocked nature of the position, White has the advantage because he has a superior Bishop and more space. The Dutch Stonewall Defense remains a favorite of amateur players because the ideas for the defender are simple to follow. Trade the pieces that land on the e5-square and move your pieces to the Kingside.

DIAGRAM 59.

Closed Catalan Variation, continued While the Dutch Stonewall is an intriguing defense, most players prefer not to commit their f-pawn so early. In the Closed Catalan (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.g3 c6 4.Qc2 Nf6), Black aims for quiet development.

5.Bg2 Be7 6.Nf3 O-O

7.O-O

Both players aim to complete their development. Black has a problem of what to do with the c8-Bishop. It's stuck inside his pawn chain, blocked behind the e6-pawn, as shown in Diagram 60.

DIAGRAM 60.

Classical Queen Pawn Openings

[diagram]
Quiz. How would you try to activate the c8-Bishop? The solution is at the end of this chapter. Queen's Gambit Declined (Main Line, continued) At this moment in the QGD main line (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3), Black can play

3. . .c6, transposing back to a Slav Defense, or he can play 3. . .15 with a Dutch

Stonewall. Because White has developed a Knight hitting the e4-square and the d5-pawn, Black opposes him with a similar scheme:

3...Nf6

Black tries to invite White to trade pawns on the d5-square. Such a trade would benefit Black for the moment! Why? If White tries 4.cxd5 exd5, then Black's c8-Bishop would no longer be blocked and its development would be unimpeded. Tarrasch Defense Because Black is trying to provoke a trade of central pawns, one of the definitive practitioners of classical chess, Siegbert Tarrasch (1862- 1934), devised the Tarrasch Defense, which begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3): 3".c5 From the perspective of fighting for central control, Black's reaction is quite sensible. (See Diagram 61.) White can play 4.e3 Nf6 5.Nf3 Nc6,

DIAGRAM 61.

CHAPTER FOUR

producing a symmetrical position with White having the move. In general, this line of play offers White only a minimal advantage. Therefore, on move four, White's main line is to capture in the center:

4. cxd5

Black should be pleased at having provoked this capture. He now has to decide between 4...cxd4 (the Schara-Hennig Gambit) and the usual

4...exd5, recapturing in the center.

Schara-Hennig Gambit The Schara-Hennig Gambit is an excellent weapon for beginning players. Black aims for rapid piece development (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 c5 4.cxd5):

4...cxd4

This capture provokes White's Queen to develop early so that Black can attack it with gain of tempi.

5.Qxd4 Nc6!

This is Black's key move. The d5-pawn is pinned and White has to move the Queen. Diagram 62 shows the position and how Black's Knight is developed with tempo. White withdraws the Queen:

6.Qd1 exd5

7.Qxd5

White has won a pawn but has made several moves with the Queen, which has cost him time.

7...Bd7

Black continues developing while preparing ...Ng8-f6, also with tempo. Black has tried 7...Be6

8.Qxd8+ Rxd8. Black's play dis-

plays the results of a classical gam- bit. Although Black is a pawn

DIAGRAM 62.

Classical Queen Pawn Openings down, its sacrifice has been for quick development. Still, White is con- sidered to have an advantage in this middle game position.

8.e3 Nf6

9.Qb3

White will try hard to catch up in development while Black will try to coordinate an attack. Practice favors White. Tarrasch Defense, continued For those players who don't like to gambit pawns as Black, the Tarrasch Defense (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 c5 4.cxd5) is the natural reaction.

4...exd5

White has tried a large number of moves here:

[diagram]
find gambits for both White and Black. White is playing for fast devel- opment and this gambit is a dangerous one for the second player.

[diagram]
is the Tarrasch Gambit, and after the theoretical recommendation

6. . .b5 7.cxb6 axb6, the poorly placed a4-Knight gives Black an excel-

lent position.

[diagram]
are 5.Nf3 Nc6. Black rein- forces the pressure on the d4-pawn. White can now try

6.e3 Nf6 7.Bb5 cxd4 8.Nxd4

Bd7, which is slightly better for White. Or he can play the popular fianchetto varia- tion, called the Schlechter Variation: 6.g3 Nf6 7.Bg2 Be7 8.O-O O-O 9.Bg5. This is shown in Diagram 63.

DIAGRAM 63.

CHAPTER FOUR

Modern practice has shown an advantage for White due to the pressure that White's pieces have in the center. From Tarrasch's view as a classical player, he was certain that Black had achieved an equal game. The Tarrasch Defense was a favorite of Garry Kasparov during his early career. Queen's Gambit Declined (Main Line, continued) White now has several moves available that very often transpose to one another. After l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6, he can try:

[diagram]
played at nearly any moment in the moves ahead, but it is best delayed for the moment.

[diagram]
On which square will he develop the cl-Bishop? 5.Bf4 only encourages 5...Bb4, which puts White on the defensive. White's best move is therefore 5.Bg5, which is very close to the main line. For the sake of accuracy, 1'11 play the correct order of moves.

[diagram]
4.Bg5 is the most effective. I agree with them.

(Besides these main moves, White can also play 4.Bf4, which mis- places the Bishop. After 4...Bb4!, Black pins the c3-Knight and intends a quick ...c7-c5 and ...Qd8-a5 attack. The development of the f4-Bishop doesn't help White counter Black's plans.) My preferred order of moves is (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6):

4.Bg5

This move (see Diagram 64) makes a lot more sense than the alternatives. The defending f6-Knight is pinned, and White immediately threatens its capture and, if possible, the win of the d5-pawn. To defend against this possibility Black's two main defenses are 4...Be7 (the Tartakover Varia- tion) and 4...Nbd7 (the main line). Classical Queen Pawn Openings Tartakover Variation Chess theorists are evenly split between Tartakover and main line adherents. The Tartakover Varia- tion begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5):

4.. .Be7

Black prepares to quickly castle while breaking the pin on the f6- Knight.

5.e3 O-O

White must make a fundamental decision. Does he intend to delay the development of his gl-Knight with moves such as 6.Qd2, 6.Qc2, or

6.Rcl -or simply develop the Knight? Each of these moves contains its

own peculiarities and Black must be familiar with each of them. Because developing the gl-Knight is the most natural, I'll follow that line:

6.Nf3

This leaves Black with the choice of:

[diagram]
Lasker Defense A favorite defense of former World Champion Emanuel Lasker was (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Be7 5.e3 O-O 6.Nf3):

6.. .Ne4

This defense now bears his name. Black's plan is to trade a few minor pieces and gain a reasonable position.

7. Bxe7 Qxe7

DIAGRAM 64.

CHAPTER FOUR

Diagram 65 shows the Lasker Defense. White can choose 8.Nxe4 dxe4 9.Nd2 f5, which is considered about equal. Or he can choose

8.cxd5 Nxc3 9.bxc3 exd5 10.c4,

which is slightly better for White. With the main move. White develops a Rook and defends the c3-Knight:

8.Rc1 Nxc3 9.Rxc3 c6

1O.Bd3dxc4 11.Bxc4b6 This line provides a small advan- tage to White.

DIAGRAM 65.

Neo-Orthodox Defense The Neo-Orthodox Defense begins (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Be7

5.c3 O-O 6.Nf3):

6...h6

This puts the question to White's Bishop: Will he exchange Bishop for Knight or move away? (The reason for the strange name, "neo," is that while Black is playing an Orthodox Defense, the idea of inserting the move ...h7-h6 is relatively modern. Classical players didn't like weaken- ing their Kingside.)

7.Bh4 b6

Following the usual retreat, Black decides to fianchetto his c8-Bishop as in the Closed Catalan. This variation is called the Tartakover, Makogonov, Bondarevsky Variation. A mouthful you say? That's why its also called the TMB Variation. I discuss this position (see Diagram 66) and its strategies extensively in Winning Chess Brilliancies (Microsoft Press, 1995), on pages 2-15. In this game (Robert James Fischer versus Boris Spassky, Reykjavik 1972, Game 6), Black retains a solid central position. Classical Queen Pawn Openings Queen's Gambit Declined (Main Line, continued) Return now to the main line (l.d4 d5 2,c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5):

4...Nbd7

Black will try to provoke the trade c4xd5 ...e6xd5, so that the c8- Bishop will develop on the c8-h3 diagonal. With Black's fourth move, he reinforces his f6-Knight, the defender of the d5-pawn.

5.e3

White prepares further development. How many players have fallen into the cunning trap 5.cxd5 exd5 6.Nxd5?? White has thought that he has won a pawn due to the pin on the f6-Knight. Look at Diagram 67 and see if you can spot White's oversight. Black continues 6...Nxd5, which has been quite a shock for many. The Knight isn't as badly pinned as first thought! 7.Bxd8 Bb4+! is Black's point. White has to return the Queen. After 8.Qd2 Bxd2+

9.Kxd2 Kxd8, Black has won a

Knight for a pawn and has a winning advantage in force. White should also avoid: 5.e4?! dxe4 6.Nxe4 h6, which puts the question to White's Bishop at an annoying moment. After the subse- quent moves 7.Bxf6 Nxf6, Black has the preferable position.

DIAGRAM 66.

DIAGRAM 67.

CHAPTER FOUR

5.. .h6

Black puts the question to White's Bishop. White doesn't benefit from the trade 6.Bxf6 Nxf6, so he retreats the Bishop:

6.Bh4

As seen before. White should avoid 6,Bf4?! Bb4!, which provides good play for Black.

6.. .Be7

Black commits his Bishop to break- ing the pin. Black could also try

6...Bb4, but without the possibility

of ...Nf(i-e4, such an attack would be premature. Diagram 68 features our main line position. Now an interesting fight for a tempo ensues. White wants Black to play ...d5xc4 so that he can play Bflxc4 in one gulp, while Black wants White to play c4xd5 so that after ...e6xd5, a path is cleared for the c8- Bishop. On such nuances the question of an advantage resides. White has two choices:

[diagram]
DIAGRAM 68.

Queen's Gambit Declined, Exchange Variation If White wants to clarify the pawn structure, then the Queen's Gambit Declined Exchange Variation is the preferred choice.

7. cxd5 exd5

8, Bd3 White's Bishops have taken up active squares, but Black has retained a solid central position.

8...C6

Classical Queen Pawn Openings Black further cements the center.

9.Nf3

White finally develops his Kingside in preparation for castling. The move

9.Nge2 is appropriately named the

Chameleon Variation. It is more flexi- ble than 9.N13 because it allows a pos- sible f2-f3 and e3-e4 plan, but the Knight is less active on the e2-square.

9. . .O-O

10.O-O Ne4

This leads to the same trading idea of the Lasker Defense. Diagram 69 shows the position, which is considered a standard one for the Queen's Gambit Exchange. Black intends to hold the e4-square as firmly as possible. Theory considers the Exchange Variation to be only slightly better for White. My view is that Black has an easy game. Queen's Gambit Declined (Main Line, continued) Return to the main line (l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Nbd7 5.e3 h6

6.Bh4 Be7):

7.Nf3

Instead of resolving the central tension, White develops a piece and hopes to take advantage of his superior development after 7...dxc4? 8.Bxc4. Black isn't about to aid White's pieces and plays:

7. . .O-O

Black tucks his King safely onto the Kingside.

8.Rd

White knows that Black will soon have to develop his c8-Bishop. This means he will try to fianchetto the Bishop or resolve the central tension.

DIAGRAM 69.

CHAPTER FOUR

White is ready to play down the c- file in either event.

8...a6

Black shows his cards. He intends to capture on the c4-square and then play ...b7-b5, accelerating his Queenside development. The posi- tion is shown in Diagram 70. White must decide if he wants to resolve the center with 9.cxd5 exd5, as in the Queen's Gambit Exchange Variation. He has gained the develop- ment move Ral-cl in return for the move . . ,a7-a6, which should give White the advantage. Even so, after 10.Bd3 c6 Black's position is quite solid. At Diagram 70, White can play 9.a3, still awaiting a resolution in the center. Continuing with 9...dxc4 10.Bxc4 b5 ll.Ba2 c5 leaves an approxi- mately equal position. Having a better understanding of the classical openings makes it eas- ier to understand the modern ones. Although learning the names of the openings and defenses is hardly a requirement, the key to good play is understanding the ideas of central control, quick piece development, and a safe King.

DIAGRAM 70.

SOLUTION FOR DIAGRAM 60: In such circumstances its very conve- nient to remember the plan of a fianchetto. With 7...b6! Black intends to oppose White's g2-Bishop on the long diagonal. Usual play proceeds: 8.Rdl Bb7 9.Nc3 Nbd7, When White has only a small advantage. Black plays for ...c6-c5 and White for e2-e4, with lots of trades expected to occur in the center.

[diagram]
Modern King Pawn Defenses This chapter, unlike the two previous ones, does not have a "main line" which we plow through while considering alternatives. Instead, it provides a brief sketch of some of the main lines of the more popular modern defenses to White's opening challenge of l.e4. The Steinitizian principles of equilibrium practically compelled all leading chess players to meet White's opening move in classical style by playing l...e5. The same was true with Queen Pawn openings when l.d4 d5 was considered practically forced. Gradually, players began to experiment with a number of different defenses. Their aim was no longer to seek to "establish or re-establish the equilibrium;" in many cases the aim was to attack's White's opening move at once or allow White to occupy the cen- ter. There were a large number of experiments and not all of them worked very well! However a number have withstood the test of time. As you fol- low the openings in this chapter, notice how both players play for the center, development, and a safe King. This will be a theme of future chapters. Alekhine Defense Sometimes when approaching a game of chess, a player has to be down- right surly in his mental attitude (not in personality!) and question the opponent's every move. For a moment, cloak yourself in this same mind frame. White has just played:

1.e4

You haughtily take offense at this move, and you must immediately set about trying to destroy the e4-pawn. You can attack the e4-pawn with moves like ...f7-f5 or ...d7-d5, or you can try to lure it forward to its cap- ture. This is what Alexander Alekhine, fourth World Champion, had in mind when he championed the Alekhine Defense: This impudent move is shown in Diagram 71. Black immediately sets out to assault the e4-pawn, with hopes of lur- ing it forward to its doom. 2,e5 White accepts the challenge. He reckons that 2.Nc3 d5 or 2. . .e5 would not punish Black for his challenge.

2...Nd5

Black's Knight takes up an unstable residence in the middle of the board. The Knight seems to be mocking White's army, daring them to attack. A horrible debacle would await Black after 2...Ne4? 3.d3! Nc5 4.d4!, when Black's Knight is being unceremoniously booted about the board. White has developed his center pawns with tempo and can expect to con- duct a swift attack.

3.d4

White calmly occupies the center and opens the diagonals for his Bishops. There is a great temptation to play 3.c4 Nb6 4.c5 Nd5 5.Bc4 e6

6.Nc3 d6(!), which is called the

Mikenas Variation. Most top players feel that White has been overzeal- ous in his treatment of the opening and that Black stands with a fair game.

3...d6

DIAGRAM 71.

Modern King Pawn Defenses The first effects of Black's strategy become apparent: The e-pawn, having been lured forward, is now the object of Black's counterplay. White can take a number of approaches, including 4.Nf3 or 4.Bc4. My preference is for: 4,c4! Nb6 5.exd6 Another popular move, aptly named the Four Pawns Attack, is 5.f4, which keeps a broad pawn center. To play either side of the Four Pawns Attack requires a good deal of study because the lines are extremely sharp and one false slip spells disaster. After White's capture, the position is beginning to take clarity.

5.. .cxd6

The alternative recapture, 5...exd6, produces a symmetrical pawn struc- ture with White having an easy advantage due to his superior space.

6. Nc3 g6

The best chance for the f8-Bishop to have a life is to fianchetto itself.

7. Be3 Bg7 8,c5!

The first eight moves of the Alekhine Defense are shown in Diagram 72. White expects the following moves, with an advantage to White.

8.. .dxc5 9.dxc5 N6d7

1O.Bc4 Scandinavian Defense Having journeyed through the clas- sical openings, you might consider the Alekhine Defense to be a bit rash. As I became a stronger player, I was surprised to discover that my old favorite was an accepted defense called the Scandinavian Defense.

1.e4 d5!?

DIAGRAM 72.

Black attacks White's e4-pawn and forces a reaction.

2.exd5

This capture is practically forced. 2,..Qxd5 This premature developing of the Queen has at least momentarily done its job. White's e4-pawn has disappeared. Black has also tried 2...Nf6 to recover the pawn without developing the Queen. White can then try 3.Bb5+, 3.c4, or the preferred 3.d4 Nxd5

4.c4 Nb6 5.Nc3, with play as in the Alekhine Defense.

3. Nc3 Qa5

Black tries to get his Queen out of danger. The retreats 3...Qd6 and

3. . .Qd8 have also been tried, but preference has been shown for the text.

4. d4 Nf6 5,Nf3 Bg4

6,h3 Bxf3 7.Qxf3 c6 As shown in Diagram 73, White has the advantage of the two Bishops but Black has a surprisingly solid position. The Scandinavian Defense is still played by grandmasters who seek to avoid studying the opening theory necessary for top-level chess. The Scandinavian Defense is a good way of avoiding an adversary's preparation. French Defense The French Defense was an early favorite of mine and one I still play today as a grandmaster. The Ale- khine and Scandinavian Defenses don't properly prepare an assault on White's e4-pawn, but the French Defense seeks to prepare the move ...d7-d5. It is distinguished after:

1.e4e6 2.d4 d5

DIAGRAM 73.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Black attacks the e4-pawn with his d5-pawn, which has been supported by the e6-pawn. White has three major choices about what he wants to do with his e4-pawn. He can trade it, support it, or push it:

[diagram]
Each of these choices has a large body of opening theory behind it to support its use. The French Defense is a wonderfully intriguing defense that shows no signs of being exhausted. Exchange Variation Quite obviously the moves by Black (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5) represent a counter- attack in the center. If White decides that he wants to avoid some of the sharp lines listed below, he can opt for a small advantage by playing the Exchange Variation:

3.exd5 exd5

Diagram 74 shows the effects of White's pawn trade. The pawn structure is completely symmetrical and White's only advantage is having the right to move. However, being on the move means that White can complete his development just a bit faster than Black and therefore gain a small advantage.

4.Bd3

This violates the principle of develop- ing Knights before Bishops. The idea behind this principle is that the devel- opment of the Bishops should be delayed because the pawn structure

DIAGRAM 74.

in most openings is dynamic. That is, a closed diagonal at one moment sud- denly opens. In the French Exchange Variation this is not the case. The pawn structure is well defined. By the text, White develops and tries to pre- vent . . .Bc8-f5, when the Black Bishop develops to a good diagonal.

4.. .Bd6 5.Nf3 Nf6

6.O-O O-O 7.Bg5 Bg4

8.Nbd2 Nbd7 9.c3 c6

1O.Qc2 Qc7 Both players have completed their development and the game is almost completely equal. Because White has the extra move in a symmetrical position, he has a small plus. French Defense, 3.Nc3 Variations By far the most popular way to meet the French Defense (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5) is with:

3.Nc3

White develops a Knight and protects his e4-pawn. Black has four main moves:

[diagram]
Once more, all of these choices are fascinating lines leading to posi- tions that are rich in strategy and tactics. Rubinstein Variation One of Black's most consequent decisions in the 3.Nc3 French Defense (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3) is to employ the Rubinstein Variation:

3.. .dxe4

Black sought the elimination of the e4-pawn and has now achieved that goal. While White will enjoy a greater freedom of movement for his Modern King Pawn Defenses pieces, Black will aim to trade pieces for a solid position:

4.Nxe4 Nd7 5.Nf3 Ngf6

6.Nxf6+ Nxf6 7,Bd3 Be7

8.Qe2

Diagram 75 shows one of the key positions of the Rubinstein Varia- tion. White has the superior Bish- ops and greater flexibility with his King position. He may castle on either side of the board. Black will aim to play ...c7-c5, neutralizing White's remaining center pawn and solve the problem of his c8-Bishop either by a fianchetto or by playing ...Bc8-d7-c6. Opening theorists believe that White has a slight advantage. Winawer Variation Today most French Defense players prefer to play the Winawer Variation (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3):

3.. .Bb4

Black pins the Knight and threatens to capture the e-pawn. In most varia- tions of the Winawer, Black will trade his Bishop for the c3-Knight and double White's Queenside pawns. The strategic plans for both sides require study and experience.

4.e5

White advances in the center to grab as much space as he can. He can also play 4.exd5 exd5, transposing into an Exchange French with Black having committed his Bishop to the b4-square. Diagram 76, on the next page, shows the main position of the Winawer Variation.

4.. .C5

DIAGRAM 75.

Black now attacks White's center, hoping to follow up with ...Nb8-c6 to eliminate the central pawns.

5.a3 Bxc3+ 6.bxc3

White has strengthened his d4- pawn for the moment, but his dou- bled Queenside pawns will offer Black counterchances.

6...Ne7

Black initiates a long-term plan to harass the d4-pawn with ...Ne7-f5 in the future.

7.Nf3

This is White's most common move, called the Rauzer Variation. White has several other choices:

[diagram]
vating his Bishop on a promising diagonal.

[diagram]
White would like to advance his h-pawn to the h6-square so that he can infdtrate on the weakened dark squares.

[diagram]
raid believing such an adventure is justified due to his control over the center. A sharp reaction by Black is 7...Qc7 8.Qxg7 Rg8

9.Qxh7 cxd4 10.Ne2 Nbc6 1l.f4 Bd7 12,Qd3. Black has sacrificed a

pawn for the superior development and an exposed White King. Theorists will argue the soundness of Black's sacrifice well into the next millennium. Have fun!

7...Nbc6

In the Rauzer Variation, battle lines are drawn on opposite wings. Usually Black's King is too vulnerable on the Kingside and he is forced to castle Queenside while White's King goes Kingside. A favored line continues:

DIAGRAM 76.

Modern King Pawn Defenses

8.a4 Qa5 9.Bd2 Bd7

1O.Bd3c4 11.Be2 O-O-O

12.O-O

With a fighting game ahead, practice has favored White. Steinitz Variation Most grandmasters prefer to hoard their Bishops, hoping that as the opening moves unfold and the position is opened, their Bishops will pow- erfully rake the open diagonals. While the Winawer Variation means part- ing with the f8-Bishop, the Steinitz Variation holds onto the Bishop and intensifies the pressure on the e4-pawn (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3):

3.. .Nf6

White usually reacts by gaining a tempo while attacking Black's Knight:

4.e5

Classical Variation An important strategic alternative for White is (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 Nf6):

4.Bg5

In the French Defense, White usually has difficulties activating his cl- Bishop due to his central d4- and e5-pawns. The idea of this move is to exchange dark-squared Bishops. Play proceeds:

4.. .Be7 5.e5 Nfd7

6.Bxe7

White can play an interesting gambit, 6.h4!?, called the Chatard-Alekhine Attack.

6.. .Qxe7 7.f4

White reinforces his e5-pawn and prepares a future f4-f5 break.

7.. .a6

Black wants to play . . ,c7-c5, but first wants to prevent Nc3-b5 invading the d6-square.

8.Nf3 c5 9.dxc5 Nxc5

1O.Bd3 Nc6

Diagram 77 shows this classical position of the French Defense, with a small advantage for White. Steinitz Variation, continued In the Steinitz Variation (l.e4 e6

2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.e5), White

doesn't exchange Bishops, reason- ing that Black's Queen will be developed to the good e7-square and keeps the Bishops on the board.

4.. .Nfd7 5.f4

Just as in the Classical Variation, White reinforces his center.

5...C5

Now that the f8-Bishop covers the d6-square, Black isn't required to play . . .a7-a6 to prevent Nc3-b5, and attacks White's center at once.

6.Nf3 Nc6 7.Be3 cxd4

8.Nxd4 Bc5

Both players are developing with an aim for central control.

9.Qd2

Diagram 78 shows the thematic position of the Steinitz Variation. Play often proceeds:

9.. .Nxd4 1O.Bxd4 Bxd4

[diagram]
13.Nb5 Ke7

This line provides an advantage for White.

DIAGRAM 77.

DIAGRAM 78.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Seirawan Variation A relatively modern defensive twist is a variation that I have devised and championed (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3):

3...Be7

Although this appears to be a strange move, it is in fact a high-class wait- ing move. If White plays 4.Nf3 Nf6 5.e5 Nfd7, play has transposed into a Steinitz Variation where White has committed his f3-Knight and has denied himself the opportunity for f2-f4. If White advances his e-pawn with 4.e5, the advance doesn't come with tempo. Black can now play for the strategically desirable plan of trading light-squared Bishops with 4...b6. Black plays for ...Bc8-a6 with a Bishop trade in sight. White attacks the g7-pawn with 5.Qg4 and hopes to cause some dark-squared weaknesses in Black's camp. Continuing with 5...g6

6.h4 h5! 7.Qf4 Ba6, Black has solved his "problem Bishop" in the French

and can face the future with confidence. White's best test of the Seirawan

4.Bd3!

This provokes:

4...dxe4 5.Nxe4 Nd7

6. Nf3 Ngf6

Play now transposes into the Rubin- stein Variation. I've played this posi- tion in provocative style as Black on several occasions: 7, Nxf6+ Bxf6 8.Qe2 c5

9.d5 Nb6 1O.Bb5+ Kf8

Diagram 79 shows a crucial position in my variation. My personal tourna- ment score is quite favorable with Black, but the position requires careful study! Variation is:

DIAGRAM 79.

Tarrasch Variation As you've seen from the 3.Nc3 vari- ations, committing the bl-Knight to the c3-square invites a pin and makes it awkward for White to defend the d4-pawn after ...c7-c5. With this in mind, White has taken another approach to the French Defense (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5):

3.Nd2

White defends his e4-pawn while keeping a flexible approach toward the defense of his center. Diagram 80 shows the Tarrasch Variation. At first glance, the move makes a poor impression because it blocks the cl-Bishop from develop- ing. Black can use this temporary central blocking move to attack White's center; 3...c5 and 3...Nf6 are the principle tries.

3.. .C5

This is quite a sensible reaction. Black plays to wipe out White's central pawns.

4.exd5

White decides to trade pawns. White gains nothing from 4.c3?! cxd4 5.cxd4 dxe4 6.Nxe4 Bb4+ 7.Nc3 Nf6, which makes an easy game for Black.

4.. .exd5 5.Ngf3 Nc6

6.Bb5 Bd6 7.O-O Nge7

8.dxc5 Bxc5 9.Nb3 Bd6

At the current position, shown in Diagram 81, White is considered to have a small advantage due to Black's isolated Queen pawn (IQP). The d5-pawn is considered to be weak as it cannot be protected by a fellow pawn and therefore requires the protection of a piece.

DIAGRAM 80.

Modern King Pawn Defenses If Black prefers a game with more of a French Defense flavor, then the following is the ticket (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nd2):

3.. .Nf6

White's e-pawn is lured forward.

4.e5 Nfd7 5.f4

In a thematic move that we've seen before, White takes as big a bite of the center as he can swallow.

5.. .c5 6x3

This is the key advantage of the Tarrasch Variation. White is able to fortify his center.

6.. .Nc6 7.Ndf3 cxd4

8.cxd4 Nb6

Diagram 82 shows the Leningrad Variation. Black focuses his play on the Queenside and White focuses on the Kingside. Opening theory favors White due to his central grip. Tarrasch-Seirawan Variation If either of the above lines don't appeal against the Tarrasch Variation, Black can always play: (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nd2) 3...dxe4, transposing into the Rubinstein Variation, or he can wait for White to commit himself:

3.. .Be7 4.Bd3 dxe4

5. Nxe4 Nd7 6.Nf3 Ngf6

The game has transposed right back into the Rubinstein Variation. (See page 107.)

DIAGRAM 81.

DIAGRAM 82.

Alternatively, White can play (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nd2 Be7):

4.Ngf3 Nf6 5.e5 Nfd7

6.Bd3 c5 7.c3 cxd4

8. cxd4 b6

As shown in Diagram 83, Black is once again trying to exchange light- squared Bishops and White has been denied the chance for f2-f4.

9.Qe2 a5!

Black pursues his idea of trading Bishops. White has an advantage due to his central pawns, but the Bishop trade will give Black excellent chances to equalize. The Seirawan Variation nicely solves problems in both the 3.Nc3 and Tarrasch Varia- tions of the French Defense.

DIAGRAM 83.

Advance Variation White can cut across the earlier opening theory by advancing his e-pawn on move three (l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5):

3.e5

This advance was popularized by Aaron Nimzovitch (1886-1935) who brought many new ideas to this move. Thus the Advance Variation often bears his name. Diagram 84 shows how White grabs as much space in the center as he can and hopes to build up an attack behind the broad shoulders of his central pawns. There is, however,

DIAGRAM 84.

Modern King Pawn Defenses a clear drawback to this advance: It doesn't come with tempo. This means that Black can create a quick counterattack in the center.

3.. .C5

Black tries to undermine the d4-pawn, which supports the e5-pawn. Black can also play the thematic move 3...b6, again trying to trade Bishops. Most French Defense players prefer to attack the d4-pawn. Naturally, White plays to keep his d4-pawn intact:

4.c3 Nc6 5.Nf3 Qb6

Black does his best to increase the pressure on the d4-pawn. He has in view a plan of . . .Ng8-h6-f5, causing the d-pawn to tremble.

6.Be2

White plays to quickly castle. White has also tried 6.Bd3 and 6.a3, which intends b2-b4 and a Queenside expansion.

6.. .cxd4 7.cxd4 Nge7

8.Na3 Nf5 9.Nc2

Diagram 85 shows a crucial position of the Advance French. White tries to keep his d4-pawn secure while Black nibbles around the flanks. White has a small advantage. Caro-Kann Defense In the Scandinavian and French Defenses, Black attacks the e4-pawn with his d5-pawn. The drawback to the Scandinavian is that the Queen is brought out too quickly, whereas in the French Defense, Black suf- fers from a cramped c8-Bishop. The Caro-Kann Defense intends to attack the e4-pawn without these disadvan- tages. 1 .e4 c6

DIAGRAM 85.

Black gives his d-pawn added sup- port in advance.

2.d4 d5

These moves distinguish the Caro- Kann, as shown in Diagram 86. The Caro-Kann has been embraced by Mikhail Botvinnik (1911-95, World Champion 1948- 57, 1958-60, 1961-63) and Anatoly Karpov (1951-, World Champion 1975-85). Every defense has some type of a drawback; the Caro-Kann is not appreciated by the b8-Knight because its best square, c6, has been denied. Well, you can't have every- thing! White has three main tries versus the Caro-Kann Defense:

[diagram]
DIAGRAM 86.

Classical Variation As you've seen from the French Defense, White often defends his e4- pawn (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5):

3.Nc3 dxe4 4.Nxe4 Bf5

This move shows the advantage of the Caro-Kann Defense. The position is similar to a Rubinstein French Variation but the c8-Bishop emerges at once. The favored move of Anatoly Karpov is 4...Nd7. Black intends to attack the e4-Knight with one of his own. This is an extremely solid choice. White players have chosen a variety of methods to gain an advan- tage, and it hasn't been easy. Currently, the favored method is 5.Ng5!? Ngf6 6.Bd3 e6 7.Nlf3 Bd6 8.Qe2 h6 9.Ne4 Nxe4 10.Qxe4. The position is shown in Diagram 87. Modern King Pawn Defenses Theory considers that White has a small advantage after 10...Nf6 ll.Qe2 b6 12.Bd2 Bb7 13.O-O-O, when White has the superior devel- opment.

5. Ng3

Although White's Knight has been forced to retreat, it does so with tempo.

5...Bg6

Black's Bishop takes up a powerful defensive position on the Kingside. The g6-Bishop is so strong that it is virtually impossible for White to create any meaningful Kingside attack- ing chances. White's best plan is to try to undermine the Kingside and trade Bishops:

6. h4! h6 7.Nf3 Nd7

8.h5 Bh7 9.Bd3 Bxd3

1O.Qxd3 e6 Diagram 88 shows the main line of the classical Caro-Kann. White has achieved an advantage in space and development. Black has a solid for- mation and he will endeavor to catch up in development. Exchange Variation If White wants to play a more open game, the Exchange Variation is the ticket (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5):

3.exd5 cxd5

DIAGRAM 87.

DIAGRAM 88.

These moves, shown in Diagram 89, open the game a bit. White hopes that having an extra move will give him an advantage. Black is happy to trade away his c6-pawn for White's e4-pawn. White has to make a choice of whether to play c2-c4, attacking the d5-pawn, or whether he would prefer c2-c3 and a quiet existence. Exchange Variation, DIAGRAM 89. Rubinstein Variation Once more we have an opening variation credited to Akiba Rubinstein (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.exd5 cxd5):

4.Bd3

White intends to continue with c2-c3 and aim his pieces toward the center and Kingside. This move stops Black's c8-Bishop from developing com- fortably.

4.. .NC6 5.c3 Nf6

6. Bf4

Diagram 90 shows the position of the Caro-Kann, Rubinstein Varia- tion. White's Bishops have taken up wonderful diagonals and Black will have to neutralize them.

6.. .Bg4

Black wants a solid central forma- tion with his pawn on e6, but he first develops his Bishop before moving his e-pawn. DIAGRAM 90. 7. Qb3 Modern King Pawn Defenses White can acquiesce to a pinned Knight with 7.Nf3, but he wants to harass the b7-pawn.

7.. .Qd7 8.Nd2 e6

9.Ngf3

The position is quite balanced. White has a temporary initiative due to his superior mobilization, but Black's position is solid and he can face the future with confidence. Exchange Variation, Panov-Botvinnik Attack As an alternative to this quiet line, White can stir up a much sharper game by immediately attacking Black's d5-pawn (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.exd5 cxd5):

4.c4

White hopes to use his extra starting move to gain an advantage. This follow-up, called the Panov-Botvinnik Attack, requires a cautious approach on Black's part.

4.. .Nf6 5.Nc3

The careful reader will note a remarkable similarity between this position and the Tarrasch Defense to the Queen's Gambit. (See Diagram 63.) The only difference is that White now has an extra move! If Black were to play

5...g6, it would be like a Schlechter

Variation with reversed colors. Black usually chooses to rein- force his d5-pawn:

5.. .e6 6.Nf3 Be7

Black quickly develops to bring his King to safety.

7.cxd5 Nxd5 8.Bd3 O-O

9.O-O

The key position of the Panov-Botvin- nik Attack is shown in Diagram 91. White has accepted an isolated Queen pawn that will need support,

DIAGRAM 91.

and he hopes to utilize his space and superior development to gain a King- side attack. After decades of prac- tice, White has been able to show a small plus. Advance Variation If White isn't satisfied with defend- ing his e4-pawn or trading it for the d5-pawn, he can advance his pawn (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5):

3.e5

As shown in Diagram 92, White has grabbed space as in the French Defense, Advance Variation and is pleased to see Black's pawn on the c6-square where it doesn't attack his d4-pawn. But if the Caro-Kann Defense, Advance Variation has a drawback, it is that Black can develop his c8-Bishop outside of his central pawn chain:

3...Bf5

White must now make a decision. Should he seek to attack the f5-Bishop with g2-g4? Should he trade the Bishop with a Bfl-d3? Or should he ignore the f5-Bishop altogether? These are interesting questions and I'll look at four possibilities: 4.g4,

4.Nc3, 4.h4 and 4.Nf3.

DIAGRAM 92.

Advance Variation, Flank Attack The Advance Variation (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 Bf5) can provoke a radical solution. White decides upon a quick attack on the flank:

[diagram]
This questionable move still has its supporters. White hopes to gain time and space on the Kingside by attacking the f5-Bishop.

4...Be4!

Black provokes White to advance his f-pawn. Modern King Pawn Defenses

5.f3 Bg6 6.h4

White tries to further disturb the Bishop and make the Kingside the theater of battle. White has also tried 6.e6?! Qd6I, when Black has the superior game. Black must stop White's threat of h4-h5 winning the Bishop.

6...h5 7.Nh3 e6!

8.Nf4 hxg4 9.Nxg6 fxg6

Diagram 93 shows White's Kingside attack to be in shambles. 1O.fxg4 Rxh4 White is a pawn down and Black has the initiative.

DIAGRAM 93.

Advance Variation, Flank Attack As you've just seen, if White is set upon a flank expansion he should pre- pare it (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 Bf5):

4.Nc3

White protects the e4-square so that Black is denied the chance for ...Bf5-e4.

4...e6 5.g4 Bg6

6.Nge2

The position shown in Diagram 94 has led to fascinating games. Grand- masters Jan Timman and John Nunn, two of the most aggressive players on the circuit, like White's position. Black has tried 6...Qh4,

DIAGRAM 94.

thereby preventing h2-h4 and trying to weaken the Kingside. It is usual to counterattack in the center:

6.. .C5 7.h4 h6

Black has also tried 7. . ,h5 8.Nf4 with a sharp game.

8.Be3 Nc6 9.f4 Qb6

With a dynamic position, both players have winning chances. Advance Variation, Flank Attack An interesting twist on the Advance Variation, Flank Attack (l.e4 c6 2,d4 d5 3.e5 Bf5) is this preparatory move:

4.h4

This cunning move is favored by Boris Spassky. Black must avoid playing

4. . .e6?? 5.g4 Be4 6.f3 Bg6 7.h5, when Black loses his Bishop .

4.. .h5

Black reacts with a necessary defensive move. Weaker is 4...h6 5.g4 Bd7

6.h5!, with advantage to White; or 4,..h6 5.g4 Bh7 6.e6! fxe6 7.Bd3!, with a

promising attack for the sacrificed pawn. The drawback of 4. . ,h5 is that the gb-square now falls into White's mitt

5.c4 e6 6.Nc3 Ne7

7.Nf3 Nd7

White's trump is the g5-square and Black's is the f5-square. Both players will use these squares to aggressively post their minor pieces. The chances are roughly equal. Advance Variation, Short Variation One of the most imaginative ways of meeting the Caro-Kann Defense has been championed by the British grandmaster Nigel Short. His idea in the Advance Variation (l.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 Bfb) is to allow Black's f5-Bishop to "peacefully co-exist." In other words, ignore what Black has done and get on with controlling space in the center:

4.Nf3

Modern King Pawn Defenses This is a radical departure from the other lines in the Advance Variation. It was always considered necessary to harass the f5-Bishop as quickly as possible, lest Black get an easy game.

4.. .e6 5.Be2

White's last two moves really distin- guish the Caro-Kann Advance, Short Variation. (See Diagram 95.) White quietly completes his devel- opment and leaves it up to Black to construct a central, counter. DIAGRAM 95.

5.. .C5 6.O-O

One of the benefits of Short's variation is that the f5-Bishop is often vul- nerable on its square to a Nf3xd4 recapture.

6.. .Ne7

Black has to be careful that his Knights don't trip over one another. For instance, after 6...Nc6 7.c3 cxd4 8.cxd4 Nge7 9.Be3, Black's Kingside pieces are entangled. Black envisions ...Ne7-c6 so that the b8-Knight can go to the d7-square.

7.dxc5

White can consider 7.c3, 7.c4 and 7.Nbd2 as reasonable alternatives.

7.. .Nec6 8.a3 Bxc5

9.b4 Be7 1O.c4

White enjoys more space and Black has good piece play. The position is approximately equal. Sicilian Defense Of the modern defenses to a King Pawn Opening, the overwhelming favorite is the Sicilian Defense:

1 ,e4 c5 This is the granddaddy of modern defenses. The plans are so rich and varied for both sides that hundreds of books have been written about this provocative and complex defense. In an effort not to over- whelm the poor reader, I'll just tread lightly upon the major defenses. As shown in Diagram 96, Black hasn't tried to block White's e4-pawn with ...e7-e5, nor has he tried to attack the e4-pawn with . . .Ng8-f6 or ...d7-d5. Instead, Black has left the e4-pawn alone and has struck out on his own scheme. For the moment, Black controls the d4-square. In viewing Diagram 96, the Classicist would condemn Black's move because unlike White's move, Black's move doesn't support the develop- ment of a Bishop. Infatuated by quick development, it is easy to overlook that Black is using a flank pawn to control the center. His own e- and d- pawns stay behind, awaiting instructions. This is the key to understanding the Sicilian structures: Black isn't interested in occupying the center, he wants to control the center from a distance. From Diagram 96, White has two options: either play for d2-d4, called the Open Sicilian; or do not play for d2-d4, called the Closed Sicilian. The current survey focuses upon Open Sicilian positions. White has several ways of playing for d2-d4. He can do it at once, or he can support the advance with the moves c2-c3 or Ngl-f3.

DIAGRAM 96.

Smith-Morra Gambit In the first scenario, White doesn't waste any time in achieving the desired move. He simply occupies the center (l.e4 c5).

2.d4 cxd4

Modern King Pawn Defenses Naturally, Black isn't about to let White keep a classical center. Now White must decide how to recapture the d4-pawn. If he plays 3.Qxd4? Nc6, his Queen is lured into the cen- ter prematurely, and Black has superior play. He can play 3,Nf3, anticipating Nf3xd4, which will transpose into a variation described later in this chapter. Instead White initiates the Smith-Morra Gambit:

3.c3

Diagram 97 shows the current position. Just as in the Danish Gambit, White offers a pawn for quick development. Smith-Morra Gambit Declined Black can decline the gambit by:

3.. .d5 4.exd5 Qxd5

5.cxd4 Nf6 6.Nc3 Qd8

The position is another famous isolated Queen pawn position, which often transposes from a Panov-Botvinnik Attack in the Caro-Kann Defense. Each IQP position must be looked at specifically. In this case, Black has all the usual advantages and disadvantages, no more or less. Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted Opening theory books rightfully question the soundness of the Smith- Morra Gambit (l.e4 c5 2.d4 cxd4 3.c3).

3.. .dxc3 4,Nxc3

Black should accept the sacrifice and force White to show compensation for the pawn. The problem is that while theory is dry and scientific, facing

DIAGRAM 97.

the Smith-Mor ra Gambit in over-the-board play is tough! Beginners usu- ally get slammed by the gambit. Black has to play very cautiously indeed!

4.. .e6

Black uses this important move to close the a2-g8 diagonal (something he can't do in the Danish Gambit), which makes his defense much easier. This move also takes away the d5-square for White's c3-Knight.

5.Nf3 Nc6 6.Bc4

White tries to bring his pieces to their most active squares. Although the a2-g8 diagonal is closed, the Bishop has no better prospects elsewhere.

6.. .a6

Black spends a whole tempo to defend the b5-square. This dangerous loss of time precludes White's c3-Knight from a potential jump to the dGsquare.

7.O-O Qc7

I know that it is hard to believe that Black should be moving his Queen so early, but he wants to avoid 7...Nf6 8.Bg5, when his Knight is pinned.

8.Qe2

Diagram 98 shows the impressive lead in development that White has achieved. However, Black hasn't created any real targets for White to grasp and Black shows he has kept a flexible and solid position.

8.. .Nf6 9.Bg5 Ng4

1O.Rad1 White had to prevent ...Nc6-d4, which would strip White's defender of the h2-pawn.

[diagram]
Black controls the e5-square and has the slightly better chances. Even so, White's position is very dangerous to the average amateur player!

DIAGRAM 98.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Alapin Variation A great amount of theory exists on the Sicilian Defense, which leads many players to seek refuge in the Alapin Variation (I.e4c5):

2.c3

The Alapin, shown in Diagram 99, has the noble aim of establishing a classical pawn center, but it is really rather harmless.

2.. .d5 3.exd5 Qxd5

4.d4 cxd4 5,cxd4 Nf6

6.Nc3 Qd8

The exact same position is reached as in the Smith-Morra Gambit Declined discussed earlier. Black can try to improve on this isolated Queen pawn position by trying (l.e4 c5 2.c3 d5 3.exd5 Qxd5 4.d4) 4...Nf6 5.NI3 Bg4

6.Be2 e6. In either case, White cannot expect much of an advantage.

Open Sicilian, Main Line In his quest to conquer the center, White realizes that he will need to play d2-d4. As the prelude to an Open Sicilian, he decides to utilize his gl- Knight (l.e4 c5):

2.Nf3

Black has to decide how he wants to play with his center pawns: 2...d6 or 2...e6. While often transposing, these moves also lead to vastly differ- ent formations. Scheveningen Variation This variation offers a quintessential example of the Open Sicilian Defense (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3):

2.. .d6

DIAGRAM 99.

Black awaits White's center push.

3.d4

White has also tried 3.Bb5+ Bd7

4.Bxd7+ Qxd7 5.c4, called the Mos-

cow Variation. But with this varia- tion, White has traded Bishops and helped Black's development.

3.. .cxd4 4.Nxd4

White's point. He has brought his Knight into the action in the center of the board where it controls many squares.

4.. .Nf6 5.Nc3 e6

Diagram 100 displays the Scheveningen Variation of the Sicilian, and it is an excellent position to spend a long time staring at. Ask yourself as many questions from the perspective of the principles as you can. It will be a very useful exercise. Diagram 100 shows that Black has taken a restrained approach to the center. He hasn't tried to occupy it, but observe how the d6- and eG-pawns control two of the sweet center squares and that the f6-Knight attacks the e4-square. This formation is the favorite of Garry Kasparov, and he used it in many games to become the World Champion! I urge any player who wants to understand the keys of the Sicilian Defense to start from this position. White has taken a number of approaches to the Scheveningen, including:

[diagram]
DIAGRAM 100.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Scheveningen Variation, Fischer Attack The Fischer Attack is a straight-forward concept that begins (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e6):

6.Bc4

White tries to clamp down on the d5-square, with an eye toward attacking the e6-pawn with f2-f4-f5. Black has a variety of defenses based upon ...Nb8-c6-a5 or ...Nb8-d7-c5 in conjunction with ...a7-a6 and ...b7-b5-b4 going for the e4-pawn. A solid choice is:

6.. .Be7 7.Bb3 O-O

8. Be3

White prepares to castle Queenside.

8.. .Na6

Black decides to bring his Knight to the c5-square to eliminate the b3- Bishop. One of the tactics that Black has to be aware of is 8...Nbd7

9.Bxe6!? fxe6 10.Nxe6 Qa5 ll.Nxf8 Bxf8, where White sacrifices two

pieces for a Rook.

9.Qe2 Nc5 1O.f3

Diagram 101 features a common position from the Fischer Attack. White will aim for g2-g4-g5 and a Kingside pawn storm. Black will play ...a7-a6 and ...b7-b5 for an attack on the Queenside. The position is dynami- cally balanced. Scheveningen Variation, Maroczy Variation In the Maroczy Variation, White takes a more restrained approach to the center. He first aims to complete his Kingside development, delaying an attack for awhile (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e6):

6.Be2 Be7 7.O-O Nc6

8.Kh1

White tucks his King away to the hl-square. He is committed to play- ing f2-f4, and wants to avoid tactics based on the gl-a7 diagonal.

8. ..O-O 9.f4 a6

Black guards the b5-square and prepares the c7-square for his Queen. 1O.Be3 Qc7 Diagram 102 shows the Maroczy. In their 1995 PCA Champion- ship Match, Viswanathan Anand and Garry Kasparov played this position a number of times. The position is dynamically balanced. Scheveningen Variation, Keres Attack By far the greatest challenge to the Scheveningen Variation is the Keres Attack, which begins (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e6):

6.g4

As shown in Diagram 103, White immediately starts his Kingside attack in motion. The threat to play g4-g5 and kick the f6-Knight into oblivion is one that theorists have long debated. Should Black allow White to carry out his threat, or play ...h7-h6, creating a weakness? This question produces two dis- tinct variations.

DIAGRAM 102.

DIAGRAM 103.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Scheveningen Variation, Keres Attack (without ...h7-h6) Black can allow White to carry out his threat, as follows (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e6

6.g4):

6...Nc6 7.g5 Nd7

8.Be3 a6 9.h4 Qc7

1O.f4 b5 White has extended his Kingside in order to launch an attack, while Black is busily preparing ...Bc8-b7 and ...Nd7-c5 with a counterattack

DIAGRAM 104.

against the e4-pawn. The position shown in Diagram 104 is uncommonly sharp, but I prefer White's position. Scheveningen Variation, Keres Attack (with ...h7-h6) Scheveningen players by and large prefer to slow down White's expansion by playing (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e6 6.g4):

6...h6 7.g5 hxg5

8.Bxg5

Diagram 105 shows the position, which is extremely difficult to evalu- ate. Black's h8-Rook has been "devel- oped" without having moved-a certain plus for Black. The trade of a Black h-pawn for a White g-pawn means that neither player is going to castle on the Kingside. Probably both Kings will move Queenside. White's menacing g5-Bishop must be

DIAGRAM 105.

carefully observed as the tactics of f2-f4 and e4-e5 will hang over Black's position. A usual continuation would be:

8...Nc6 9.f4 Be7

1O.Qd2a6 11. O-O-O Qc7

12.h4 Bd7

This leads to another one of those bottomless Sicilian positions that defy conventional understanding. Theorists have a slight preference for White in this position. Scheveningen Variation, Tai Variation Our final look at meeting the Scheveningen Variation of the Sicilian Defense (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e6) exhibits a com- pletely different plan by White. Mikhail Tai (1936-92, World Champion 1960-61), a master of the attack, introduced the scheme of a quick Queen- side castling:

6.f4

White wants to create immediate central threats with e4-e5. Black has to keep a wary eye to this possibility.

6...Nc6 7.Be3 Be7

8.Qf3

Diagram 106 shows Tai's idea. What he wants to do is quickly castle Queenside and reintroduce the threat of e4-e5 after White's Rook is sitting on the dl-square. In many lines, when the players castle on opposite wings, White's Queen is ready to support the charge of the g- pawn. The position is dynamically balanced.

DIAGRAM 106.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Dragon Variation I started my description of the Open Sicilian Defense with the Schevenin- gen Variation because that is really the classical way of handling the Sicilian. Black's e6- and d6-pawns act as a central buffer between the two armies. Of course, this central buffer is quite dynamic and Black can try a number of different cen- tral structures. A favorite of mine, if only for the name, is the Dragon Variation. 1 covered this defense in some depth in Winning Chess Brilliancies (Microsoft Press, 1995), and I urge you to probe there for a deeper understanding of this line. The Dragon Variation, shown in Diagram 107, is reached after (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3):

5...g6

Note Black's pawn structure: h7-g6-f7-e7-d6, which resembles a dragon. Black goes for a Kingside fianchetto where the g7-Bishop will have a strong influence along the long diagonal. From White's perspective, Black has failed to adequately keep the d5-square guarded, and he can use this point to his advantage. If Black tries a later ...e7-e6, the d6-pawn will be vulnerable. The Dragon can be met in an expected variety of ways that all boil down to a crucial decision: Will White castle Kingside or Queenside? Once White decides where he'd like to park his King, he can decide which formation he likes best.

DIAGRAM 107.

Dragon Variation (with Kingside Castling), Levenfish Attack One popular attacking scheme for White is the Levenfish Attack (l.e4 c5

2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 g6):

6.f4

White threatens e4-e5, which Black immediately prevents.

6...Nc6 7.Nf3 Bg7

8.Bd3 O-O 9.O-O

Diagram 108 shows a common posi- tion of the Levenfish Attack. White's attacking scheme is to play Qdl-el-h4 in conjunction with f4-f5 and Bcl-h6. Black has to come up with a reaction. If he plays 9...d5?

10.e5!, White will have a big advan-

tage. Thus it is difficult for Black to make a meaningful counter in the center. Black can try to distract White's pieces from the Kingside by play- ing a line like 9...b6 lO.Qel Nb4 ll.Qh4 Nxd3 12.cxd3 Ba6. Practice has shown the position to be dynamically equal.

DIAGRAM 108.

Dragon Variation (with Kingside Castling), Nottingham Variation As an alternative to the Levenfish Attack. White can take a more restrained approach (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 g6):

6.Be2 Bg7 7.Be3 Nc6

8.Nb3

White's last move distinguishes the Nottingham Variation. (See Dia- gram 109.) White's approach is to keep the d5-square firmly in his sights.

8.. .O-O 9.O-O

White intends to keep the center well patrolled by playing f2-f4 and Be2-f3. Black's space deficit encour-

DIAGRAM 1 09.

Modern King Pawn Defenses ages him to trade pieces and a common line is:

9.. .Be6

This is possible now that White's d4-Knight has retreated.

10.f4 Na5

Black's point is revealed; he is playing to put a piece on the c4-square:

11.f5 Bc4

This final position is known as the Byrne Variation. White has a slight advantage as he tries to stir up trouble on the Kingside. Dragon Variation (with Queenside Castling), Yugoslav Attack While castling Kingside by White can certainly bring about attacking schemes, the sharpest lines of the Dragon Variation occur when White castles Queenside (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 g6):

6. Be3

White quickly develops his Queenside pieces in order to make way for castling.

6.. .Bg7

A painful trap would be 6...Ng4?? 7.Bb5+! Bd7 8.Qxg4.

7.f3

White rules out a possible ...Nf6-g4, which would disrupt his develop- ment

7. . .0.0 8.Qd2 Nc6

Diagram 110 shows a critical posi- tion in the Dragon Sicilian. White has prepared to castle long but he is concerned about a possible ...d6-d5 and decides to clamp down on the d5-square.

9.Bc4 Bd7 10.O-O-O Rc8

11.Bb3

DIAGRAM 110.

The battle lines have been drawn. With Kings on opposite wings, it is a given that both armies will go after the other's monarch. White usually plays for h2-h4-h5 in conjunction with Be3-h6 to weaken Black's King. Black usually plays for ...Nc6-e5-c4 to block the b3-Bishop and force trades. Black's counterplay is centered down the c-file. This position is known as the Yugoslav Attack and has provided a bounty of beautiful attacking games. The position is dynamically balanced. Najdorf Variation Arguably the most complex Sicilian formation of all is the Najdorf Varia- tion, which begins with a move of great cunning (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3):

5...a6

Diagram 111 shows the starting position of the Najdorf Variation. As we've seen in the Scheveningen Variation and the Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, the move ...a7-a6 is quite useful. Black controls the b5-square and makes the plan of ...b7-b5 and ...Bc8-b7 a possibility. Before going into the many approaches that White can try, the move 5...a6 deserves a reproach. The move does nothing to control the sweet center, which is a violation of our cherished princi- ples. White is given free rein over play in the center. Despite the doubts raised, White's ability to get a grip on the position is quite elu- sive. At times the central pawn buffer can radically change. Black might play ...e7-e6 or ...e7-e5, requiring White to change his plans. The following is a short list of White's approaches:

[diagram]
DIAGRAM 111. are all based upon the Modern King Pawn Defenses theme of developing White's fl-Bishop. The latter is a humorous echo of Black's "wasted" tempo on the Queenside. If Black wants to expand on the wing with ...b7-b5, White will expand on the Kingside with g2-g4 and Bfl-g2 for a position similar to a Keres Attack.

[diagram]
Queenside quickly so that White can castle there.

[diagram]
...b7-b5 and sometimes plays a4-a5 to clamp down on the b6- square.

[diagram]
center. After 6. . .e6 7.Qf3, White plays as in the Tai Variation of the Scheveningen. All of these plans are so complex and varied that separate books have been written about them. In fact, many books have been written on varia- tions further down the chain of moves! With apologies to my readers, I'll take a look only at the greatest test facing the Najdorf:

6.Bg5

Choosing the most dynamic move, White develops a piece and begins a hand-to-hand struggle with the f6-Knight. Black's position is under imme- diate pressure.

6...e6

Black's Queen now protects the f6-Knight and prevents White from dou- bling the Kingside pawns.

7.f4

In another fine strengthening move, White introduces the threat of e4-e5 and f4-f5. This position is literally the starting position for most Najdorf players. White's threat of e4-e5 must be addressed. I'll examine each of these moves that Black has played:

[diagram]
7...Nbd7

Although it's not that popular, this move makes sense. Black covers the e5-square and reinforces the f6-Knight. The drawback to this move is that the e6-pawn can be quickly attacked:

8.Bc4 b5 9.Bxe6 fxe6

1O.Nxe6 Qa5 This piece sacrifice is shown in Diagram 112. In theory, Black is supposed to be all right, but not too many players are anxious to play Black's position. Our next line is an interesting offbeat idea (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4

4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 a6 6.Bg5 e6 7.f4):

7...Qc7

Black gets out of the pin, controls the c4'Square, thereby preventing the type of sacrifice shown in Diagram 112, and invites White to double his Kingside pawns. Black's play is based on the trick:

8.Bxf6 gxf6 9.Qh5 Qc5!

Black is now able to offer an exchange of Queens. On his ninth move, White can build up pressure on the e6-square by:

9.f5 Nc6 1O.Bc4Nxd4

1 1 .Qxd4 Be7 1 2.O-O-O Bd7 Diagram 113 shows the position, in which White has an advantage.

DIAGRAM 112.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Najdorf Variation, Poisoned Pawn Variation One of Bobby Fischer's favorite defensive weapons was the Poisoned Pawn Variation of the Najdorf. It comes about after (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6

3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 a6

6.Bg5 e6 7.f4):

7.. .Qb6

As shown in Diagram 114, Black has no respect for the principles that we have worked so hard to learn. The rascal! The commander of the Black pieces is truly a gangster. Not only is he not worried about protecting him- self on the Kingside, he brings out his Queen in such a manner as to rob White of his b2-pawn! In principle, Black's play must be wrong. But both in theory and practice it is hard to prove it! If anyone finds a refutation to the Poisoned Pawn, please send a letter labeled "top secret" to my post office box. In the main line Poisoned Pawn, White jettisons his b2-pawn for quick development:

8.Qd2

White can also protect the b2-pawn by playing 8.Nb3, but after 8...Qe3+

9.Qe2 Qxe2+ 10.Bxe2 Nbd7, White's

advantage is slight.

8.. .Qxb2 9.Rb1 Qa3

[diagram]
The position shown in Diagram 115, on the next page, has been a source of endless theoretical debate.

DIAGRAM 114.

Najdorf Variation, Polugaevsky Variation Yet another vexing continuation of the Sicilian Najdorf is the Polugae- vsky Variation (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 a6 6.Bg5 e6

7.f4):

7...b5

Russian grandmaster Lev Polugae- vsky devised this monstrous move, shown in Diagram 116. Black is not oblivious to White's threat of e4-e5; on the contrary, he encourages it. Furthermore, Black shows his intention to start his own counterattack with ...b5-b4, pushing away the nicely placed c3-Knight. What arrogance! White accepts the challenge:

8.e5 dxe5 9.fxe5 Qc7

This is Polugaevsky's point. After 10.exf6 Qe5+ ll.Qe2 Qxg5, Black has traded pieces. 1 0.Qe2 Nfd7 1 1 .O-O-O Nc6! It would be a mistake to capture the e5-pawn. ll...Qxe5 12.Qxe5 Nxe5 13.Ndxb5 leads to threats of Nb5-c7 and Rdl-d8, with check- mate in both cases. After Black's careful eleventh move the position is dynamically balanced. Najdorf Variation, Main Line By now you should be getting an idea of just how complex the Sicil- ian Najdorf has become. But wait,

DIAGRAM 115.

DIAGRAM 116.

Modern King Pawn Defenses we haven't gotten to the main line! (I.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 a6 6.Bg5 e6 7.f4)

7.. .Be7

This natural developing move is the most popular way to play the Naj- dorf. Black breaks the pin and pre- pares to castle out of the central dangers.

8.Qf3

White makes way for his own King to castle.

" DIAGRAM 117.

8.. .Qc7

Black has also played the Najdorf with 8...h6 9.Bh4, intending to provoke a sharp encounter by playing . . .g7-g5.

9.O-O-O Nbd7

The position shown in Diagram 117 is considered yet another starting point of the Najdorf Sicilian! Theorists have devoted a dozen moves and more to the best plans for White and Black. I suspect they will still be debating for centuries to come. It is impossible to say that an "equilib- rium" has been established. Both sides have their advantages and I'll just say the position provides both players with good winning prospects. Classical Variation In the Sicilian formations we've looked at so far, Black has delayed the development of his b8-Knight. When he brings out both of his Knights at the start of the opening, I consider this to be the Classical Variation. Of course, the positions are highly transpositional as we shall see. Play begins (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3):

5...Nc6

In classical style, Black develops his Knight to its most aggressive square.

Diagram 118 shows the starting position. White must now decide upon his approach. If he plays

6.Be2, Black can play 6...e6, trans-

posing to the Scheveningen, where Black has dodged the Keres Attack. Or Black could play 6...g6, where he has dodged the Yugoslav Attack in the Dragon. Or Black might change the features of the position to an all-together different variety:

6.Be2 e5

Black's sixth move, depicted in Dia- gram 119, is called the Boleslavsky Variation. Black creates a weakness on the d5-square, but he intends to play ...d6-d5 and dissolve the backward d6-pawn. Play might proceed:

7.Nb3 Be6 8.Bg5 Be7

9.O-O O-O

With a puzzling strategic battle ahead, White is considered to have an advantage. If White is dissatisfied with (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 Nc6) 6.Be2, he can play

6.Bc4, playing for the Fischer

Attack from the Scheveningen Vari- ation. Black loses some flexibility because his b8-Knight has commit- ted itself.

DIAGRAM 118.

DIAGRAM 119.

Modem King Pawn Defenses Classical Variation, Richter- Rauzer Attack Because of the highly transposi- tional nature of the Classical Varia- tion, White usually strives to play the forcing Richter-Rauzer Attack so that he can override the various transpositions (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 Nc6): 6,Bg5 The Richter-Rauzer is shown in Dia- gram 120. White sensibly develops his Bishop as in the Najdorf. For Black, the possibility of playing the Dragon is less desirable. After 6. . .g6?!

7.Bxf6 exf6, White has damaged Black's pawn structure. The common

course is:

6...e6 7,Qd2 Be7

8.O-O-O O-O

A typically sharp Sicilian game is in sight. The classical Sicilian is one of the most popular formations for Black in modern chess. The position pro- vides equal chances for both sides.

DIAGRAM 120.

Sicilian Defense, 2...e6 Variations So far our survey has focused upon (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6). Black also has a major choice on move two of playing (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3):

2...e6

This creates an entirely different complex of opening formations. Each has its own peculiarities.

3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4

Diagram 121, on the next page, shows the position, with Black having to decide between three main choices:

[diagram]
Paulsen Variation Of these three choices, the first is the one that gives this line of the Sicilian its unique flavor (l.e4 c5

2.Nf3 e6 3.d4cxd4 4.Nxd4):

4...a6

Black's fourth move introduces the Paulsen Variation. It seems to be a mocking move as Black pays no attention to the sweet center. Instead, he just covers the b5-square and sets up for possible Queenside counterplay. At first it seems that Black has created a weak d6-square, but it is quite difficult for White to land a piece there. Usually, White ignores what Black has done and instead of trying to punish him immediately for his transgressing of our beloved principles, White calmly develops. He has three choices:

[diagram]
DIAGRAM 121.

Paulsen Sicilian, Taimanov Variation A natural reaction by White is to simply develop the Knight and control the sweet center (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 a6):

5. Nc3 Qc7

Once more, Black seems to mock the opening principles. He brings out his Queen to control the e5-square and to see how White will commit his forces. 6, Bd3 Nc6 7.Be3 Nf6 Modern King Pawn Defenses This is Black's first benefit of his unusual move order. He has avoided Bcl-g5 and the problems that move can cause.

8.O-O Ne5

Black's position is shown in Dia- gram 122. Russian grandmaster Mark Taimanov introduced this plan for Black, and it now bears his name: the Taimanov Variation. Black is looking for an opportunity to play ...Ne5-g4, winning the advantage of two Bishops. At the same time, he has kept the f8-a3 diagonal open so that he can consider ...Bf8-c5, developing the Bishop to a more active square. Black's position in Diagram 122 is a provocative one.

9.h3

White winds up for f2-f4 and e4-e5, with a rout in the center. Once more, the complexities are quite dizzying and the Taimanov Variation remains a favorite in grandmaster play. Paulsen Sicilian, Reti Variation One of the ways that White should consider "punishing" Black's move order is by (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 a6): 5x4 As shown in Diagram 123, Black has not provoked Nbl-c3 by ...Ng8-f6, and thus White's c2-pawn can stake a claim to the sweet center. This

DIAGRAM 122.

DIAGRAM 123.

move introduces the Reti Variation. White aims to keep both the breaks . . .b7-b5 and . . .d7-d5 from being played.

5...Nf6 6.Nc3 Bb4

Black exerts pressure on the e4-pawn.

7.Bd3 Nc6 8.Bc2

White has the superior position due to his central control. Paulsen Sicilian, Gipslis Variation In this final look at the Paulsen Sicilian, White is also a little crafty with his move order (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 a6):

5.Bd3

White supports his e4-pawn and camouflages his intentions. Will he play for f2-f4 or c2-c4?

5.. .Nf6 6.O-O

White's threat is to play e4-e5, which Black now prevents:

6.. .d6 7x4

White plays in the same manner as in the Reti Variation, but Black's f8- Bishop isn't active.

7.. .g6

Diagram 124 shows the Gipslis Vari- ation. Black activates his f8-Bishop by fianchetto, reckoning that the d6-pawn isn't weak because White will have to clear the d-file to attack the pawn. White has the advantage. Szen Variation Besides the Paulsen Sicilian, Black can opt for a different complex (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6 3,d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4) :

4.. .Nc6

DIAGRAM 124.

Modern King Pawn Defenses As seen in Diagram 125, Black develops a Knight and doesn't waste a tempo for ...a7-a6 yet. As always, the position can allow for a number of transpositions. If White plays

5.Nc3 d6, the game can quickly

become a Scheveningen Variation. Black's fourth move distinguishes the Szen Variation, which has its own flavor after:

5.Nb5

White makes fast tracks for the d6- square.

5.. .d6

Black quickly covers his vulnerable square.

6.c4

White once again clamps down on the d5-square.

6.. .Nf6 7.N1c3a6

8.Na3 Be7 9.Be2 O-O

10.O-O

As shown in Diagram 126, White has control over the d5-square and an advantage in space. But the a3- Knight is misplaced. Practice favors White's position. Pin Variation Our final look at the Sicilian com- plex with ...e7-e6 features a provoc- ative line of play by Black (l.e4 c5

2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4):

4.. .Nf6

DIAGRAM 125.

DIAGRAM 126.

Black immediately attacks the e4- pawn. Because 5.e5? Qa5+ loses a pawn and 5.Bd3 Nc6! 6.Nxc6 dxc6 offers White nothing, White defends the e4-pawn:

5.Nc3 Bb4

Diagram 127 features the Pin Varia- tion, which can be quite disconcert- ing to White when seen for the first time. Fortunately, with correct play, White can gain an advantage:

6.e5! Ne4

It would be a mistake by Black to try to grab material. After 6...Qa5?? 7.exf6! Bxc3+ 8.bxc3 Qxc3+ 9.Qd2! Qxal 10.c3 Qbl (Black is worried about H.Nb3 Qbl 12.Bd3 trapping his Queen) ll.Bd3 Qb6 12.fxg7 Rg8 13.Qh6, White has a winning advantage.

7.Qg4!

With this key move, White attacks both the e4-Knight and the g7-pawn.

7.. .Nxc3 8,a3 Bf8

9.bxc3Qc7 1O.Qg3

Despite his damaged pawns, White's lead in development and control of space gives him the advantage. Bourdonnais Variation Besides the Sicilian complexes with Black's pawns on either the d6- or e6- squares, one more series of complexes has Black committing his e-pawn to the e5-square. This complex is also very rich and varied (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3):

2.. .Nc6 3.d4 cxd4

4,Nxd4 e5 Diagram 128 shows the introductory moves of a whole new complex of Sicilian positions. Black's fourth move is known as the Bourdonnais Varia- tion and is quite forcing. White gains nothing from 5.Nxc6? bxc6, when

DIAGRAM 127.

Modern King Pawn Defenses Black can face the future with confi- dence. Nor does 5.Nf5? d5! promise any advantage. White's only chance for an advantage is by continuing:

5.Nb5

Black now has three variations that are all quite distinctive:

[diagram]
tion main line)

[diagram]
ation)

[diagram]
tion) In the main line of the Bourdonnais Variation (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4,Nxd4 e5 5.Nb5), Black forces White to occupy the d6-square.

5...a6 6.Nd6+ Bxd6

7.Qxd6 Qf6

Diagram 129 shows White's befuddlement. He has played natural forcing moves and finds himself without any development. After 8.Qxf6 Nxf6

9.Nc3 d5! 10.exd5 Nb4, Black will

favorably recover his pawn. White is better off not trading Queens and instead retreats:

8.Qd1 Qg6 9.Nc3 Nf6

This leads to an interesting battle with White holding the two Bishops to help him along.

DIAGRAM 128.

DIAGRAM 129.

Lasker-Pelikan Variation If Black doesn't like giving up the two Bishops as in the Bourdonnais Variation, he can claim them for himself in the Lasker-Pelikan Varia- tion (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4

4.Nxd4 e5 5.Nb5):

5...Nf6

This nuance creates a small, but unique, twist.

6.N1c3 d6

Diagram 130 shows how White's Knight has been "forced" to the b5- square. Black intends to play ...a7-a6 and send the b5-Knight into obliv- ion. White's play is, once more, quite forcing:

7.Bg5 a6 8.Bxf6 gxf6

9.Na3

This has all the makings of a horrible debacle for Black. But wait! We are about to discover a fascinating modern defense:

9...b5

This extraordinary move is called the Sveshnikov Variation. White domi- nates the d5-square and Black practically forces White's Knight to this powerful outpost. But the move has a deeper internal logic. White will have one good d5-Knight, but one bad a3-Knight. Play usually continues:

10. Nd5 f5

Black's plan is to trade off his doubled pawns and, after ...Bf8-g7, to put his two Bishops to work. Modern theory is unsure of its verdict. Practice has shown that Black has fair chances. Kalashnikov Variation If the Sveshnikov is too strategically frightening, the Kalashnikov Varia- tion is terrifying (l.e4 c5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 e5 5.Nb5):

DIAGRAM 130.

Modern King Pawn Defenses

5.. .d6

With Black's fifth move, shown in Diagram 131, White's Knight is stopped from going to the de- square. White can try to reinforce his control over the d5-square but Black can fight: 6.Bc4 Be6 7,Bb3 a6

8.N5c3 Nd4 produces an unclear

position. Usual is:

6.c4

White brings the c-pawn into the fight for the sweet center. But now the stunning moves that follow cre- ate an entirely new struggle:

6.. .f5 7.exf5 Bxf5

8.Bd3 Be6

As you can see from this overview of modern King Pawn defenses, genera- tions of chess players have been busy blazing new and varied trails. Of them all, the Sicilian Defense complexes are the most formidable to master.

DIAGRAM 131.

WJ /AWdW AWAWdW A Modern Queen Pawn Defenses As I demonstrated in Chapter Five, today's grandmasters are will- ing to experiment with basic principles, oftentimes violating them in order to achieve some other strategic advantages. Recall from Chapter Five how Black would attack White's e4-pawn with ...d7-d5, from the side, so to speak, trying to lure the e-pawn forward. Many of the mod- ern defenses to a Queen Pawn Opening (l.d4) try the same kind of strat- egy. Other defenses try to ignore the d-pawn and play "around" the center. Polish Defense One clear example of playing around the d4-pawn is the Polish Defense (l.d4):

1...b5

Black's opening move appears at first to be absurd, but the move has its points: It controls the c4-square and prepares a fianchetto, as shown in Diagram 132. In 1990 I played a match versus former World Champion Boris Spassky, who three times employed the Polish Defense: DIAGRAM 132.

2.e4 Bb7

4.Nf3 a6

6.Re1 c5

3.Bd3 e6

5.O-O Nf6

7.c3

White has the advantage due to his classical pawn center. Dutch Defense The Dutch Defense has a goal similar to that of the Polish Defense. Play begins (l.d4): 1,..f5 Black isn't trying to meet White in the center. Instead, he's trying to stake out his own territory. It can be argued that the Dutch Defense, shown in Diagram 133, is a bit more sound than the Polish Defense because Black's opening move at least controls the sweet center. Black wants to continue with ...Ng8-f6 and completely control the e4-square. White can meet the Dutch Defense with a variety of plans. He can fian- chetto his King Bishop as in a Catalan. Or he can try any of these options:

[diagram]
Staunton Gambit If the Dutch Defense sets out to control the e4-square, the Staunton Gambit aims to stop Black's plan in its tracks (ld4 f5):

2.e4

White offers his e4-pawn as bait for quick development, as shown in Diagram 134. Black should accept the gambit. DIAGRAM 133. 2...fxe4 3.f3 Modern Queen Pawn Defenses

DIAGRAM 134. DIAGRAM 1 35.

White hopes to induce 3...exf3 4.Nxf3 Nf6 5.Bd3 with a promising attack. Black should fall back on his plan of controlling the e4-square:

3...d5 4.fxe4 dxe4

5.Nc3 Nf6 6.Bg5 Bf5

7.Nge2 e6 8.Ng3 Be7

The main line of the Staunton Gambit is shown in Diagram 135. Black con- tinues to control the e4-square and has an acceptable game. Dutch Defense (2.Bg5) The Dutch Defense is about control- ling the e4-square. White can employ another method to stop the grip (l.d4 f5):

2.Bg5

Displayed in Diagram 136, White's Bishop move is a favorite of mine. Black has a difficult moment After

DIAGRAM 136.

2...Nf6?! 3.Bxf6 exf6 4.e3, White will play c2-c4 and Nbl-c3 with a sizable

advantage. Black's best is:

2.. .h6 3.Bh4 g5

4.e3

This opens the evil threat of Qdl-h5 Checkmate!

4.. .Nf6 5.Bg3 Bg7

6.Nd2

White has the advantage. Black's Kingside is extended and the move h2- h4 is sure to undermine Black's position. Dutch Defense, Main Line If he likes, White can also play into the main line of the Dutch Defense (I.d4f5):

2.c4 Nf6 3.Nc3 e6

4,Nf3 Be7 5.e3 O-O

6.Bd3 d5

Black continues his strategy of controlling the e4-square. Black's position is about equal because in this main line, the cl-Bishop has a limited role. Most players like to fianchetto their fl-Bishop as in the Catalan. Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Of all the modern defenses, Black's most popular opening defensive move is (l.d4):

1...Nf6

As shown in Diagram 137, Black hasn't committed his central pawns and remains flexible about his intentions. He may soon play ...e7-

D I AG RAM 137.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses e6 and ...d7-d5, transposing back into a classical defense. Black waits to see how White intends to continue:

2. c4

This is the starting point for the rest of this chapter. With his second move, White takes up the fight for the center and, given the opportunity, will play Nbl-c3 and e2-e4, occupying the whole center. How will Black stop this plan? Budapest Gambit The Budapest Gambit was an early favorite of mine (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4):

2.. .e5

Diagram 138 shows Black's surprising second move. Black attacks the d4- pawn directly. But the e5-pawn is unsupported! White can and should cap- ture the pawn.

3.dxe5 Ng4

Exhibiting a strange leap of faith, Black is forced to move his f6-Knight again, but his aim is to recapture the e5-pawn.

4. Bf4

Naturally, White is quick to protect his gains. An awful mistake would be 4.f4? Bc5, when White has weak- ened his position. White can also return the gambit pawn by 4.e4 Nxe5 5.f4 Nec6 6.Be3, with a space advantage for White.

4.. .NC6 5.Nf3 Bb4+

Now we come to a parting of the ways. White must decide if he'd pre- fer to play with an extra pawn or with the two Bishops. DIAGRAM 138.

Rubinstein Variation The great Akiba Rubinstein loved the advantage of the two Bishops. He knew how to get 'em and hold 'em (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5 3.dxe5 Ng4 4.Bf4 Nc6

5.Nf3 Bb4+):

6. Nbd2

White blocks the check but allows Black to recapture the gambit pawn:

6.. .Qe7

Black's move is forced. White threatens 7.h3, with a winning game.

7.a3 Ngxe5

In a stirring moment, Black appears to have lost his senses and left his Bishop en prise. I once watched a tournament game where my friend, Leo Stefurak, cruelly punished his opponent for taking the Bishop: 8.axb4?? Nd3 Smothered Checkmate! What a jolt that was.

8. Nxe5 Nxe5 9.e3

White guards against the Smothered Checkmate.

9.. .Bxd2+ 1O.Qxd2

The Rubinstein Variation is shown in Diagram 139. White has earned the two Bishops and a small advantage. Budapest Gambit, Main Line If White wants to hang on to his pawn he can play the Budapest Gambit main line (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5

3.dxe5 Ng4 4,Bf4 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bb4+):

6,Nc3 Bxc3+ 7.bxc3 Qe7

8.Qd5

This is the difference: White can protect his e5-pawn.

8...f6

Black can't go fishing for pawns.

8...Qa3? 9.Rcl! Qxa2 10.h3 Nh6

DIAGRAM 139.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses

11. e4 gives White a massive

advantage.

9.exf6 Nxf6 1O.Qd3d6

11.g3

Diagram 140 shows that White has earned the two Bishops and an extra pawn. This is why the Budapest Gam- bit isn't a favorite in master games, but amateurs love its tricky nature. Benko Gambit One of the most intriguing strategic DIAGRAM 140. gambits in opening chess theory is the Benko Gambit. Broadly speaking, gambits are sacrifices to gain a short-term edge in development that might be used to win back the sacri- ficed material. Black usually has a hard time making a gambit work because he is behind a tempo at the start of a game. On the other hand, gambits for White abound, because he has a head start in development. The Benko Gambit doesn't look for a quick reward; it seeks a long-term strategic advantage. The Benko Gambit begins (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4):

2...C5

Black attacks the d4-pawn from the side. White has several choices. If he plays 3.dxc5 e6, Black will quickly recapture the c5-pawn with a fine game. If White defends the d4-pawn with 3.e3 cxd4 4.exd4 d5, the game has transposed to a Caro-Kann, Botvinnik-Panov Attack. Another choice,

3.Nf3 cxd4 4.Nxd4 a6 5.Nc3 d5, brings Black an easy equality. White's

best chance for an advantage is to advance the d-pawn:

3.d5

With this move White is a happy camper. His pawn occupies a fine central square and denies Black's pieces either the c6- or e6-squares.

3...b5

Diagram 141 shows the starting position of the Benko Gambit. At first the move makes a strange impression. Black is playing on the Queen's wing and not in the center. But the move has great logic. The center is closed for the moment and the c4-pawn, which supports the d5-pawn, is undermined. Whole volumes have been written about whether the Benko Gambit should be accepted or declined. I'll use a page or two to show just few of the main ideas.

DIAGRAM 141.

Benko Gambit Accepted The first officially recognized World Champion, Wilhelm Steinitz, once said, "The best way to refute a gambit is to accept it." So that's where we'll start (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 b5):

4.cxb5 a6 5.bxa6 Bxa6

The effects of accepting the Benko Gambit can be seen in Diagram 142. Black has developed three units to White's one. Also of great impor- tance is that Black's a8-Rook is ready to pressure the a2-pawn. White's aim will be to catch up in development and defend his d5-pawn.

6.Nc3 g6

This is a crucial link in Black's plans. He wants to fianchetto his King's Bishop so that it too can

DIAGRAM 142.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses pressure White's Queenside while offering Black's King a safe haven.

7.g3 d6 8.Bg2 Bg7

9.Nf3 O-O 10.O-O Nbd7

11.Re1

White prepares e2-e4 in an attempt to grab more of the center. Diagram 143 shows one of the main positions of the Benko Gambit Accepted. Black will play on the Queenside and White in the center. Practice has shown good results for Black and he has full compensation for the pawn. This line in no way exhausts the Benko Gambit Accepted possibilities, and I encourage further research.

DIAGRAM 143.

Benko Gambit Declined If White isn't happy about accepting the gambit (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 b5), he can always decline it and hope to capture the pawn under better cir- cumstances.

4. Nf3 b4

Black decides not to keep the tension. After 4...bxc4 5.Nc3 d6 6.e4 g6

7.Bxc4, White has a lead in development and a sizable advantage. Black

can also choose 4...g6 5.cxb5 a6 6.Nc3 axb5 7.e4!? b4 8.Nb5, with a dan- gerous attack for White.

5.a3 Na6 6.axb4 Nxb4

7.Nc3 d6 8.e4 g6

White has a strong center in return for allowing the b4-Knight an outpost. Theorists consider the position shown in Diagram 144, on the next page, to be better for White.

Benoni Defense One of the sharpest defenses is the Benoni Defense, it's also one of the most difficult to master. A favorite of former World Champion Mikhail Tai, its success even attracted Bobby Fischer to play it against Boris Spassky in their celebrated

1972 World Chess Championship

match. The Benoni leads to extremely lively tactical play that keeps both players on their toes. Play begins (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4):

2...c5 3.d5 e6

Black seeks to remove the cramping d5-pawn. 4,Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 Diagram 145 shows the starting position of the Benoni Defense. White has been given a central majority. In return, Black has claimed a Queen- side majority. Both players will use their majorities to control the other player's pieces. Pawn Storm Variation The most dangerous weapon in White's arsenal to try to defeat the Benoni is an immediate Pawn Storm Variation (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5

3.d5 e6 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6) :

6.e4

White immediately expands in the center. One of Black's aims in the

DIAGRAM 144.

DIAGRAM 145.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Benoni, as in the Benko Gambit, is to fianchetto his f8-Bishop where it might be more active on the long diagonal. Black starts this strategy now.

6.. .g6 7.f4

White is planning to blow away the f6-Knight with e4-e5.

7.. .Bg7 8.Bb5+

This is an important intermezzo move. White would like to play 8.e5 dxe5 9.fxe5 Nfd7 10.e6 fxe6 ll.dxe6 Qh4+ 12.g3 Bxc3+ 13.bxc3 Qe4+, but these tactics don't favor him. The Pawn Storm Variation has reached a pregnant moment, shown in Diagram 146. How will Black handle the check? He has two main choices:

8...Nfd7 and 8...Nbd7.

DIAGRAM 146.

8...Nfd7

Considered the safe choice, the main line runs:

9.a4

White is worried about . . .a7-a6 and . . ,b7-b5 coming with tempo.

9.. .Qh4+ 1O.g3Qe7

11. Nf3O-O 12.O-O

This position is considered better for White. Black's best alternative is (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e6 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.e4 g6 7.f4 Bg7 8.Bb5+):

8.. .Nbd7 9.e5 dxe5

10. fxe5 Nh5 11.e6Qh4+

12.g3Nxg3 13.hxg3Qxh1

The tactics of this position, shown in Diagram 147, on the next page, are still being debated, with practice favoring White. This is definitely one vari- ation where preparation is a requirement!

Nimzovitch Variation If the dangers of the Pawn Storm Variation frighten both players, and they should, White can take a more restrained approach by (l.d4 Nffi 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e6 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6):

6. Nf3

White calmly develops his Knight for now. 6,..g6 As usual, Black prepares to fianchetto. 7, Nd2 This move distinguishes the Nimzo- vitch Variation, as shown in Diagram 148. White aims to plant his Knight on the c4-square, where it will pressure the d6-pawn.

7...Nbd7

DIAGRAM 147.

Black intends to meet 8.Nc4 with 8. . .Nb6, attacking the cTKnight. Black has also essayed 7. . .Bg7 8.Nc4 O-O 9.Bf4 Ne8, which is favorable for White.

8.e4 Bg7 9.Be2 O-O

[diagram]
3.d5 e6 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6):

DIAGRAM 148.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses

6.e4 g6 7.Nf3 Bg7

8.h3

White rules out ...Bc8-g4 and any trades. White wants to keep pieces on the board due to the cramping effect of his central pawns.

8. . .O-O 9.Bd3

This modern treatment, shown in Diagram 150, has had a chilling effect on Benoni players. If allowed, White wants to play O-O and Bcl-f4, with an active game. Black tries to counter with an enterprising gambit:

9.. .b5 1O.Bxb5Nxe4

[diagram]
13.Nxd6

Diagram 151 shows the latest word in the modern Benoni theory. The posi- tion is a mass of confusion, but for now White has shown a plus in practice.

DIAGRAM 149.

DIAGRAM 150. DIAGRAM 151.

Czech Benoni Defense If Black is unhappy about giving White a central majority, he can absolutely lock up the center using a Czech Benoni (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4):

2...C5 3.d5 e5

Instead of challenging White's d5- pawn, Black's e-pawn whizzes right by it. The center now becomes totally blockaded:

4.Nc3 d6 5.e4 Be7

Diagram 152 shows he starting posi- tion of the Czech Benoni Defense. White has a fine wedge in the center which cramps Black pieces, but how will he further exploit it? With the center so locked, play on the flanks becomes all important. The main line of the Czech Benoni is an intriguing line:

6.h3

Concerned that Black will be able to make trades after 6.Nf3 Bg4, White makes a precautionary move.

6.. .O-O 7.Nf3 Ne8

Black is preparing to play . . ,f7-f5 to attack White's center.

8.g4

White attempts to put a stop to Black's plan.

8.. .Nd7 9.Bd3 g6

Black refuses to flinch away from his plan. 1O.Bh6 Ng7 11.Rg1 Nf6

12.Qe2 Kh8 13.O-O-O Ng8

14.Bd2f5 15.gxf5gxf5

DIAGRAM 152.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Diagram 153 shows that, at long last, Black has gotten in his King- side break. But who benefits from the open lines? Theory favors White but the practical results show that Black has chances too. Nimzo-lndian Defense While the Sicilian Defense is the granddaddy of modern King Pawn Defenses, the Nimzovitch-Indian (or Nimzo-lndian) is the granddaddy of Queen Pawn Defenses. The amount of chess literature written about this defense is astounding. While writing this book, I entered this section with trepidation. I cannot possibly cover the myriad ideas of the Nimzo-lndian in such a work. Rather, I can form an impression for you and encourage you to make further research yourself. As shown in Diagram 154, the Nimzo-lndian is reached by (l.d4 Nf6

2.c4):

2...e6

Black doesn't yet take a firm stand in the center as with the Budapest Gambit or the Benoni Defense. Rather, he simply opens up the diag- onal for the f8-Bishop. White contin- ues his standard development

3.Nc3 Bb4

This is Nimzovitch's idea. The c3- Knight is pinned, making the move e2-e4 difficult to carry out. On the other hand, Black is showing a will- DlAGRAM 154.

ingness to part with the two Bishops early in the game. Black hopes that if he is to lose his Bishop he will have the satisfaction of doubling White's pawns. White has tried a variety of moves, including:

[diagram]
Leningrad Variation If Black is going to pin White's Knight, it's only fair that White might return the favor (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3,Nc3 Bb4):

4.B g 5

White pins Black's Knight and hopes to play e2-e4 in the near future. This line is called the Leningrad Variation, and it was a great favorite of former World Champion Boris Spassky.

4...C5 5.d5 h6

6.Bh4 Bxc3+ 7.bxc3 d6

Now that Black has traded away his dark squared Bishop, he quickly puts his center pawns on the dark squares where they will not obstruct his c8-Bishop.

8.e3

White has to go slowly in the cen- ter. The immediate 8.e4? g5 will cost him the e4-pawn.

8...e5 9.f3

Diagram 155 shows a main position from the Leningrad Variation. Black has done a good job of clogging up

DIAGRAM 155.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses the center. White's Bishops aren't working at the moment. Practice has favored Black! Samisch Variation If Black is willing to part with the two Bishops, White reasons that he should force him to do so (l.d4 Nf6

2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4):

4.a3

White puts the question to the Black Bishop and obliges the capture:

4.. .Bxc3+ 5.bxc3

Diagram 156 shows the starting position of the Samisch Variation. White has a nice grouping of pawns, even if they are doubled. Black's strategy is to freeze the c4-pawn so that he might capture it in the near future:

5.. .C5

White now faces a crucial decision as to how to play in the center. Should he play 6.e3 and slowly prepare the advance of his e-pawn, or should he play 6.f3 and play for e2-e4 in one go?

DIAGRAM 156.

Samisch Variation (6.e3) If White goes slowly with his e-pawn, Black has time to organize a coun- terattack against the c4-pawn (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.a3 Bxc3+

5.bxc3 c5) :

6.e3

White intends to develop his Kingside pieces before pushing through in the center.

6...Nc6 7.Bd3 O-O

8.Ne2 b6 9.e4 Ne8!

Diagram 157, on the next page, displays the fine idea of Jose Raul Capa- blanca, the third World Champion. Black prevents a possible Bcl-g5, which

puts his Knight in an unpleasant pin. Furthermore, Black gets his pieces out of the way of White's imposing pawn center. Left to his own devices, Black intends to play ...Bc8-a6, ...Nc6-a5 and possibly ...Ne8-d6, clipping the c4-pawn. Practice has favored Black once more. Samisch Variation (6.f3) The modern way to play the Samisch Variation is (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.a3 Bxc3+ 5.bxc3 c5):

6.f3

White wastes no time, but immediately goes for his e2-e4 set-up. Black feels obliged to halt White in the center.

6...d5 7.cxd5 Nxd5

White would have an advantage after 7...exd5 8.e3 O-O 9.Bd3 b6 10.Ne2 Ba6 due to his extra pawns in the center. Mikhail Botvinnik was an excel- lent champion of White's possibili- ties in this position.

8.dxc5

Owing to his two Bishops, White tries to open up the position as much as possible. As soon as he plays e2-e4, he can count on a plus.

8...f5

As shown in Diagram 158, Black tries to put a stop to e2-e4 and expects to round up the c5-pawn in the near future by playing ...Nb8- DlACRAM 158. Modern Queen Pawn Defenses a6. The position is absolutely devil- ish and requires careful study. The position is dynamically balanced. Spielmann Variation In the Nimzo-Indian, the doubled c- pawns can be downright annoying. It begins to make sense that White should avoid the doubled pawns, and what could be more natural than (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4): 4,Qb3 Diagram 159 shows the starting position of the Spielmann Variation. White not only stops his pawns from becoming doubled, he even attacks the b4-Bishop with tempo! What could be sweeter? The only problem with this move is that the Queen becomes a tactical target.

4...C5

Black protects his Bishop and attacks the d4-pawn. If White plays 5.a3? Bxc3+ 6.Qxc3 cxd4 7.Qxd4 d5 8.Nf3 Nc6, Black will have the advantage. 5,dxc5 Nc6 Black now has the annoying threat of ...Nc6-d4, which pushes White's Queen away from the protection of the c3-Knight. 6, Nf3 Ne4! 7,Bd2 Nxc5 Black can also play 7...Nxd2. In both cases Black's chances are good.

DIAGRAM 159.

Classical Variation You should now realize some of the problems that White has handling the Nimzo-Indian. A much favored continuation even to this day is the Classi- cal Variation (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4):

4.Qc2

With this quiet move, White reinforces his c3-Knight and prepares both a2-a3 and e2-e4 with fine gains. Black has three main choices: 4...c5,

4...d5 and 4... O-O.

Classical Variation (4...c5) A completely reasonable reaction for Black is to attack White's center at once (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.Qc2):

4...C5

Now that the d5-square isn't supported by White's Queen, the d-pawn can't be pushed.

5.dxc5 O-O

Black can also consider the sharp line 5,..Na6 6.a3 Bxc3+ 7.Qxc3 Nxc5

8.b4 Nce4 9.Qd4 d5 10.c5 b6, which is still in great debate.

6.a3 Bxc5 7.Nf3 Nc6

8.Bg5 Nd4 9.Nxd4 Bxd4

[diagram]
12.Qd2

This famous ending from the Classical Nimzo is shown in Diagram 160. Practice has shown an advantage for White. Classical Variation (4...d5) One of the sharpest lines of the Classical Variation is shown after (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.Qc2):

4...d5

Black takes a stand in the center.

5.a3 Bxc3+ 6.Qxc3 Ne4

7.Qc2 Nc6 8.e3 e5

Diagram 161 shows the starting position of what is sometimes called the Grand Variation. Watch what happens now:

DIAGRAM 160.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses

DIAGRAM 161. DIAGRAM 162.

O.cxdS Qxd5 1 1 .b4 Nxb4

13.Ke2 Qe1 +

1O.Bc4Qa5+ 12,Qxe4 Nc2++

14.Kf3 Nxal

Diagram 162 shows the starting position for this Grand Variation. Modern practice favors White and it is an excellent position to play with your friends. What do you think is going on? This is one of those positions where general principles are replaced by concrete analysis. Classical Variation (4... O-O) A far more topical treatment of the Classical Defense is to allow White to win the two Bishops (l.d4 Nf6

2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.Qc2):

4... O-O

As shown in Diagram 163, Black safely tucks his King away before starting aggressions in the center.

5.a3

DIAGRAM 163.

White is sorely tempted to play 5.e4, gaining ground in the center, but

5...d5 6.cxd5 exd5 7.e5 Ne4 8.Bd3 c5! gives Black excellent counter

chances. With the text White claims the two Bishops.

5...Bxc3+ 6.Qxc3 b6

Black prepares to fianchetto his c8-Bishop and control the e4-square. In this way the Nimzo-Indian gets its name. At the turn of the century the fianchetto was simply called "irregular" and later was referred to as an "Indian" development by the hypermodernists who began experiment- ing with all kinds of openings and defenses.

7.Bg5 Bb7

Many grandmaster games today begin this way. The position shown in Diagram 164 is considered dynamically equal. Rubinstein Variation Somehow White's play against the Nimzo-Indian hasn't been altogether convincing. The Samisch Variation only seems to encourage Black's inten- tions, and the Classical Variation has White spending a lot of tempi with his Queen to avoid doubled pawns. Another approach seems to be needed. Once again Akiba Rubinstein offered a solution (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6

3.Nc3 Bb4):

4.e3

Diagram 165 shows the Rubinstein Variation. As mentioned in the sec- tion on the Budapest Gambit, Akiba loved the Bishops. White plans to play Ne2 and put the question to the b4-Bishop. Black has tried 4...b6 (Bronstein Variation), 4...c5 (Hueb- ner Variation), 4...d5, and 4... O-O. Naturally, each defensive try has its own peculiarities.

DIAGRAM 164.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Rubinstein Variation, Bronstein Variation David Bronstein, virtual co-cham- pion of the world in 1951, is a player with enormous creative gifts. He has enriched practically every opening he ever played. This is the Bronstein Variation (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3):

4...b6

It is quite witty. Black realizes that White intends to win the two Bishops and so prepares to trade one away.

5.Nge2 Ba6 6.a3 Bxc3+

7. Nxc3 d5

Bronstein's idea can be seen in Diagram 166.

8. b3 Nc6

Black intends to play ...Nc6-a5, pressuring the c4-pawn. White has a small advantage.

DIAGRAM 165.

Rubinstein Variation, Huebner Variation In my view, the best way for Black to meet the Rubinstein Variation is with the line introduced by German grandmaster Robert Huebner (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3):

4...C5

Diagram 167, on the next page, shows Huebner's idea. He wants to start a quick attack on White's cen- ter. White has two choices: He can DIAGRAM 166.

play 5.Ne2, continuing with the idea of winning the two Bishops, or he can play for development with

5.Bd3.

Rubinstein Variation, Huebner Variation (5.Ne2) In the next two moves, White com- pletes his idea of winning the two Bishops.

5.Ne2 d5 6.a3 Bxc3+

7.Nxc3 cxd4 8.exd4 dxc4

DIAGRAM 167. Black makes all these trades in the center to force White to have an isolated Queen pawn.

9.Bxc4 O-O 10.O-O Nc6

11.Be3 b6

White's position in Diagram 168 is a favorite of Victor Kortchnoi. White has an advantage of the two Bishops, but after fianchettoing Black will have good chances to equalize. Rubinstein Variation, Huebner Variation (5.Bd3) If White isn't satisfied by his edge in Diagram 168, he can try a different piece arrangement (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3 c5):

5.Bd3

White decides to develop his Bishop first, anticipating that he will have a better chance for e3-e4 in the future.

DIAGRAM 168. 5...NC6

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses In Diagram 169, White faces a cru- cial decision. Where should his gl- Knight go, to the e2- or f3-square? Rubinstein Variation, Huebner Variation (6.Nge2) In this variation, White plays in the classical manner preferred by Akiba Rubinstein (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3 c5 5.Bd3 Nc6):

6.Nge2

Left to his own devices, White will castle and play d4-d5 with an over- whelming position. Black is quick to respond in the center.

6...cxd4 7.exd4 d5

8.a3 dxc4 9.Bxc4 Be7

Another typical isolated Queen pawn middle game has emerged in Dia- gram 170. Practice has favored White because it is easy for him to play d4- d5 with advantage due to his superior development.

DIAGRAM 169.

Rubinstein Variation, Huebner Variation (6.Nf3) In Diagram 170, the e2-Knight isn't well placed, and many grandmas- ters prefer the traditional f3-square (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3 c5

5.Bd3 Nc6):

6.Nf3

White invites the same kind of iso- lated Queen pawn as in the previous line and expects his Knight to be bet- ter placed. Black changes his plan:

DIAGRAM 1 70.

6.. .Bxc3+ 7.bxc3 d6!

Black's shift of plan is shown in Dia- gram 171. He intends to block the center with ...e6-e5, when White's Bishops will have difficulty activat- ing themselves.

8.O-O e5 9.Nd2!

White makes a surprising, yet pow- erful, retreat. White wants to launch his f2-pawn into the central fray.

9. . .O-O

It would be a mistake for Black to capture the d4-pawn with 9...cxd4

10.cxd4 exd4 ll.exd4 Nxd4 12.Bb2 Ne6 13.Ne4, leaving White's Bishops

to radiate their power. 1O.d5 Ne7 !1.Qc2 White is prepared to play f2-f4, with good chances for the initiative. Black will try to keep the position blocked so that White's Bishops can't cooper- ate. Practice has shown the position to be balanced, although Black must play with great care. Rubinstein Variation (4...d5) So far against the Rubinstein Variation, we have looked at Bronstein's and Huebner's ideas. After White has committed himself to e2-e3, it is far more natural for Black to respond in the center in classical style (l.d4 Nf6

2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3):

4...d5

As shown in Diagram 172, Black wants to keep the e4-square as well cov- ered as possible. If he can stop White from playing e3-e4, the cl-Bishop will be deprived of a future!

5.a3 Bxc3+

DlAGRAM 171. Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Black can also retreat with 5...Be7

6.Nf3 O-O 7.b4, giving White an

edge in the center and the Queen- side, but without giving up the two Bishops.

6.bxc3 c5

This attack in the center is neces- sary. One day White will play c4xd5 and then use his newly minted c3- pawn as a central battering ram.

7.Bd3 O-O 8.Ne2 b6

Black seeks an active diagonal for his Bishop. This move is the signal for White that the time has come to trade his c4-pawn.

9.cxd5 exd5 1O.Ng3

Compare Diagram 173 with the note on the Samisch Variation. It is a direct transposition. As previously mentioned, Mikhail Botvinnik liked to play White's position as he would play f2-f3 and Ne2-g3, building up the break e3- e4. White has an advantage.

DIAGRAM 172.

Rubinstein Variation (4.O-O) The last look at the Rubinstein Vari- ation analyzes the most popular defense (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4

4.e3):

4. ..O-O

As shown in Diagram 174, on the next page, Black whips his King to safety and retains all the flexible defensive options previously men- tioned. He hasn't committed his central pawns and may play with

DIAGRAM 173.

...d7-d5 or ...d7-d6, putting his cen- tral pawns on light or dark squares. From Diagram 174, White must decide between 5.Ne2 (Reshevsky Variation) and 5.Bd3. Rubinstein Variation, Reshevsky Variation Like Akiba Rubinstein, Samuel Reshevsky loved the two Bishops. His favorite line was (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3O-O):

5. Nge2

White immediately goes for a2-a3 so that he can recapture the Bishop with his Knight. Black is now forced to respond in the center:

5...d5 6.a3 Be7

Black has been forced into this retreat. Black can also play 6...Bd6 7.c5 Be7 8.b4, allowing White to gain space on the Queenside.

7.Nf4

Reshevsky made a career out of the position shown in Diagram 175. White has the advantage. Rubinstein Variation (5.Bd3) The most analyzed continuation of the Rubinstein Variation is (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3 O-O):

5.Bd3

White hasn't committed his Knight and wants to see how Black will respond in the center.

5...C5 6.Nf3 d5

DIAGRAM 174.

DIAGRAM 175.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses

7.O-O dxc4 8.Bxc4 b6

Diagram 176 represents a starting position of the Rubinstein Variation. The options are quite complex, and I encourage further study! Black's last move plans . . .Bc8-a6, trading White's best piece. Most games continue:

9.Qe2 Bb7 1O.Rd1

A fine battle lies ahead. Bogo-lndian Defense If the White player finds himself overwhelmed by the complexities of the Nimzo-Indian, he can duck the line on move three (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4):

2...e6 3,Nf3

DIAGRAM 176.

As Diagram 177 shows, White doesn't allow the Nimzo-Indian. Instead, he invites his opponent to play 3...d5, transposing back to a classical Queen Pawn Defense, or 3...c5 4.d5, transposing back to a Benoni Defense. Many grandmasters appreciate these transpositions. They feint with a Nimzo-Indian only to transpose to a Benoni. In this way certain lines, such as the Pawn Storm in the Benoni, are averted. If Black doesn't want to transpose back into these defenses, he can give the position its own flavor by playing:

3...Bb4+

This variation is attributed to Efim Bogoljubow. When faced with a last name like that, it is easy to see why

DIAGRAM 177.

players called this defense the Bogo Variation. Because Black often fian- chettos his Queen's Bishop, the defense became known as the Bogo- lndian Defense. If White doesn't want to play 4.Nc3, transposing back into the Nimzo-Indian, he should block Black's check in one of two ways: 4,Nbd2 or 4.Bd2 (the main line). Bogo-lndian Defense (4.Nbd2) My favored continuation is to block Black's check with (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6

3.NI3 Bb4+):

4, Nbd2 My reasoning is simple: I want to play a2-a3 and win the two Bishops as in a classical Nimzo-Indian without spending tempi with my Queen. If Black doesn't give up the two Bishops, my d2-Knight will support e2-e4.

4...b6

This is a key move to understanding the Bogo-lndian. Black tries to con- trol the e4-square with pieces and not by playing ...d7-d5, which requires him to commit himself in the center.

5.a3 Bxd2+

Practically speaking, this capture is forced. After 5...Be7 6.e4 Bb7 7.Bd3, White has control over the e4- square and a clear advantage. 6,Qxd2 Diagram 178 shows this paradoxi- cal capture. After 6.Nxd2 Bb7, White will have to spend time blocking the long diagonal. After

6.Bxd2 Bb7, it isn't clear what

White should do with his dark- squared Bishop. In a few moves, White's plan will be clear:

6...Bb7 7.e3 O-O

DIAGRAM 178.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Black could play 7...Bxf3 8.gxf3, but White will soon play Bfl-g2 and f3- f4, with a powerful middle game.

8.Be2 d6 9.O-O Nbd7

1O.b4! Diagram 179 shows how the middle game plans for both sides begin to take shape. White intends to fian- chetto his dark-squared Bishop for good central control. Black intends to occupy the e4-square with his Knight and follow up with . . .f7-f5 to play on the light squares. Practice has favored White.

DIAGRAM 179.

Bogo-lndian Defense, Main Line Black's Bishop check has provoked a response and it's certainly natural to rebuff the impudent attacker with an attack of your own (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6

3.Nf3 Bb4+):

4.Bd2

This is the main line of the Bogo- lndian, and it's a completely logical counter. If Black is forced to trade Bishops, White's development would get a boost.

4...Qe7

Not wishing to help White develop, Black defends his Bishop. Black has also tried 4...a5 and 4...c5, but the text is the most logical. Diagram 180 shows White's stra- tegic problem in a different light.

DIAGRAM 180.

What will White do with his fl-Bishop? The c4-pawn means that the fl-a6 diagonal isn't the brightest, so White decides on a fianchetto.

5.g 3

It also might seem like a reasonable plan to play for e2-e4. After trading a few pieces with 5.Nc3 Bxc3 6.Bxc3 Ne4 7.Qc2 Nxc3 8.Qxc3 d6 9.e4 Nd7, Black will play for . . .e6-e5 with rough equality.

5.. .Nc6 6.Bg2 Bxd2+

Black chooses the right moment to trade Bishops. White can't play

7.Qxd2?! Ne4 8.Qc2 Qb4+, which gives Black the initiative.

7.Nbxd2 d6

Diagram 181 is typical of the Bogo-Indian. Black has the flexibility to change plans. He now plans ...e6-e5 in order to activate his c8-Bishop.

8.O-O e5 9.d5

White gains a nice wedge in the center.

9.. .Nb8 1O.e4

Diagram 182 shows the starting position for most grandmaster games with the Bogo-Indian. White's central control gives him the advantage, but Black's position is quite solid. Black will play ...Nb8-a6, thereby control- ling the c5-square.

DIAGRAM 181. DIAGRAM 182.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Queen's Indian Defense By now you've observed that learning all the plans of a Nimzo-Indian is a daunting challenge to the White player. Gaining a spatial advantage against the Bogo-Indian isn't as difficult, so Black sets up a new challenge, the Queen's Indian Defense. In this defensive scheme, Black quickly fian- chettos his Queen's Bishop. The Queen's Indian Defense is initiated after the moves (l.d4 Nf6 2,c4):

2...e6 3.Nf3 b6

As shown in Diagram 183, Black prepares to fianchetto his Queen's Bishop in order to control the e4-square. This strategy is typical of mod- ern defenses. While White's pawns occupy the center, Black's pieces con- trol the central squares. From Diagram 183, White has taken a number of approaches:

[diagram]
logical continuation. Unfortunately, this move allows Black's f8- Bishop to pin the c3-Knight, just as in a Nimzo-Indian.

[diagram]
ment of his Knight by first playing 4.a3 (the Petrosian Variation).

[diagram]
Queen's Indian is to play

4.g3, countering Black's fian-

chetto with one of his own. Botvinnik Variation Mikhail Botvinnik had a deserved reputation as an "iron logician," a player whose purposeful moves fol- lowed a completely logical DIAGRAM 183.

sequence. The following variation of the Queen's Indian Defense bears his name (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6

3.Nf3 b6):

4. Nc3

White revs up to play e2-e4 for cen- tral domination.

4...Bb4

Just as in the Nimzo-Indian, Black is quick to make this pin.

5. Bg5

White counters with a pin of his DIAGRAM 184. own.

5.. .Bb7

Black continues to observe the e4-square.

6.e3

White intends Bfl-d3, in order to complete his development and tussle for control over the e4-square.

6.. .K6 7.Bh4g5

Black breaks the pin but weakens his Kingside in the process.

8.Bg3 Ne4 9.Qc2 Bxc3+

1O.bxc3 Nxg3 11.hxg3 d6 Diagram 184 features the starting position of the Queen's Indian Botvin- nik Variation. Many grandmaster games have been played from this posi- tion as both sides have strengths and weaknesses. Practice has favored White but not by much. Petrosian Variation The ninth World Champion, Tigran Petrosian (1929-84, World Champion 1963-69), had an extraordinary gift for frustrating his opponents' plans. Grandmaster Robert Byrne once commented to me, "Petrosian would play a defensive combination long before his opponent realized he had a Modern Queen Pawn Defenses chance to attack!" He mastered the art of prophylaxis, anticipating the dangerous plans of his opponent before they could arise. His spe- cialty was to carefully prepare his advances, nurturing and building his position before initiating a clash. He conjured up the following varia- tion (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6): 4,a3 Diagram 185 shows the Petrosian Variation. White spends a whole tempo in the opening to prevent the pin in the Botvinnik Variation.

4...Bb7 5.Nc3 d5

At last Black has been provoked into committing himself in the center. White was threatening to play d4-d5 and e4-e5, completely shutting out the b7-Bishop.

6. cxd5 Nxd5

After 6...exd5, the position becomes that of a Queen's Gambit Declined. The text gives this variation its unique flavor.

7.Qc2

White is playing for e2-e4. Early in his career, Garry Kasparov's favorite weapon as White was this position. Practice has favored White.

DIAGRAM 185.

Queen's Indian Defense, Main Line The most popular way for White to meet the Queen's Indian is to fian- chetto his own Bishop (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6):

4.g3

White reasons that if Black just tries to play with his pieces, his position will invariably become cramped. At some point, Black will have to commit

his central pawns; in the meantime, White has a safe haven for his King on the Kingside.

4...Bb7

An entirely different idea of the Queen's Indian is for Black to change his approach and target the c4-pawn. Black reasons that if White is going to fianchetto his fl- Bishop, the c4-pawn might be vul- nerable: 4...Ba6 5.b3 c6 6.Bg2 d5 reaches a position that is also favored in grandmaster chess.

5.Bg2 Be7 6.O-O O-O

Diagram 186 shows the starting position for the main line Queen's Indian Defense. Most games continue by 7.Nc3 Ne4 8.Qc2 Nxc3 9.Qxc3 f5, both players contending for control of the e4-square. Vladimir Kramnik, currently the world's third highest-rated grandmaster, prefers 7.Rel, waiting to see how Black will react The Queen's Indian Defense is considered one of the most solid defensive systems available against the Queen Pawn Opening.

DIAGRAM 186.

Grunfeld Defense The last modern defense against the Queen Pawn Opening I consider in this survey is the Grunfeld Defense. More than any other modern defen- sive scheme, the Grunfeld typifies piece play for Black and occupation of the center by White. The opening moves are (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4):

2.. .g6

This time Black decides to fianchetto his own King's Bishop.

3.Nc3

White is ready to play e2-e4 with central domination.

3.. .d5

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses Black makes a surprising move by striking in the center. It is Black's third move that initiates the Grun- feld Defense, which is shown in Dia- gram 187. White has three main responses to the Grunfeld Defense:

[diagram]
tion)

[diagram]
DIAGRAM 187.

Exchange Variation The most logical continuation for White, and hence the one that has the largest body of theory, is the Grunfeld Exchange Variation (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5):

4.cxd5

Naturally, White is pleased at the prospect of exchanging a flank pawn, the c4-pawn, for Black's central pawn.

4...Nxd5 5.e4 Nxc3

6.bxc3

Diagram 188 shows the starting posi- tion for the Grunfeld Exchange Varia- tion. Naturally, White is very pleased with himself. He has established a classical center in exactly half a dozen moves. Classical players are cheering! But Black isn't about to give up the game now. He reasons that after fianchettoing his Bishop, he

DIAGRAM 188.

will be able to put strong pressure on White's d4-pawn and the long diago- nal. Play now continues:

6...Bg7

Black plans the counter ...c7-c5 and ...Nb8-c6 to attack the d4-pawn. White must make a crucial decision as to how he should defend his cen- ter. Would he like his Knight defending his d4-pawn on the e2- or f3- square? While the f3-square is preferable, the Knight would then be vul- nerable to a pin from the c8-Bishop. Exchange Variation, Main Line For several decades the main line of the Exchange Variation was the stan- dard (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4 Nxc3 6.bxc3 Bg7):

7.Bc4

White develops a Bishop while making room for the gl-Knight to have a comfortable development.

7...C5

Once more, Black strikes into the center. The pressure of the g7-Bishop on the long diagonal is making itself felt.

8.Ne2

This was White's development scheme. On the e2-square, the Knight is not vulnerable to the c8- Bishop.

8...O-O 9.O-O Nc6

1O.Be3 Both players have followed their plans in exemplary fashion. White occupies the center and therefore should be pleased with his game. But the fight is just beginning! From Diagram 189, play proceeds:

10.. .Bg4

DIAGRAM 189.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses This move appears to be a wasted effort because White can easily neu- tralize the pin. Black's move has a deeper point 1 1 .f3 Na5 This is Black's point: the move f2-f3 weakens White's position.

12.Bd3

Practically a whole FIDE World Championship Match between Ana- toly Karpov and Garry Kasparov was contested after 12.Bxf7+ Rxf7 13.fxg4 Rxfl+ 14.Kxfl. Today this line is con- sidered completely equal and thus preference is made for the text.

12...cxd4 13.cxd4Be6

The position shown in Diagram 190 is considered a key starting point for the Grunfeld Exchange Variation. Having provoked the move f2-f3, Black clearly wants to play ...Na5-c4, attacking the vulnerable e3-Bishop. Doz- ens of games have been played that feature the exchange sacrifice, 14.d5 Bxal 15.Qxal f6 16.Bh6 Re8, with Black usually doing well! Modern play- ers now play:

14.Rc1 Bxa2 15.Qa4 Bb3

16.Qb4 b6

White has excellent compensation for the pawn and practice has shown the position to be about equal. Exchange Variation, Modern Line Today's grandmasters have devised a new approach to the Exchange Grunfeld that involves placing the King's Knight more aggressively (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4 Nxc3 6.bxc3 Bg7):

7.Nf3

DIAGRAM 190.

Diagram 191 shows the more com- bative approach. Modern players have devised a way of meeting the ...Bc8-g4 pin.

7.. .C5 8.Rb1

And this is it. The b7-pawn needs protection and the c8-Bishop is to be kept at home. If Black tries to block the Rook's attack, 8...b6

9.Bb5+ disrupts Black's plans of

attacking the d4-pawn.

8. . .O-O 9.Be2 cxd4

1O.cxd4Qa5+ 11.Bd2 Once more, White offers his a2-pawn as a gambit. The ending after ll.Qd2 Qxd2+ 12.Bxd2 b6, preparing ...Bc8-b7, is considered harmless for Black.

11...Qxa2

The position shown in Diagram 192 is quite the rage in grandmaster cir- cles. Results have favored White in a series of tactical melees. Do your research and come prepared to your tournament games! Three Knights Variation If the amount of analysis of the Exchange Variation seems over- whelming, the Three Knights Varia- tion might be easier (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5):

4.Nf3

White calmly develops a Knight and chooses not to define the cen- ter just yet.

DIAGRAM 192.

Modern Queen Pawn Defenses

4.. .Bg7

Now White must reveal his plans. He can play 5.cxd5, transposing into the Exchange Grunfeld, and play the modern line. Or he can choose one of the following variations, which have their own flavor:

[diagram]
Three Knights Variation, Russian Variation The Russian school of chess has done an amazing "joint collaboration" on the following bottomless varia- tion (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4,Nf3 Bg7):

5.Qb3

As shown in Diagram 193, White develops his Queen early in order to put pressure on Black's d5-pawn. White realizes that after the passive move

5...c6 6.cxd5 cxd5, the game will

become an Exchange Slav Defense, with Black's fianchetto misplaced. The standard moves are:

5.. .dxc4 6.Qxc4 O-O

7.e4

Diagram 194 shows the current position. White has achieved a clas- sical pawn center but the premature development of his Queen means that Black can create all kinds of counter defenses. Just to list the main variations:

DIAGRAM 193.

DIAGRAM 194.

[diagram]
All of these variations have their unique qualities and books have been written about their strengths and weaknesses. While I believe that the Smyslov Variation makes the most sense, others may properly disagree. Let me just say that all of these lines are fascinating and the ideas challenging. Three Knights Variation, Seirawan Variation With so many complex lines to choose from, I decided to create a simple "anti-Grunfeld" weapon that I've used with great success. I even defeated Garry Kasparov in the Chess Olympics with the following (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4.Nf3 Bg7):

5.Bg5

From the position shown in Diagram 195, White plans to eliminate the f6- Knight and grab the d5-pawn.

5...Ne4

This is the best move. After

5...dxc4? 6.e4!, White will favorably

recover the c4-pawn. Another alter- native, 5...c6 6.cxd5 cxd5 7.e3, once again is an Exchange Slav Defense where the g7-Bishop bites on gran- ite, and with the d4-pawn, White has the advantage.

6.cxd5 Nxg5!

Black properly snares the two Bish- DlAGRAM 195. ops. After 6...Nxc3 7.bxc3 Qxd5 Modern Queen Pawn Defenses

8.e3, White has more influence in

the center, and once more the g7- Bishop has a limited future.

7.Nxg5 e6 8.Nf3

This latter move was really my con- cept. Previously White players had tried 8.Qd2 exd5 9.Qe3+ Kf8

10.Qf4 Bf6!, but hadn't received an

advantage.

8.. .exd5 9.b4

Diagram 196 shows the Seirawan Variation. The game is similar to a Queen's Gambit Declined, where White has played Bcl-g5xf6, giving up the two Bishops for a Queenside minority attack.

9. . .O-O 1O.e3

Black's g7-Bishop is on a closed diagonal. Practice favors White. Grunfeld Defense (4.Bf4) This last look at the Grunfeld fea- tures another logical move that ignores the action in the center (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5):

4.B14

White develops his Bishop and tar- gets the c7-pawn.

4...Bg7 5.e3

This is crucial to White's opening strategy. The Bishop is developed outside of the pawn chain and rein- forces the d4-pawn. Diagram 197 shows the position, with Black hav- DlAGRAM 197.

ing to choose between 5. . .c6, 5. . .c5, and 5. . . O-O .

5.. .c6

This passive move doesn't suit the nature of the Grunfeld Defense. White can trade by 6.cxd5 cxd5, with a favorable Exchange Slav, or he can con- tinue:

6.Nf3 O-O 7.Bd3

White has the advantage. Far more common is (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4.Bf4 Bg7 5.e3):

5.. .C5

Black tries to blast open the long diagonal for the g7-Bishop.

6.dxc5 Qa5

Black prepares a possible ...Nf6-e4 to attack the c3-Knight.

7.Rc1 dxc4 8.Bxc4 O-O

9.Nf3 Qxc5

White has a lead in development that gives him a slight advantage. Grunfeld Gambit An intriguing gambit appears after (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4.Bf4 Bg7

5.e3):

5. ..O-O

White can now play 6.Rcl, with a likely transposition to the line given above. The text move has indepen- dence if White decides to gobble a pawn:

6.cxd5 Nxd5 7.Nxd5 Qxd5

8.Bxc7

White has won the c7-pawn, as shown in Diagram 198. Black's compensation after 8...Na6 9.Bg3 Bf5 is quite visible. A difficult end- DlACRAM 198. Modern Queen Pawn Defenses ing, however, arises in Diagram 198 after 8...Na6 9.Bxa6 Qxg2 10.Qf3 Qxf3 ll.Nxf3 bxa6, which favors White. This completes our survey of the major modern defenses to the Queen Pawn Opening. I hope I've provided you with food for thought and that you now have a better understanding of the reasons behind most chess openings.

CHAPTER SEVEN

WNmwwvwvmmmM An Opening Solution Utnderstanding the information presented in the previous chapters ook me several years. Learning all the classical openings and defenses and their names was a real bear. It did, however, help me to appreciate that I'd never return to my Cannon or Queen Raid Open- ings! My favorite opening move became l.e4, and it would have stayed that way forever except for one small problem: I lost. In fact, I lost quite often and the opening was the real culprit. It seemed to me that it was nec- essary to become a specialist in every opening and defense! As soon as I'd find a line to deal with the Dragon, I lost because I wasn't aware of the lat- est wrinkle in the Scheveningen Keres Attack. Things didn't get better with the Petroff Defense. Not knowing the nuances of so many openings meant that I couldn't get an edge, no matter which line I chose. My com- plaints only got affirmative nods, "Yep, you're right Yaz. Let me know when you find something good." In a strange way that I couldn't articulate, it seemed to me that after a few years of playing chess, I was playing less "original" chess in my games. I'd play the first dozen or so opening moves as prescribed by the great chess teachers and end up with either a completely won position or a bad one that I couldn't hold. Much like the fellow who checkmated me in four moves and exclaimed that I had been his fourth victim, my oppo- nents at this time would tell me that I had fallen into the same trap as their previous opponent. It didn't make me feel any better! I realized that I wanted to play a game of chess that had less of a "the- oretical" understanding. My friends called this approach "getting out of book"-the book being the rather large body of opening theory. But how on earth could I escape? The whole purpose of opening theory was to pre-

CHAPTER SEVEN

scribe the best set of opening moves and counters so that a player would have a decent middle game position. Didn't getting out of book mean being at a disadvantage? After all, I'd no longer be following the recom- mended moves of top grandmasters. The answer is a succinct no. There is no single best opening or best defense. As this book has already shown, there are hundreds to choose from. What is important is finding an open- ing and defense that is comfortable for you-one where you can under- stand the formation and the plans that will give you the type of position that you want. Building a House What I discovered for myself is that, despite my choice of opening or defense, I often left my own King vulnerable. I was so locked in on target- ing my opponent's King that I constantly left my own inadequately pro- tected. In attacking the Dragon Sicilian, I noted that the g7-Bishop- besides putting pressure on the long diagonal-is a great defender. The concept of building a house took root, and that's exactly what I did. Building a house is making a fianchetto and sliding your King under- neath the Bishop. Once my King was nicely protected, only then did I start to worry about the center. Experienced players who are reading this book have probably noticed that the previous chapters on classical open- ings missed the Barcza Opening and the English Opening, and the chap- ters on modern defenses overlooked the King's Indian Defense and the Pirc Defense. These omissions were deliberate, because these openings are the ones I recommend. When I decided to avoid opening theory, it took me a long time to give up l.e4 because this move seemed like a trusted old friend. Instead my new move order would be:

1.Nf3

An Opening Solution Instead of trying to occupy the center with either l.e4 or l.d4, my new opening move was the start of my house building. The move controls the d4 and e5-squares and leaves it up to Black to choose his defense.

2.g3

This was the second step in building my house. The Bishop is to be fian- chettoed on the long diagonal. 2".g6 Black does the same thing.

3.Bg2 Bg7 4.O-O O-O

In Diagram 199, we see that both sides have built homes for their Kings. Both have a solid pawn shield and are covered by a Knight, a Bishop, and a Rook. It was from this formation that I realized it was possible to simply play chess without any disadvantages from not knowing the opening. The center is still left to be defined, but my King was nice and safe and I could face the future with confidence. Barcza Opening Gedeon Barcza (1911-86) was a Hungarian grandmaster who enjoyed play- ing the "quiet" opening moves shown in Diagram 199. Against nearly every Black defense, White's first four moves were always the same. Only after the King was tucked away did White turn his attention to the center. My joy for chess was rekindled after I started to play the Barcza Opening. No longer did I have to know the latest wrinkle of an Open Ruy Lopez. I could now try to outplay my opponent with both of us playing our own moves. DIAGRAM 1 99.

CHAPTER SEVEN

Just about every World Champion at one time in their careers has played the Barcza Opening. Garry Kasparov used it against Deep Blue in their celebrated 1997 match. The world's third highest-rated grandmaster, Vladimir Kramnik, has used it throughout his entire career. Although the opening often transposes into other openings and defenses, this choice is entirely White's. White's four opening moves, l.Nf3, 2.g3, 3.Bg2, and 4.O-O, create the Barcza Opening. After these initial moves, if White follows up with c2-c4, the opening often transposes into an English Opening. If he plays d2-d4, a likely transposition into a Catalan will occur. And if White plays for d2-d3 and e2-e4, the opening becomes a King's Indian Attack (KIA). The KIA became my favorite because the ideas are quite easy to grasp. Now that we know what we are going to do as White, we need a few strategies to play against Black's reactions. Black often stakes out the cen- ter, and these are the variations for which we need ideas to combat:

[diagram]
2.. .Nf6, 3...Bf5 or 3...Bg4.

[diagram]
Defense: l...d5, 2...c5, 3...Nc6, 4...e5.

[diagram]
3.. .Nc6, 4...e6, which White should take into a Closed French

Defense. E Black can copy White's opening (see Diagram 199), and then I recommend a King's Indian Attack.

[diagram]
Indian Defense. This is called the Hedgehog Defense. Once more, the King's Indian Attack is the winning formula. London Defense (...Bc8-f5) As its name suggests, the London Defense is a venerable one noted for its solidity. Black opens with his Queen Pawn and develops in classical An Opening Solution fashion while White plays the Barcza setup:

1.Nf3d5 2.g3 Nf6

As so often happens in openings, Black's first two moves are often interchanged.

3.Bg2 Bf5 4.O-O

These moves lead to the position shown in Diagram 200. White has built his house and now needs to find a plan. Black has developed three of his units, which all control the sweet center. In fact, all three of Black's pieces control the e4-square. Good for him! So what should White's plan be? The King's Indian Attack is based upon White try- ing to push his e2-pawn up the board. White aims to do this by playing d2- d3 and Nbl-d2, preparing the charge of his e-pawn.

4.. .e6

Black fortifies the d5-pawn and makes room for the f8-Bishop. Note that Black has developed the f5-Bishop outside of his pawn chain.

5.d3

This is the signal move for the KIA. White could have played 5.c4, 5.d4, or

5.b3, each of which would channel the game in a different direction. The

text move retains White's flexibility to choose another plan, but it does show that White is preparing e2-e4.

5.. .h6

This move has become the standard for Black. It is interesting to note that despite the lead that Black held in controlling the e4-square. White will be able to push his e-pawn forward. That being the case, Black prepares the h7-square as a retreat square.

6. Nbd2

DIAGRAM 200.

CHAPTER SEVEN

This is not the ideal square for the Knight because it blocks the cl-Bishop. But White is counting upon the move e2-e4 to provide him with breathing room in the future. The development of the cl-Bishop is delayed. If White wants he can also fianchetto his Queen's Bishop.

6.. .Be7

Black is happy to develop and to prepare to castle.

7.b3

Once more White prepares another fianchetto.

7.. .O-O 8.Bb2 Nbd7

9.Re1

The position is shown in Diagram 201. White is now prepared to push his e-pawn up the board with tempo. He can then play for a Kingside attack by playing e4-e5 to push away the f6-Knight, or by playing in the center. White's good Bishops and flexible position gives him the advantage in a position where neither player needs to worry about the latest theoretical wrinkle. London Defense (...Bc8-g4) In this line of the London Defense, Black plays an important nuance by developing his Bishop to the g4- square. Often this results in a trade for the f3-Knight. In such cases, its important that Black keep the long diagonal blocked; otherwise the g2- Bishop becomes extremely power- ful.

1.Nf3Nf6 2.g3d5

3.Bg2 Bg4

One of the goals behind Black's strategy is to capture White's f3- Knight and follow up with . . .e7-e5 in

DIAGRAM 201.

An Opening Solution an attempt to establish a classical pawn center.

4.O-O Bxf3

Black immediately captures the Knight.

5.exf3

I prefer this recapture, as shown in Diagram 202. After 5.Bxf3 e5, Black gets to implement his plan. With

5.exf3, Black's center quickly col-

lapses after 5...e5? 6.Rel Nc6 7.d4! Black isn't able to play ...e7-e5 and must content himself with simple developing moves:

5.. .e6 6.f4

With this excellent move, White opens the long diagonal and tightens down on the e5-square, which will become a natural outpost.

6.. .Be7 7.d3 O-O

8. Nd2 c5

Black takes a risk that he might not be able to keep the long diagonal closed. While 8...c6 is more solid, it is passive.

9. Nf3 Nc6 1O.Re1

White will soon post a Knight on the e5-square and have a small advantage. King's Indian Reversed Defense (...d5xe4) If the Barcza Opening has a drawback, it is that Black is given the oppor- tunity to occupy the center at once. A classical player quickly picks up on this opportunity. White will be placed in the position of a counterattacker, which he will have to play forcefully: 1 .Nf3 d5 2.g3 c5

3.Bg2 Nc6 4.O-O e5

DIAGRAM 202.

CHAPTER SEVEN

Black now occupies the entire cen- ter, as shown in Diagram 203. Once again, White will play to get in e2-e4 and his own play in the center.

5.d3

White protects himself against any plans of ...e5-e4 and prepares his counter.

5...Nf6 6.e4

With this key move, White attacks the d5-pawn and forces Black to make a decision. Does he capture the e4-pawn by 6...dxe4? Push his pawn with 6...d4? Or continue his development by 6...Be7? The choice isn't an easy one.

6...dxe4

At first glance, this move appears to win a pawn, but appearances are deceiving. White's e4-pawn is inviolate:

7.dxe4 Qxd1 8.Rxd1 Bg4

Black correctly refrains from "winning" the e4-pawn with 8...Nxe4?

9.Nxe5 Nxe5 10.Bxe4. White has won back his pawn and has the much

superior position as he has a lead in development. He will try to bring his Knight to the d5-square and play Bcl-f4, developing with tempo.

9.c3

An excellent move as White prevents any play based upon ...Nc6-d4, try- ing to take advantage of the pin created by Black's last move. This posi- tion is considered quite favorable to White due to the pawn structure. I describe the concept of pawn structure extensively in Play Winning Chess (Microsoft Press, 1995) and Winning Chess Strategies (Microsoft Press, 1994). Black's d5-square is vulnerable to invasion, while White's d4- square is not.

DIAGRAM 203.

An Opening Solution The position, shown in Diagram 204, should be studied closely because this formation is quite com- mon in a King's Indian Reversed. My suggestion is to play the posi- tion out against friends as well as against a computer. Once again the e4-pawn can't be captured:

9.. .Nxe4? 1O.Re1

Now Black is in trouble. The Knight retreating by 10...Nf6 ll.Nxe5 is excellent for White. If Black plays

10...Bxf3 ll.Bxf3 Nf6 12.Bxc6+,

White again reclaims his pawn with advantage.

10.. .f5 11.Nh4

This fine stroke decides the position in White's favor. He is threatening f2- f3, where he wins a piece, as well as Nh4xf5-with or without h2-h3- when White will reclaim his pawn with advantage. King's Indian Reversed Defense (...d5-d4) As you've just witnessed, capturing the e-pawn works badly for Black. He therefore decides to close the center (l.Nf3 d5 2.g3 c5 3.Bg2 Nc6

4.O-O e5 5.d3 Nf6 6.e4):

6.. .d4

Diagram 205 shows the position. With the center pawns locked, play on the flanks becomes the leading factor. White will play for the breaks f2-f4 and c2-c3 to 1pressure the

DIAGRAM 205.

CHAPTER SEVEN

center. One of the benefits to White after Black's last move is that he now has control over the c4-square, which provides him with an ideal outpost for the bl-Knight.

7.a4

This appears to be a strange move until you understand the idea behind the move. White is anticipat- ing playing Nbl-a3-c4. Once he has spent so much time traveling there, he doesn't want his arrival to be greeted by ...b7-b5 giving the Knight the boot. White thus secures the c4-outpost for his Knight.

7.. .Be7 8.Na3 O-O

9.Nc4

The game has evolved to the position shown in Diagram 206.

9.. .Nd7 1O.Ne1

White is ready to play f2-f4 and a possible Kingside pawn storm. Once again. White is considered to possess a positional advantage.

DIAGRAM 206.

King's Indian Reversed Defense (...Bf8-e7) Clearly, Black isn't entirely satisfied with the above two lines. On move six he tries a different plan (l.Nf3 d5 2.g3 c5 3.Bg2 Nc6 4.O-O e5 5.d3 Nf6

6.e4):

6..,Be7

Instead of capturing the e4-pawn or bypassing with the d-pawn, Black just develops. Now White takes a different approach from the position shown in Diagram 207.

7.exd5

White opens the long diagonal for his g2-Bishop and exposes the e5-pawn to a frontal attack. An Opening Solution

7.. .Nxd5

In such positions, recapturing with the Queen is extremely dangerous due to the potential of a discovered attack by the g2-Bishop.

8.Re1

White immediately puts pressure on the e-pawn.

8.. .f6

Black does not make this move hap- pily, but 8. . .Bf6 9.Nxe5 Nxe5 10.f4 is good for White, while 8...Qd6 invites 9,Nbd2, with the threat of Nd2-c4 winning a pawn.

9.c3

White is preparing to open the position to his advantage with d3-d4.

[diagram]
This position, shown in Diagram 208, will soon clarify into White's favor due to his good g2-Bishop and the weaknesses caused by the move ...f7-f6. Closed French Defense If Black tries to occupy the center, but doesn't want to weaken his d5- square, he can try a different for- mation (l.Nf3 d5 2.g3 c5 3,Bg2 Nc6

4.O-O):

4.. .e6

DIAGRAM 207.

DIAGRAM 208.

CHAPTER SEVEN

Black is happy with his central gains and plays to strengthen his center. The position is shown in Diagram 209. By now White's play should be quite familiar. He will again use his e-pawn as a battering ram. 5,d3 Nf6 6,Nbd2 Be7

7.e4 O-O

As White, this was one of Bobby Fischer's favorite positions, which he used to score a number of fine wins. While the center is not locked, it soon will be. The players pursue different plans: White will go Kingside, Black Queenside. 8,Rel b5 Black gains space on the Queenside while planning to launch a pawn storm. 9,e5 Nd7 1O.h4 This is a key move in White's plan of attacking Black's King. The g5- square is to be used as a likely stepping stone and the h2-square is cleared for reasons that will soon become apparent: 1O...b4 11,Nf1a5

12.N1h2a4 13,Bf4

Practice has shown that White has the better chances. Hedgehog Defense Black's final defensive reaction that I'll examine is the Hedgehog Defense. Black meets White's Kingside fianchetto with a Kingside fianchetto in order to neutralize the g2-Bishop:

1.Nf3c5 2.g3b6

This move initiates the Hedgehog. An Opening Solution

3.Bg2

This is a position where White should carefully consider his move order. He could play 3.e4 Bb7 4.d3, setting up a King's Indian Attack at once and thereby limiting Black's choices.

3...Bb7 4.O-O g6

In Diagram 210 we can see Black's strategy. He plans to fianchetto both his Bishops and leave it up to White to define the center.

5.d3 Bg7 6.e4 d6

Black plays cautiously, obviously having been previously victimized by a King's Indian Attack!

7.Nbd2 Nd7 8.Re1 Ngf6

9.c3 O-O

The game has evolved to Diagram 211. White can play for d3-d4 and push in the center. The Hedgehog is one of the best ways for Black to meet the Barcza Opening. Certainly, by adopting the Barcza Opening as White, you will cut out a number of losses that you would experience by playing com- plicated classical openings. Your need to know the theoretical lines is reduced and you can be quite confi- dent in the safety of your King.

DIAGRAM 210.

DIAGRAM 211.

CHAPTER EIGHT

A Solution to the Queen Pawn Opening Iswas so attracted to the Barcza Opening as White that I tried out the ame formation as Black against White's Queen Pawn Opening. Known as the King's Indian Defense (KID), this is the favorite defense of both Garry Kasparov and Bobby Fischer. It comes highly recom- mended! Let's see it in action: 1,d4Nf6 2x4 g6 3,Nc3 Bg7 4x4 d6 Of course, White is under no obligation to occupy the center. He can play much more quietly with his first four moves, but it is these opening moves that put the most pressure upon Black's formation. Diagram 212 serves as the starting position. White has a large number of choices. White's main tries are:

[diagram]
Four Pawns Attack One of Black's greatest fears in play- ing the King's Indian Defense is the DIAGRAM 212.

CHAPTER EIGHT

Four Pawns Attack (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6):

5.f4

As shown in Diagram 213, White's pawn center is quite imposing! What's worse from Black's perspec- tive, the routine of ...d7-d6 and ...e7-e5 has been severely dis- rupted, and it is now impossible for Black to count on this maneuver. A change of plans is needed -and fast. However, don't despair! Although White has occupied the center, his pawns can easily become overextended.

5.. .C5

Black immediately attacks White's center and forces him to make a deci- sion.

6.d5

White bypasses the c5-pawn. After 6.dxc5 Qa5!, Black threatens ...Nf6xe4, with a winning attack. White has to protect the e4-pawn: 7.Bd3 Qxc5 produces a crucial recapture. White is prevented from playing e4-e5 in the future, and play continues: 8.Nf3 O-O 9.Qe2 Bg4 10.Be3 Qa5 11.O-O Nc6. Practice has shown the position to be dynamically equal.

[diagram]
White must be careful not to overextend his center. A mistake would be

7.e5? Ne8 8.Nf3 Bg4, when White's center collapses under Black's pressure.

[diagram]
Black makes a necessary pawn sacrifice that is similar to the Benko Gam- bit. Diagram 214 shows the position. Black desperately, and correctly, tries to break up White's center. White must accept the sacrifice because . . .b5-b4 threatens to win the e4-pawn.

8.cxb5

DIAGRAM 213.

A Solution to the Queen Pawn Opening After 8.e5 dxe5 9.fxe5 Ng4! 10.Bf4 b4 ll.Ne4 Nd7, Black is well placed to meet White in the center.

8.. .a6 9.a4

White decides to cling to his extra pawn.

9.. .Nbd7 1O.Be2axb5

11.Bxb5 Ba6

Practice has shown that Black has compensation for his pawn. He will try to utilize the half-open b-file to create counterplay. Samisch Variation Another aggressive system against the KID is the Samisch Variation (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6):

5.f3

In this variation, White's intentions are cleverly disguised. At the posi- tion shown in Diagram 215, White wants to play Bcl-e3, Qdl-d2, and castle long. He will attack on the Kingside in a style similar to the Yugoslav Attack of the Sicilian Dragon. Because I like to play the Samisch Variation as White, I know that Black has to play carefully to gain a safe position. However, the Samisch Variation has an important drawback. In the words of

DIAGRAM 214.

DIAGRAM 215.

CHAPTER EIGHT

grandmaster Eduard Gufeld, "Please, ask the gl-Knight how he likes the move f2-f3. He has been robbed of his best square!"

5.. .e5

This is probably the only time that Black should make this move before castling-an important nuance. Black is not worried about the ending

6.dxe5 dxe5 7.Qxd8+ Kxd8 8.Bg5 c6 9.O-O-O+ Kc7, correctly believing

that this middle game is not worse for him.

6.d5

This is considered White's best chance of gaining an advantage. Recall from considering the Barcza Opening that a line like 6.Nge2 exd4 7.Nxd4 O-O 8.Be2 c6 has Black preparing the break . . .d6-d5, with a fine game.

6.. .Na6

Once again, Black plays for the positional plan of controlling the c5- square. When the colors were reversed, White prefaced this move with a2-a4.

7. Be3

White sets up the attacking line previously outlined.

7.. .Nh5

This move has a dual purpose: It clears the way for Black to play ...f7-f5 and possibly ...Qd8-h4+ in order to disrupt White's plan.

8.Qd2

Diagram 216 shows one of the most interesting variations of the KID. Black can now play 8...f5, a key source of counterplay in the KID that gives him a fair game. Or he can try the Bronstein Variation:

8...Qh4+ 9.Bf2 Qf4

Black invites White to trade Queens if he'd like. DlACRAM 216. 1O.Be3 Qh4+ A Solution to the Queen Pawn Opening This invites a repetition, which is declined as follows:

11.g3 Nxg3 12.Qf2

Certainly White must avoid 12.Bf2? Nxfl, which would result in the loss of a pawn for White. Now, however, Black is forced to sacrifice his Queen:

12...Nxf1 13.Qxh4Nxe3

Black has the threats of ...Ne3-g2+ and ...Ne3-c2+, so White now moves his King:

14.Ke2 Nxc4

As shown in Diagram 217, Black has a material deficit of two Bishops and two pawns for his Queen. Speaking bluntly, the position is absolutely gross and defies analysis. I've played Black's position against Kasparov and made an easy draw. Players who don't like to sacrifice their Queen should play

8. . ,f5 instead. But please, do yourself the favor of playing out this position

against a friend. It will be very rewarding. Play often continues:

15.b3 Nb6 16.Rd Bd7

17.NH3O-O 18.Nf2f6

19.a4 Rae8

A fascinating game lies ahead. Clearly, the Samisch Variation is quite a challenging one for Black and he must be on his toes.

DIAGRAM 217.

Averbach Variation The purpose of f2-f3 in the Samisch Variation is to set up with Bcl-e3 and prevent ...Nf6-g4, which would harass White's Bishop. Isn't there another way White can do this without playing f2-f3? With this move, White covers the g4-square and initiates the Averbach Variation (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6):

CHAPTER EIGHT

5.Be2

The move is highly transpositional and we haven't reached the Aver- bach Variation quite yet.

5. ..O-O 6.Bg5

This is the move that signals the Averbach Variation, as shown in Diagram 218. White's sixth move is far more annoying than 6.Be3, because on the g5-square, the Bishop is far more active. When Black plays his DIAGRAM 218. frreei.ng move ...e7-e5, he will place himself in a nasty pin.

6.. .C6

Black prepares to counter in the center. The immediate 6...e5? 7.dxe5 dxe5 8.Qxd8 Rxd8 9.Nd5 would be a failure as Black loses material.

7.Qd2 e5

Now this break works because the d5-square is covered.

8.d5 cxd5 9.cxd5

While it might be tempting to capture on d5 with the Knight, it is wrong; after playing 9.Nxd5 Nc6 10.O-O-O Be6, Black's Knight goes to the d4- square and Black earns a good game.

9.. .Nbd7 1 O.f3

In view of Black's impending pressure on the e4-pawn with ...Nd7-c5, White strengthens his center.

[diagram]
As before. Black secures the c5-square. 1l.Nh3Nc5 12.Nf2a4

13.O-O Bd7

A Solution to the Queen Pawn Opening Theorists consider the position shown in Diagram 219 to be dynamically balanced. King's Indian Defense, Main Line By far, White's most popular way of meeting the KID is the main line, where White just develops his King- side, happy with his central gains (l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4,e4 d6):

5.Nf3 O-O 6.Be2

White's last two moves are inter- changeable and some grandmasters enjoy the time their opponents spend reflecting about how they intend to meet the Averbach Variation!

6.. .e5 7.O-O

Diagram 220 features the starting position of the main line King's Indian Defense. My colleague, grandmaster John Nunn, has written two 300- page books called The Main Line King's Indian (Henry Holt and Com- pany, 1996) and The New Classical King's Indian (International Chess Enterprises, 1997), in which he goes into great detail about the strategic considerations facing both players. Needless to say, it is an impossible act to follow! My recommendation for Black is to play as follows:

7.. .exd4 8.Nxd4 Re8

9.f3 c6

DIAGRAM 219.

DIAGRAM 220.

CHAPTER EIGHT

Black is ready to break out with ...d6-d5 or, at certain times, ...Qd8- b6, which can be an annoying move. 1O.Kh1 This is the key move in this varia- tion, as shown in Diagram 221. White has tried other lines, including 10.Be3 and 10.Nc2, and is unable to gain any superiority. (One nice trick for Black is 10.Be3 d5 ll.cxd5 Nxd5! 12.Nxd5 cxd5, leav- ing Black with no problems.) Instead, White gets off the a7-gl diagonal where his King might be vulnerable.

10.. .Nbd7

This is considered the most solid continuation. Black would dearly love to play the immediate ...d6-d5, but it fails: 10. ..d5 ll.cxdS cxd5 12.Bg5 dxe4

13.Ndb5! White's lead in development gives him the advantage. With the

text, Black is prepared to put his Knight on either the e5- or c5-square and, in the cases of ...d6-d5, the Knight can play to the b6-square. White now has a large choice of moves, including ll.Nb3, ll.Nc2, ll.Rbl, and ll.Bf4. Theory considers this to be White's best move:

11.Bg5

The f6-Knight is pinned and Black's ability to play . ..d6-d5 is slowed. Black also has his choices, and ll...Qb6 and ll...Qa5 have been popular alternatives. I prefer the text for reasons that shall soon be clear:

12.Bh4Ne5 13.Qc2

One trick that White must avoid is 13.Qd2? Nxe4! because the h4-Bishop is unprotected.

13.. .g5 14.Bf2 c5

15.Nb3 Be6

DIAGRAM 221.

A Solution to the Queen Pawn Opening These moves lead to the position shown in Diagram 222. Theory con- siders White's position to be slightly better, but I'm suspicious of this evaluation. Benoni players will be happy to have a powerful e5-Knight, and the b3-Knight is definitely out of play for some time. Black is cer- tainly capable of raising a heck of a fuss. Take a close look at this posi- tion and see how much fun playing the KID can be!

DIAGRAM 222.

CHAPTER NINE

A Solution to the King Pawn Opening After discovering the solidity of building a house in chess, I became attracted to the very same formations against White's King Pawn Opening. This time, however, the ideas were far more tricky for me than in a Barcza Opening and a King's Indian Defense (KID). In time, I learned to play the Pirc Defense, which became a career defense that I still use to this day. The opening move order is quite important for Black as a single mistake can give him a bad game. The opening moves are: 1 ,e4 d6 Black is heading for the Barcza formation. The alternative l...Nf6 is the Alekhine Defense, which would provoke e4-e5-a threat Black will try to avoid. 2,d4 White establishes a classical pawn center. White could certainly entertain other, quieter formations, but this is considered White's best. 2,..Nf6 Black develops while attacking the e4-pawn.

3.Nc3

White could also play 3.f3 g6 4.c4 Bg7 5.Nc3, transposing directly back to the Samisch Variation of the KID. In fact, this was the move order that Kasparov used against me in one of our tournament games. 3,..g6 Black initiates the Pirc Defense. Left to his own devices, Black will com- plete his house and then counter in the center. From the position shown

CHAPTER NINE

in Diagram 223, White has a wide range of possibilities:

[diagram]
Attack or the Three Pawns Attack, is the most danger- ous for Black. White tries to prevent ...e7-e5 and often plays for e4-e5, booting away the f6-Knight and trying to disturb Black's house.

[diagram]
development of his cl- Bishop so he can castle Queenside and conduct an attack similar to the Yugoslav Attack in the Sicilian Dragon.

[diagram]
and Bg5-h6 to trade dark-squared Bishops, this line is called the Modern System.

[diagram]
Variation in the KID. White plays for h2-h4-h5, trying to blow down Black's house.

[diagram]
White's desire to complete his Kingside development and hold a plus in the center. In comparing Diagram 223 with Diagram 212, the difference is the placement of White's c-pawn. It can be argued that the pawn on the c4- square is far more active and controls the sweet center. On the c2-square, White's Queenside isn't as weakened, so that if White decides to castle there, his King's protection will be significantly improved. The difference comes down to a question of style. One thing is certain: With the pawn on c2, White can use the extra tempo to considerably sharpen the game.

DIAGRAM 223.

A Solution to the King Pawn Opening Austrian Attack The Austrian Attack causes Black to be on guard early. Play begins (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6):

4.f4

Diagram 224 shows the initial posi- tion of the Austrian Attack, and it's easy to see why it's also called the Three Pawns Attack. White's play is straightforward as can be; he is winding up for e4-e5 and crashing through in the center.

4...Bg7 5.Nf3 O-O

These moves lead to the most provocative lines of the Austrian. White is being encouraged to push in the center, where Black hopes that White will become overextended. White now has three main lines:

[diagram]
Austrian Attack (6.e5) The central push seems logical, but Black should be happy because he can chip away at White's center (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.f4 Bg7 5.Nf3

O-O):

6.e5 NeB

Black is forced to retreat, but in so doing opens the way for his g7-Bishop. Black's central focus will be the e5-pawn, and he'll use ...c7-c5 to under- mine White's central support.

7.Be3

White develops and tries to restrain the ...c7-c5 break. White has tried

7.Bc4, 7.Bd3, and 7.h4, but in each case 7. . .c5 gives Black good counterplay.

DIAGRAM 224.

CHAPTER NINE

7.. .c5 8.dxc5

White accepts Black's pawn sacri- fice. Otherwise ...c5xd4 causes White's center to collapse.

8.. .NC6 9.Be2 Bg4

This is Black's key resource. He is trying to unlock the potential of his g7-Bishop. 1 0.cxd6 exd6 1 1 .exd6 Nxd6 The center has been blown up and White has won a pawn. The position shown in Diagram 225 offers Black DIAGRAM 225. excellent compensation.

12.Bc5 Bxc3+ 13.bxc3 Ne4

14.Bxf8Qb6

After Black's fourteenth move, he has gained a dangerous attack. A likely continuation is 15.Rfl Nxc3 16.Qd2 Nxe2 17.Qxe2 Rxf8, when Black has sacrificed an exchange for good play against White's King. Austrian Attack (6.Bd3) This line and the next one are White's preferred choices in the Austrian Attack, as White plays for development (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6

3.Nc3 g6 4.f4 Bg7 5.Nf3 O-O):

6.Bd3 Na6

A surprising move away from the center leads us to Diagram 226. Black supports his freeing break ...c7-c5, and once again invites e4- e5 by White.

7.O-O

DIAGRAM 226.

A Solution to the King Pawn Opening White brings his King into safety before pressing in the center. White has tried playing for central control with 7.e5 Ne8 8.Be3. Black should perse- vere and prepare his central break ...c7-c5 by 8...b6. Black is not playing to fianchetto his Bishop; rather, he intends to smash White's center with ...c7-c5. Although White has a position that would make a classical player happy, Black's central counter will give him good play.

7.. .C5

Black goes for his standard break in the Austrian Attack. Grandmaster practice has shown that White's best chance for the advantage is to push his d-pawn.

8.d5 Rb8

The position is now similar to a Benoni, with Black playing for the . . .b7-b5 push.

9.Kh1

This move is considered best as White sidesteps a number of tricks based upon ...b7-b5 and ...c5-c4. The immediate attacking plan, 9.Qel Nb4, gives Black the chance to win the two Bishops.

9.. .Nc7 1O.a4a6

11.a5b5 12.axb6Rxb6

As shown in Diagram 227, White has an advantage in the center, while Black's pressure is on the Queen- side. He will play for ...Nc7-b5 and, in most cases, ...e7-e6, continuing to chip away at the center. The position is a highly charged one, typical of Benoni and Pirc Defenses. The chances are about even.

DIAGRAM 227.

CHAPTER NINE

Austrian Attack (6.Be3) As in the previous lines of the Austrian Attack, White develops while retain- ing his central options (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.f4 Bg7 5.Nf3 O-O):

6.Be3

The advantage of this move is that it makes it much more difficult for Black to make his freeing . . .c7-c5 break.

6.. .b6

Black spends an extra tempo preparing his . . .c7-c5 break.

7.e5 Ng4

Usually the Knight parks itself on the e8-square. Black decides on the text to pick up a tempo.

8. Bg1 c5 9,h3

Black suffers the consequences of venturing forward. The Knight is forced into a retreat, but White spends a lot of time trying to corral the Knight.

9.. .Nh6 1O.d5

It would be a mistake to play 10.dxc5? bxc5 ll.Qd5? (trying to spear the Rook) because ll...Qb6! is excellent for Black. White tries to keep his center intact.

10.. .Nd7

Provocative as ever, Black tries to lure White's center forward to its death.

11.Qe2

White protects the e5-pawn. After ll.e6? fxe6 12.dxe6 Nf6 13.Bc4 Nh5, Black wins the f4-pawn. Diagram 228 shows the current position.

[diagram]
DIAGRAM 228.

A Solution to the King Pawn Opening In a beautifully timed break, Black attempts to kick away the only defender of the d-pawn.

12.O-O-O

The game is about to become violent as both Kings now face fierce attacks. 12.Nxb5 (12.Qxb5? Rb8 advantageously regains the b-pawn) 12,..Qa5+ 13.Qd2 (13.c3 Ba6 and 13.Nc3 Rb8 both offer Black good com- pensation for the sacrificed pawn) 13...Qxd2+ 14.Kxd2 dxe5 results in approximate equality.

12. ..b4 13.Ne4 Nb6

14.g4 Bb7

The position shown in Diagram 229 is a barn burner, with both players having their trumps. Pirc Defense (4.f3 or 4.Be3) Building a house is a well-respected defensive strategy in grandmaster cir- cles. For this reason, many players immediately try to storm the founda- tions by trading off the fianchettoed Bishop. After (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6), Black has committed himself to the fianchetto. The favored move for White to trade the f8-Bishop is:

4.Be3

White wants to play Qdl-d2, Be3-h6, and probably h2-h4-h5, with a King- side initiative. In the past, theorists suggested that White should pref- ace the move with 4.f3, thereby pre- venting a timely ...Nf6-g4. Indeed, f2-f3 forms an important nucleus of White's plans, but this move should be delayed. White's point is that

4...Ng4 5.Bg5 h6 6.Bh4 g5 7.Bg3

sends Black on a wild goose chase.

DIAGRAM 229.

CHAPTER NINE

He has weakened his Kingside without trading Knight for Bishop. The rule of thumb is that this kind of chase should be encouraged only if Black is able to nab the Bishop. Diagram 230 shows the current position, in which Black must become a little crafty himself.

4...C6

Black makes an exception to the traditional "automatic" play to com- plete his house, 4...Bg7. The rea- son for the text is that Black anticipates that White will castle Queenside. He wants to save the tempo ...Bf8-g7 and accelerate a Queenside pawn storm.

5. Qd2 b5

Black reveals his point. He now threatens ...b5-b4, thereby chasing away the c3-Knight, the only defender of the e4-pawn.

6. f3

White reinforces his center. Although the moves 4.Be3 and 4.f3 are inter- changeable, both players should be precise with their move order. Under the present order of moves, Black has forced White to include the tempo f2-f3. Without this order of moves, White might have foregone f2-f3 alto- gether. One of the benefits of f2-f3 is that White can now plan g2-g4-g5, removing an important defender with tempo. Again, Black should resist the temptation to automatically fianchetto his Bishop.

6.. .Nbd7 7.O-O-O

White has also tried to delay this committed move by 7.Nh3, 7.h4, 7.Bh6, and 7.g4, amongst others. 7.g4 aims for g4-g5; after 7...Nb6, Black has made room on the d7-square for his f6-Knight to retreat. That's why Black's opening move order deserves careful scrutiny.

7.. .Nb6

DIAGRAM 230.

A Solution to the King Pawn Opening Diagram 231 shows the position. Both players will zealously attempt to maul one another's King. A sample line might run:

8.g4 b4 9.Nb1 a5

1O.h4h5 11.g5 Nh7

12.Bd3 Bg7

This leaves a wild game in view, fea- turing a typical Pirc middle game. Modern System The lines described in the previous section gave a number of grandmas- ters some clever ideas, including (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6):

4. Bg5

White reasons that he wants to play as before, using Qdl-d2 and Be3-h6 with a nice twist. He can also play for the Austrian Attack with the Bishop on a much more aggressive square.

4...h6

Black puts the question to the Bishop immediately. White would have an advantage after 4...Bg7

5.f4!, when the move e4-e5 will come

with added punch because the g5- Bishop does so much more than in the previous Austrian Attack varia- tions.

5. Be3

The position shown in Diagram 232 is nearly the same as the one shown in Diagram 230, with an important

DIAGRAM 231.

DIAGRAM 232.

CHAPTER NINE

nuance: White has induced the move ...h7-h6. The great debate is, which side benefits? It is clear that after the battery Qdl-d2, the h6-pawn is a tar- get and Black's King is stuck in the center. Furthermore, White will be able to play g2-g4, h2-h4 and with g4-g5 insure himself of prying open the Kingside. On the other hand, White has robbed himself of the Be3-h6 trading Bishops option.

5...C6 6.f3 b5

7.Qd2 Nbd7

After these moves, the game is similar to the previous variation with the h6-pawn sticking out. Black's King shouldn't be too uncomfortable in the center because White isn't threatening to crash through any time soon. Pirc Defense (4.Be2) A rather cunning line is (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6):

4.Be2

White has not revealed his point. He might easily transpose into the main line, which I describe later in this chapter.

4...Bg7 5.h4

Diagram 233 shows White's belliger- ent move. It's appalling that White decides to storm the house before the Black King even makes it to the Kingside. White's intentions are as clear as they are aggressive. He will push his h-pawn and rip open the Kingside. It would now be a grievous error for Black to play 5... O-O, for as they say in chess parlance, "Black would castle into it." And by it, they mean a bone-crunching attack. After

DIAGRAM 233.

A Solution to the King Pawn Opening White's fifth move, Black should definitely be put off from castling Kingside for awhile.

5.. .c5

Once more Black strikes in the center with this familiar counter. This brings me to the last wise opening principle of this book: An attack on the wing is best met by a counter in the center. This dictum was laid down centuries ago and it's as valid as ever. Time and time again in master games you will see this type of principled response. Look for it in your games too. Black forces a central response.

6.dxc5

White could try 6.d5 a6 7.h5 (7.a4 e6 leaves White wondering where he will castle) 7...b5, which produces the better position for Black.

6.. .Qa5

Black utilizes a standard Pirc Defense resource, and threatens ...Nf6xe4 with advantage.

7.Qd3

White defends the e4-pawn and sets a cunning trap: 7...Nxe4?? 8.Qb5+ wins a piece.

7.. .Qxc5 8.Be3 Qa5

9,h5 White pursues his Kingside play.

9.. .NC6 1O.h6

White achieves nothing from

10.hxg6 hxg6 ll.Rxh8+ Bxh8, when

Black has a fine position.

10.. .Bf8 11.O-O-O Bd7

As shown in Diagram 234, the posi- tion has become an unusual Sicilian where Black has an excellent game.

DIAGRAM 234.

CHAPTER NINE

Geller Quiet System (Pirc Defense Main Line) Russian Grandmaster Efim Geller is a first-class attacker of the highest order. He is one of the few players in the world to have a better score against Bobby Fischer. When such a bold player devises a "quiet" line against the Pirc Defense, you just know that things are boiling below the surface. Play begins with a fundamentally principled move in which White develops his Knight to its best square (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6):

4.Nf3 Bg7 5.Be2 O-O

6.O-O

Diagram 235 shows the starting position of Geller's system. White has a classical pawn center and is happy with his gain. It is up to Black to find an effective counter.

6...c6

With this multipurpose move, Black feints a possible ...b7-b5, but mainly intends to cover the d5-square. In some lines, Black can also play ...d6-d5 intending to leap into the e4-square. White has tried three plans:

[diagram]
creates "air" for his King)

[diagram]
and prepares e4-e5 Geller Quiet System (7.a4) While this move reasonably fur- thers White's intention of prevent- ing a Queenside expansion, it hardly pressures Black's position (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.Nf3 Bg7 5.Be2 O-O 6.O-O c6):

7.a4 Nbd7

DIAGRAM 235.

A Solution to the King Pawn Opening As shown in Diagram 236, Black is aiming for the traditional ...e7-e5 counter.

8.Be3 e5 9.dxe5 dxe5

1O.Qd6Re8 11.Bc4 White targets the f7-pawn.

11...Qe7 12.Rad1 Qxd6

13. Rxd6 Bf8!

Black forces the Rook away with tempo.

14. Rdd1

White's Rook has an uncomfortable time finding a good square on the d- file.

DIAGRAM 236.

14...Kg7

I prefer Black's position. Geller Quiet System (7.h3) This is a far more useful move. White makes luft and prevents annoyances from happening on the g4-square, by (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.Nf3 Bg7

5.Be2 O-O 6.O-O c6):

7. h3

White also is set to play 8.e5 dxe5 9.dxe5, forcing the f6-Knight to retreat.

7.. .Nbd7

Black concedes that ...b7-b5 is not yet a threat. Black stands badly after:

7...b5 8.e5 dxe5 9.Nxe5, when Be2-f3 gives White strong pressure.

8.e5

Otherwise Black will play ...e7-e5. Kasparov as Black has faced 8.Bf4 Qa5

9.Qd2 e5 10.dxe5 dxe5 ll.Bh6 Re8 and soon got the better game.

Diagram 237, on the next page, shows the current position.

8.. .Ne8

CHAPTER NINE

This standard retreat is much bet- ter than 8...Nd5?l 9.Nxd5 cxd5

10.exd6 exd6, when White has the

better game due to the pawn structure.

9.Re1 dxe5 1O.dxe5 Nc7!

Black's Knight finds a different way to liberate itself.

11.Bf1 Ne6

The position is considered equal as White has problems creating active play in the center. Geller Quiet System (7.Re1) This is the most dangerous line for Black. White supports his e-pawn so that it will act as a bowling ball as it moves up the board, knocking pieces out of the way (l.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.Nf3 Bg7 5.Be2 O-O 6.O-O c6):

7.Re1 Nbd7 8.Bf4

Diagram 238 shows the most trying position that Black faces in the Pirc Defense today.

8...QC7

Black is ready to make his central ...e7-e5 break forcing White's response:

9.e5 Nh5 1O.exd6exd6

1 1 .Bg5 Re8 Black is kicking well. He is pre- pared to play ...Nd7-b6 and develop the rest of his forces. I hope, dear reader, that you have enjoyed Winning Chess Open- DlAGRAM 238. A Solution to the King Pawn Opening ings, and that it has given you some insight into classical and modern openings and defenses. I hope that my recommended formations of the Barcza Opening, the King's Indian Defense, and the Pirc Defense will bring you a career of success as they have brought me. Happy hunting. Glossary Active: An aggressive move or position. Advantage: A net superiority of position, usually based on force, time, space, or pawn structure. Algebraic Notation: The international standard for writing chess moves. Each square on the chessboard is given a letter and a number, as shown in Diagram 239. When a piece travels from one square to another, algebraic notation enables you to identify the piece and the square to which it is moving. For example, if the Rook moves from square al to square a8, you write Ra8. For pawn moves, you write only the square to which the pawn moves; for example, e4. Castling Kingside is written O-O, and castling Queenside is written O-O-O. Analysis: The calculation of a series of moves based on a particular posi- tion. In tournament play, you are not allowed to move the pieces during analysis but must make all calcula- tions in your head. When the game is over, opponents commonly ana- lyze the game they have just played, moving the pieces about in an effort to discover what the best moves would have been. a8 b8 c8 d8 e8 f8 g8 h8 a7 b7 c7 d7 e7 f7 g7 h7 a6 b6 c6 d6 e6 f6 g6 h6 a5 b5 c5 d5 e5 f5 g5 h5 a4 b4 c4 d4 e4 f4 g4 h4 a3 b3 c3 d3 e3 f3 g3 h3 a2 b2 c2 d2 e2 f2 g2 h2 a1 b1 c1 d1 e1 f1 g1 hi

DIAGRAM 239.

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

Attack: To start an aggressive action in a particular area of the board, or to threaten to capture a piece or pawn. Bind: When one player has a grip on the position because of a large advantage in space and his opponent is unable to find useful moves. Bishop Pair: Two Bishops versus a Bishop and a Knight or two Knights. Two Bishops work well together because they can control diagonals of both colors. See also Opposite-Colored Bishops. Blockade: To stop an enemy pawn by placing a piece (ideally a Knight) directly in front of it. Popularized by Aaron Nimzovitch. Blunder: A terrible move that loses material or involves decisive posi- tional or tactical concessions. Book: Opening analysis found in chess books and magazines. A book player relies heavily on memorization of published material rather than on his own creative spark. Break: The offer of an exchange of pawns in order to gain space or mobil- ity. Also called a pawn break. Castle: A player castles by moving his King and Rook simultaneously. Castling is the only move in which a player can deploy two pieces in one move. Castling allows a player to move his King out of the center (the main theater of action in the opening) to the flank, where the King can be protected by pawns. Additionally, castling develops a Rook. When White castles Kingside, he moves his King from el to gl and his hl-Rook to fl. When Black castles Kingside, he moves his King from e8 to g8 and his h8-Rook to f8. When White castles Queenside, he moves his King from el to cl and his al-Rook to dl. And when Black castles Queenside, he moves his King from e8 to c8 and his a8-Rook to d8. Glossary Center: The center is the area of the board encompassed by the rectangle c3-c6-f6-f3. Squares e4, d4, e5, and d5 are the most important part of the center. The e- and d-files are the center files. Centralize: To place pieces or pawns in the center, or as close to the center as possible. From there, they can control a good chunk of enemy territory. Checkmate: An attack against the enemy King from which the King cannot escape. When a player checkmates his opponent's King, he wins the game. Classical: A style of play that focuses on the creation of a full pawn center. Classical principles tend to be rather dogmatic and inflexible. The philoso- phy of the classical players was eventually challenged by the so-called "hypermoderns." See also Hypermodern. Closed Game: A position that is obstructed by blocking chains of pawns. Such a position tends to favor Knights over Bishops, because the pawns block the diagonals. Combination: A sacrifice combined with a forced series of moves, which exploits specific peculiarities of the positions in the hope of attaining a cer- tain goal. Compensation: An advantage in one area that balances the opponent's advantage in another area. Material versus development is one example; three pawns versus a Bishop is another. Control: To completely dominate an area of the board. Dominating a file or a square, or simply having the initiative, can constitute control. Counterplay: When the player who has been on the defensive starts his own aggressive action. Cramp: The lack of mobility that is usually the result of a disadvantage in space.

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

Critical Position: An important point in the game, where victory or defeat hangs in the balance. Defense: A move or series of moves designed to thwart an enemy attack. Also used in the names of many openings initiated by Black. Examples are the French Defense and the Caro-Kann Defense. Development: The process of moving pieces from their starting positions to new posts, from which they control a greater number of squares and have greater mobility. Discovered Attack: A discovered attack is an ambush. A Queen, Rook, or Bishop lies in wait so that it can attack when another piece or pawn moves out of its way. Discovered Check: The most effective type of discovered attack, which involves checking the enemy King. Double Attack: An attack against two pieces or pawns at the same time. Double Check: The most powerful type of discovered attack, which checks the King with two pieces. The King is forced to move, and the enemy army is thus frozen for at least one move. Doubled Pawns: Two pawns of the same color lined up on a file. This dou- bling can only come about as the result of a capture. Draw: A tied game. A draw can result from a stalemate, from a three-time repetition of position, or by agreement between the players. Dynamic: Implies action and movement. A dynamic factor concerns itself with actual moves and threats and involves combinations of attack and defense maneuvers. The two main aspects of a dynamic factor are time and force. Glossary Endgame: The third and final phase of a chess game. An endgame arises when few pieces remain on the board. The clearest signal that the ending is about to begin is when Queens are exchanged. En Prise: A French term that means in take. It describes a piece or pawn that is vulnerable to capture. Equality: A situation in which neither side has an advantage or the play- ers' advantages balance out. Exchange: The trading of pieces, usually pieces of equal value. Exchange, The: Winning the Exchange means winning a Rook for a Bishop or a Knight. Fianchetto: An Italian term that means on the flank and applies only to Bishops. A fianchetto (pronounced fyan-KET-td) involves placing a White Bishop on g2 or b2 or a Black Bishop on g7 or b7. FIDE: The acronym for Federation Internationale des Echecs, the interna- tional chess federation. File: A vertical column of eight squares. Designated in algebraic notation as the a-file, b-file, and so on. See also Half-Open File; Open File. Flank: The a-, b-, and c-files on the Queenside, and the f-, g-, and h-files on the Kingside. Force: An advantage in force arises when one player has more material than his opponent or when he outmans his opponent in a certain area of the board. Forced: A move or series of moves that must be played if disaster is to be avoided.

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

Fork: A tactical maneuver in which a piece or pawn attacks two enemy pieces or pawns at the same time. Gambit: The voluntary sacrifice of at least a pawn in the opening, with the idea of gaining a compensating advantage (usually time, which per- mits development) . Grandmaster: A title awarded by FIDE to players who meet an estab- lished set of performance standards, including a high rating. It is the highest title (other than World Champion) attainable in chess. Lesser titles include International Master and FIDE Master, which is the lowest title awarded for international play. Once earned, a Grandmaster title can- not be taken away. See also Master. Half-Open File: A file that contains none of one player's pawns but one or more of his opponent's. Hanging Pawns: A pawn island consisting of two pawns side by side on the 4th rank on half-open files. Sometimes, hanging pawns are the source of dynamic energy for an attack; at other times, they become a target, sub- ject to frontal attack by the enemy. See also Pawn Island. Hypermodern: A school of thought that arose in reaction to the classical theories of chess. The hypermoderns insisted that putting a pawn in the center in the opening made it a target. The heroes of this movement were Richard Reti and Aaron Nimzovich, both of whom expounded the idea of controlling the center from the flanks. Like the ideas of the classicists, those of the hypermoderns can be carried to extremes. Nowadays, both views are seen as correct A distillation of the two philosophies is needed to cope successfully with any particular situation. See also Classical. Initiative: When you are able to make threats to which your opponent must react, you are said to possess the initiative. Glossary Isolated Pawn: A pawn with no like-colored pawns on either adjacent file. The drawbacks of an isolated pawn are that it is not guarded by a friendly pawn and that the square directly in front of it can make a nice home for an enemy piece, because no pawns can chase that piece away. On the other hand, an isolated pawn has plenty of space and controls squares on the open (or half-open) files on either side of it, with the result that minor pieces and Rooks of the same color usually become active. An isolated pawn is, however, considered a weakness. Ringside: The half of the board made up of the e, f, g, and h files. Kingside pieces are the King, the Bishop next to it, the Knight next to the Bishop, and the Rook next to the Knight. See also Queenside. Luft: A German term that means air. In chess, it means to give the King breathing room. It describes a pawn move made in front of the King of the same color to avoid back rank mate possibilities. Major Pieces: Queens and Rooks. Also called heavy pieces. Master: In the US, a player with a rating of 2200 or more. If a player's rat- ing drops below 2200, the title is rescinded. See also Grandmaster. Mate: Short for checkmate. Material: All the pieces and pawns. A material advantage is when a player has more pieces on the board than his opponent or has pieces of greater value. Mating Attack: An attack on the enemy King, with checkmate as the ulti- mate goal. Middle Game: The phase between the opening and the endgame. Minor Pieces: The Bishops and Knights. Mobility: Freedom of movement for the pieces.

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

Occupation: A Rook or Queen that controls a file or rank is said to occupy that file or rank. A piece is said to occupy the square it is sitting on. Open File: A vertical column of eight squares that is free of pawns. Rooks reach their maximum potential when placed on open files or open ranks. Open Game: A position characterized by many open ranks, files, or diag- onals and few center pawns. A lead in development becomes very impor- tant in positions of this type. Opening: The start of a game, incorporating the first dozen or so moves. The basic goals of an opening are to:

[diagram]
bringing the Rooks toward the center and placing them on poten- tially open files Openings: Established sequences of moves that lead to the goals outlined under Opening. These sequences of moves are often named after the player who invented them or after the place where they were first played. Some openings, such as the King's Gambit and the English, have been ana- lyzed to great lengths in chess literature. Opposite-Colored Bishops: Also Bishops of opposite color. When players have one Bishop each and the Bishops are on different-colored squares. Opposite-colored Bishops can never come into direct contact. Overextension: When space is gained too fast. By rushing his pawns for- ward and trying to control a lot of territory, a player can leave weaknesses in his camp, or can weaken the advanced pawns themselves. He is then said to have overextended his position. Glossary Passive: In relation to a move, denotes a move that does nothing to fight for the initiative. In relation to a position, denotes a position that is devoid of counterplay or active possibilities. Pawn Center: Pawns that are inside the rectangle bounded by squares c3, f3, f6, and c6. Pawn Chain: A diagonal line of same-colored pawns. Pawn Island: Two pawns are members of different islands if neither can protect the other. Pawn islands are separated by open files. Pawns that are both doubled and isolated constitute two pawn islands. Having fewer pawn islands than the opponent is advantageous. See also Hanging Pawns. Pawn Structure: Also referred to as the pawn skeleton. All aspects of the pawn setup. Perpetual Check: When one player places his opponent in check, forcing a reply, followed by another check and another forced reply, followed by another check that repeats the first position. Because such a game could be played forever, after the position repeats itself, the game is declared a draw. Pin: When one player attacks a piece that his opponent cannot move with- out losing a different piece of greater value. When the piece of greater value is the King, this tactic is called an absolute pin; when it is not the King, the tactic is called a relative pin. Plan: A short- or long-range goal on which a player bases his moves. Poisoned Pawn: A pawn whose capture is a precursor to a strong attack. Positional: A move or style of play that is based on long-range consider- ations. The slow buildup of small advantages is said to be positional. Premature: Taking action without sufficient preparation.

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

Prepared Variation: In professional chess, it is common practice to ana- lyze book openings in the hope of finding a new move or plan. When a player makes such a discovery, he will often save this prepared variation for use against a special opponent. Queenside: The half of the board that includes the d-, c-, b-, and a-files. The Queenside pieces are the Queen, the Bishop next to it, the Knight next to the Bishop, and the Rook next to the Knight. See also Kingside. Quiet Move: An unassuming move that is not a capture, a check, or a direct threat. A quiet move often occurs at the end of a maneuver or com- bination that drives the point home. Rank: A horizontal row of eight squares. Designated in algebraic notation as the 1 (1st) rank, the 2 (2nd) rank, and so on. Rating: A number that measures a player's relative strength. The higher the number, the stronger the player. Resign: When a player realizes that he is going to lose and graciously gives up the game without waiting for a checkmate. When resigning, a player can simply say, "I resign," or he can tip over his King in a gesture of helplessness. When you first start playing chess, I recommend that you never resign. Always play until the end. Sacrifice: The voluntary offer of material for compensation in space, time, pawn structure, or even force. (A sacrifice can lead to a force advantage in a particular part of the board.) Unlike a combination, a sacrifice is not always a calculable commodity and often entails an element of uncertainty. Sharp: An aggressive move or position. In relation to a player, denotes someone who enjoys dynamic, attacking chess. Skewer: A threat against a valuable piece that forces that piece to move, allowing the capture of a less valuable piece behind it. Glossary Smothered Checkmate: When a King is completely surrounded by its own pieces (or is at the edge of the board) and it receives an unanswer- able check from the enemy. Space: The territory controlled by each player. Speculative: Made without calculating the consequences to the extent normally required. Sometimes full calculation is not possible, so a player must rely on intuition, from which a speculative plan might arise. Strategy: The reasoning behind a move, plan, or idea. Tactics: Maneuvers that take advantage of short-term opportunities. A position with many traps and combinations is considered to be tactical in nature. Tempo: One move, as a unit of time; the plural is tempi. If a piece can reach a useful square in one move but takes two moves to get there, it has lost a tempo. For example, after l.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.Qxd4 Nc6, Black gains a tempo and White loses one because the White Queen is attacked and White must move his Queen a second time to get it to safety. Theory: Well-known opening, middle game, and endgame positions that are documented in books. Transposition: Reaching an identical opening position by a different order of moves. For example, the French Defense is usually reached by l.e4 e6

2.d4 d5, but l.d4 e6 2.e4 d5 transposes into the same position.

Trap: A way of surreptitiously luring the opponent into making a mistake. Two Bishops: See Bishop Pair. Unclear: An assessment of a position. Some positions are good for White, others are good for Black, and still others are equal. Unclear means that the analyst is unable or unwilling to state which applies.

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

Variation: One line of analysis in any phase of the game. It could be a line of play other than the ones used in the game. The term variation is fre- quently applied to one line of an opening; for example, the Wilkes-Barre Variation (named after the city in Pennsylvania) of the Two Knights' Defense. Variations can become as well-analyzed as their parent openings. Entire books have been written on some well-known variations. Weakness: Any pawn or square that is readily attackable and therefore hard to defend. Index

active 239, 247 Advance Variation Caro-Kann Defense 120- French Defense 114-15 Alapin Variation 81 Alekhine, Alexander 28, 102 Alekhine Defense 101-3, 104, 223 Alekhine Variation 81 algebraic notation 239 analysis 239 Anand, Viswanathan 130 anticipating opponents' moves 18, 187 Anti-Marshall Variation 65- Anti-Merano Game 82 attacks defined xi, 240 double 24, 85, 242 on wing, countering 233 Austrian Attack 224, 225-29 Averbach Variation 217-19,

Barcza, Gedeon 201 Barcza Opening Closed French Defense 209-10 compared with King's Indian Defense 213 Hedgehog Defense 210- initiating 201-2 Barcza Opening, continued King's Indian Reversed Defense 205-9 London Defense 202-5 Benko Gambit 159-61, 214 Benoni Defense 162-65, 167, 181,227 Berlin Defense 51, 52-53 bind 61, 240 Bird Defense 51, 53-54 Bishop pair 240. See also Bishops, advantage of two Bishops advantage of two 52, 62, 85, 158, 170 and closed positions 241 controlling the center 87 developing 76, 84, 137 fianchettoing (see fianchetto) opposite-colored 246 role in openings 25 Bishop's Opening 35 Blackmar-Diemer Gambit 76, 84 Blackwood, James 25 blockade 166, 240 blunder 240 Bogo-Indian Defense 181- Bogoljubow, Efim 181 Bogo Variation. See Bogo- Indian Defense Boleslavsky Variation 142 book 199, 240 Bomgesser, Allison 21 Botvinnik, Mikhail 79, 116, 170, 179, 185 Botvinnik Gambit 83 Botvinnik Variation 185-86 Bourdonnais Variation 148- break 240 Bronstein, David 1, 175 Bronstein Variation King's Indian Defense 216 Nimzo-Indian Defense 175 Budapest Gambit 157-59, building a house 200 Byrne, Robert 186 Byrne Variation 135

Cannon Opening 5-7 cannons. See Rooks Capablanca, Jose Raul 67- 68, 169 Caro-Kann Defense Advance Variation 120-23 Classical Variation 116-17 Exchange Variation 117- initiating 115-16 Panov-Botvinnik Attack 119-20, 125 Rubinstein Variation 118- Short Variation 122-23 castling defined 240 history 63 Kingside 134

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

castling, continued Queenside 135 Catalan Variation 87-90, center controlling 26, 27, 35, 67, 69, 87, 101,124,154, 224 defined 27, 241 occupying vs. controlling Center Game 37-38 Center Pawn Opening 35 centralize 241 Chameleon Variation 99 Chatard-Alekhine Attack checkmate defined 241 smothered 158, 249 Chess Assistant 28 ChessBase 28 Chigorin Defense 78, 85- Chigorin Variation 74 Classical Defense to Ruy 51, 54-55 defined 241 King Pawn Defense 15 openings 31 pawn center 29, 47, 67, Classical Variation Caro-Kann Defense 116- French Defense 106, 109-10 Nimzo-Indian Defense 171-74 Sicilian Defense 141-43 Closed Catalan Variation 87, 89, defined 241 Closed, continued diagonals 84 French Defense 209-10 Ruy Lopez Opening 59, 61, 63-65 Sicilian Defense 124 combinations 11, 241 compensation 241 computer programs 28 controlling the center 26, 27, 35, 67, 69, 87, 101, 124, 154, 224 copying the opponent 3 countering attacks on the wing 233 counterplay 241, 247 Cozio Defense 51 cramp 241 Czech Benoni Defense 166

Danish Gambit 37 databases 28 Deep Blue 202 defenses. See also name of defense against Barcza Opening against King Pawn openings 101, 223 against Queen Pawn openings 153, 213 against Queen's Gambit against Ruy Lopez Opening 51 defined xi, 31, 242 goal of 26 Delayed Exchange Variation 62 developing Bishops 84, 137 defined 242 importance in open games 246 in openings 20, 101 Knights 84, 95 pawns 65 Rooks 63-64, 131, 240 with tempo 10 diagonals 84, 167 discovered attack 242 check 24, 242 double attack 24, 85, 242 check 242 doubled pawns 52, 58, 87, 169, 171, 174, 242 Dragon Variation 133-36, 142, 215, 224 draw 242 Dutch Defense 154-56 Dutch Stonewall Defense 89-90, 91 dynamic 242

early influences 28 en prise 3, 243 endgame 243 English Opening 202 equality 243 equilibrium 33, 73, 101 Evans Gambit 45-47 exchange 243 Exchange Variation Caro-Kann Defense 117- French Defense 105-6 Grunfeld Defense 189-92 Queen's Gambit Declined 94, 98-99, 100 Index Exchange Variation, continued Ruy Lopez Opening 56- Slav Defense 80, 193

Falkbeer Counter Gambit Federation Internationale des Echecs (FIDE) 243 fianchetto building a house 200-201 defined 87, 243 history 174 Kingside examples 88, 93, 103, 133, 146, 160, 163, 164, 187, 188, 210 Queenside examples 88, 96, 100, 182,211 FIDE (Federation Internationale des Echecs) 243 files 243, 244, 245 Fischer, Robert James (Bobby) 7, 28, 57, 96, 139, 162, 213 Fischer Attack 129, 142 flank 243 force 243 fork defined 244 examples 14, 18 Four Pawns Attack 103, 213-15 French Defense Advance Variation 114- Chatard-Alekhine Attack Classical Variation 106, 109-10 Closed Variation 209-10 French Defense, continued compared with Caro- Kann 115, 116 Exchange Variation 105- 6 initiating 104-5 Leningrad Variation 113 Rauzer Variation 108 Rubinstein Variation 106-7, 111, 113, 116 Seirawan Variation 106, Steinitz Variation 106, 109, 110, 111 Tarrasch Variation 112 Tarrasch-Seirawan Variation 113-14 Winawer Variation 106, 107-9 Fried Liver Attack 44-45

gambits defined 26, 159, 244 examples 37, 38, 39, 46, 68, 76, 78, 92, 93, 154 for Black 67-68, 159 game databases 28 games, recording 4, 239 Geller, Efim 234 Geller Gambit 82 Geller Quiet System 234- Geller Variation 224 getting out of book 199 Gipslis Variation 146 Giuoco Piano 47-48 Grand Variation 172-73 grandmaster 244 Grau Variation 78, 84-85 Grunfeld Defense Exchange Variation 189- Grunfeld Defense, continued Hungarian Variation 194 initiating 188-89 Levenfish Variation 194 Lundin Variation 194 Prins Variation 194 Russian Variation 193-94 Seirawan Variation 194- Simagin Variation 194 Smyslov Variation 194 Three Knights Variation 192-95 Grunfeld Gambit 196 Gufeld, Eduard 216

Haessler, Carl 21 half-open files 215, 244, 245 hanging pawns 244 heavy pieces. See major pieces Hedgehog Defense 210-11 Huebner, Robert 175 Huebner Variation 175-78 Hungarian Variation 194 hypermodem 174, 244

Indian development 174 influences 28 initiative 244, 247 international chess federation 243 IQP. See isolated Queen pawn isolated pawns 112, 245 isolated Queen pawn 112, 119, 125, 177 Italian Game 42-50, 59

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

mobility 245 modem King Pawn defenses 101 Queen Pawn defenses 153, 156-57 Modem System 231-32 Modem Variation, Benoni Defense 164-65 Moeller Attack 48 Morphy, Paul 56 Morphy's Defense 56 Moscow Variation 128 moving same piece twice Muzio Gambit 39

Najdorf Variation 136-41 Neo-Orthodox Defense 96 Nimzo-Indian Defense Bronstein Variation 175 Classical Variation 171- Grand Variation 172-73 Huebner Variation 175- initiating 167-68 Leningrad Variation 168 Reshevsky Variation 180 Rubinstein Variation 174-81 Samisch Variation 169- 71, 174 similar lines 181 Spielmann Variation 171 Nimzovich Defense 36 Nimzovitch, Aaron 114, Nimzovitch Variation 164 Nimzovitch-Indian Defense. See Nimzo- Indian Defense Noble, Danny 21

Kalashnikov Variation 150-51 Karpov, Anatoly 116, 191 Kasparov, Garry 41, 83, 94, 128, 130, 187, 191, 194, 202, 213, 217, 235 Keres Attack 130-32, 142 KIA. See King's Indian Attack KID. See King's Indian Defense King castling 63-64 protecting 69, 101, 200, vulnerability in opening 26, 200 King Pawn openings 31, 34, 101, 223 King's Gambit 38 Kingside 245 King's Indian Attack 202, 203,211 King's Indian Defense Averbach Variation 217- 19, 224 Bronstein Variation 216 Four Pawns Attack 213- initiating 213 main line 219-21 Samisch Variation 215- 17, 223 King's Indian Reversed Defense 205-9 Knights and closed positions 241 developing 84, 95 role in openings 25 sacrificing 39, 66 Kortchnoi, Victor 14, 176 Kramnik, Vladimir 202

Lasker, Emanuel 52, 67, 95 Lasker Defense 95-96 Lasker-Pelikan Variation Legall's Mate 28, 30 Leningrad Variation French Defense 113 Nimzo-Indian Defense Levenfish Attack 133-34 Levenfish Variation 194 Levitsky Variation 76-77, London Defense 202-5 Lopez, Ruy 41 luft 234, 245 Lundin Variation 194

major pieces defined 245 role in openings 25 Maroczy Variation 129-30 Marshall, Frank James 67, Marshall Gambit Ruy Lopez Opening 67- Tarrasch Defense 93 Mason Variation 76-77, 84 master 245 material advantage 245 mating attack 245 Max Lange Attack 28, 48- Merano Variation 80 middle game 245 Mikenas Variation 102 minor pieces defined 245 role in openings 25 Index principles, continued goal of openings and defenses 26 moving same piece twice playing strong opponents purpose of opening 26 purpose of opening moves 69 recording moves 4 roles of pawns, minor pieces, and major pieces in openings 25 Prins Variation 194 programs, computer 28 prophylaxis 187 protecting the King 69, 101, 200, 224 notation 239 Nottingham Variation 134- Nunn, John 121, 219 o Open Catalan Variation 87-89 diagonals 84 files 22, 23, 64, 245, 246 position 170 Ruy Lopez Opening 59, 60-61 Sicilian Defense 124, 127 opening moves, purpose of openings. See also name of opening classical King Pawn 34 classical Queen Pawn 73 classical, introducing 31 defined xi, 31, 246 goal of 26, 100, 246 King Pawn vs. Queen Pawn 31 principles. See principles purpose 26 roles of pawns, minor pieces, and major pieces 25 theory 199 opposite-colored Bishops overextension 246

Panov-Botvinnik Attack 119-20, 125 Parsons, Jeffery 25 passive 247 patzer 13 Paulsen Variation 144-46 pawn break 240 center 29, 47, 67, 247 chain 76, 90, 247 islands 247 structure 206, 247 Pawn Storm Variation 162- 63, 181 pawns developing 65 doubled 52, 58, 87, 169, 171, 174, 242 hanging 244 isolated 112, 177, 245 role in openings 25 perpetual check 247 Petroff Defense 29, 40 Petrosian, Tigran 186 Petrosian Variation 186-87 Philidor Defense 29 pins defined 247 examples 19, 42, 57, 94, 97, 107, 167, 168, 185 Pin Variation 144, 147-48 Pirc Defense 223, 229-31, 232-36 plan 247 poisoned pawn 247 Poisoned Pawn Variation Polish Defense 153-54 Polugaevsky, Lev 140 Polugaevsky Variation 140 positional 247 premature 247 prepared variations 248 principles believing ideas 6 countering attacks on the wing 233 developing Knights before Bishops 84 QGA (Queen's Gambit Accepted) 78-79 QGD. See Queen's Gambit, Declined Queen early development 8, 12, 20, 58, 78, 92 role in openings 25 sacrificing 30 Queen Pawn openings 31, 73, 153, 156-57 Queen Raid 7-20, 24 Queen's Gambit Accepted 78-79 Chigorin Defense 78, 85- Declined 78, 83, 87, 91, 94, 97-100, 187 Dutch Stonewall Defense Exchange Variation 94, 98-99, 100

WINNING CHESS OPENINGS

Queen's Gambit, continued Grau Variation 78, 84-85 initiating 78 Semi-Slav Defense 82-83 Slav Defense 78, 79-82 Tarrasch Defense 119 Queenside 248 Queen's Indian Defense 185-88 quiet moves 248 Russian Defense 40 Russian Variation 193-94 Ruy Lopez Opening Anti-Marshall Variation 65-66 Berlin Defense 51, 52-53 Bird Defense 51, 53-54 Classical Defense 51, 54- Closed Variation 59, 61, 63-65 Cozio Defense 51 defenses against 51 Delayed Exchange Variation 62 developing Bishop 84 Exchange Variation 56- main line 41, 56, 58-59, 61, 63-65, 67, 68-71 Marshall Gambit 67-68 Morphy's Defense 56 Open Variation 59, 60-61 Schliemann Defense 51, 55-56 Steinitz Defense 51 Schlechter Variation 93, Schliemann Defense 51, 55-56 Scholar's Mate 16, 26 Scotch Game 41-42 Seirawan Variation French Defense 106, 111 Grunfeld Defense 194-95 Semi-Slav Defense 81, 82- sharp 248 Short, Nigel 122 Short Variation 122-23 Sicilian Defense

2...e6 variations 143-48

Boleslavsky Variation Bourdonnais Variation 148-49 Byrne Variation 135 Classical Variation 141- Dragon Variation 133-36, Fischer Attack 129, 142 Gipslis Variation 146 initiating 123-24 Kalashnikov Variation 150-51 Keres Attack 130-32, 142 Lasker-Pelikan Variation Levenfish Attack 133-34 Maroczy Variation 129- Moscow Variation 128 Najdorf Variation 136-41 Nottingham Variation 134-35 Open 127 Open vs. Closed 124 Paulsen Variation 144-46 ranks 248 rating 248 Rauzer Variation 108 recommended openings and defenses 201, 211, 213, 237 recording moves 4, 239 Reshevsky, Samuel 180 Reshevsky Variation 180 resigning 248 Reti Variation 145-46 reversed xi Richter Attack 74-76 Richter-Rauzer Attack 143 Rooks Cannon Opening 5-7 castling 63-64 developing 63-64, 131, and open files 22, 23, 64 role in openings 25 Rubinstein, Akiba 158, 174, Rubinstein Variation Budapest Gambit 158 Caro-Kann Defense 118- French Defense 106-7, 111, 113, 116 Nimzo-Indian Defense 174-81 sacrificing material 11, 26, 30, 66, 248 Samisch Variation King's Indian Defense 215-17, 223 Nimzo-Indian Defense 169-71, 174 saving games 4 Scandinavian Defense 13, 103-4, 115 Schara-Hennig Gambit 92- Scheveningen Variation 127-32, 142 Index Sicilian Defense, continued Pin Variation 144, 147-48 Poisoned Pawn Variation Polugaevsky Variation Reti Variation 145-46 Richter-Rauzer Attack Scheveningen Variation 127-32, 142 similar lines 233 Smith-Morra Gambit 124-26 Sveshnikov Variation 150 Szen Variation 144, 146- Taimanov Variation 144- Tai Variation 132 Yugoslav Attack 135-36, 142, 215, 224 Simagin Variation 194 skewer 248 Slav Defense 78, 79-82, 193 Smith-Morra Gambit 124- smothered checkmate 158, Smyslov, Vasily 79 Smyslov Variation 194 space 249 Spanish Game. See Ruy Lopez Opening Spassky, Boris 7, 28, 96, 122, 153, 162, 168 speculative 249 Spielmann Variation 171 Staunton Gambit 154-55 Stefurak, Leo 158 Steinitz, Wilhelm 33, 73, Steinitz Defense 51 Steinitz Variation 106, 109, 110, 111 strategy 249 studying games 28 Sveshnikov Variation 150 sweet center 27, 33. See also center Szen Variation 144, 146-47

tactics 249 Taimanov, Mark 145 Taimanov Variation 144-45 Tai, Mikhail 132, 162 Tai Variation 132 Tarrasch, Siegbert 91 Tarrasch Defense 91-92, 93-94, 119 Tarrasch Gambit 93 Tarrasch-Seirawan Variation 113-14 Tarrasch Variation 112 Tartakover, Makogonov, Bondarevsky Variation Tartakover Variation 95 tempo 10, 249 theory of openings 199, 249 Three Knights Variation 192-95 Three Pawns Attack 224, 225-29 Timman, Jan 121 TMB Variation 96 transposition 249 Traxler Gambit 44 twice, moving same piece Two Knights Defense 43- u Ulvestad Variation 44 unclear 249

variations, defined xi, 250 Vienna Game 35

weakness 250 Winawer Variation 106, 107-9 wing attacks, countering World Champions Alekhine, Alexander 28, Botvinnik, Mikhail 79, 116, 170, 179, 185 Capablanca, Jose Raul 67-68, 169 Fischer, Robert James (Bobby) 7, 28, 57, 96, 139, 162, 213 Karpov, Anatoly 116, 191 Kasparov, Garry 41, 83, 94, 128, 130, 187, 191, 194, 202,213,217, 235 Lasker, Emanuel 52, 67, Petrosian, Tigran 186 Smyslov, Vasily 79 Spassky, Boris 7, 28, 96, 122, 153, 162, 168 Steinitz, Wilhelm 33, 73, Tai, Mikhail 132, 162

Yugoslav Attack 135-36, 142, 215, 224

<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 1 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007)
FILENAME: 3. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 1 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 3
SHA256: a31a9ec93c5cc9c802d857926a105ae25b19a0b5b66fba43f95fadc9cff34875
BYTES: 820059
1. Bishops like open diagonals and should

usually be developed accordingly. You may also use your bishop to pin an enemy piece, or to unpin your own. Exchanging your bishop for a knight is reasonable, but do so only to gain some advantage (or if forced to), otherwise you will be surrendering the advantage of the bishop-pair for no return. Although there are many exceptions to this in various openings, try not to let your bishops become trapped behind their own pawns with out good reason. Having said that, limiting a bishop's activity may be necessary to ensure that your knights, rooks and remaining bishop secure good positions.

2. Knights also need as much freedom of

movement as possible, but only to the extent that they don't unduly interfere with the ac tivity of other pieces. For that reason, you may see knights developed on the second rank or on the side of the board with their first move, in stead of to one of the 'ideal' squares f3, c3, f6 or c6. Knights are particularly fond of outposts, which arise in many openings. An outpost is a place in the opponent's pawn-structure where your piece cannot be attacked by a pawn. To have significance, an outpost should be on at least your 4th rank, and preferably on the 5th or 6th rank. From an outpost on a central file, a knight can exert considerable influence on sev eral squares in the enemy position while main taining defensive coverage. Here's an example of an outpost that's occupied by a knight (see upper diagram on following page): The defining feature of the outpost is that the knight can't be captured by a pawn. Its influ ence would be further strengthened by a rook or queen on the d-file, or by another knight on c3 or e3.

THE NATURE OF CHESS OPENINGS: FUNDAMENTALS 21

In the lower diagram Black's knight is on an outpost that is unsupported by his own pawns yet not subject to attack by the opponent's pawns. Notice that Black could also occupy this outpost with a dark-squared bishop, rook, or queen. Support for the eS-knight could come from rooks on the open file, another knight, a bishop on f6 or d6, and various placements of Black's queen. This is a real-world example: Black has an outpost on d5. Some students will say that White's knight has an outpost on e5, but notice that if Black's knight moves from f6, he could then attack the knight with a pawn by .. .f6. In stead, the e5-square is sometimes called a 'support-point' because it is supported by his d4-pawn and unlikely to be driven away by a pawn in the near future. Knights are sometimes just as happy to reside on a support-point as they are to occupy an outpost. The outpost and support-point are examples of structural configurations, a subject that we expand upon in Chapter 2 and still more Chap ter 3.

3. Rooks like to have open files, preferably

ones that extend vertically as far as possible into the enemy camp. Early pawn exchanges will sometimes let rooks breathe and have im mediate effect upon the game. In the opening, assuming that you castle in one direction or an other, your rooks may well end up on half-open files (ones blocked by your own pawns). If they can be centralized so as either to defend your e or d-pawns or to assist in their advance, that's also not a bad role. Doubling rooks (placing one behind the other on an open file) used to be uncommon in the opening stage, but since openings extend further and further into what was previously called the middle game, you'll definitely run across that situation. Likewise with the placement a rook on the seventh rank, which isn't generally possible until after the opening, but does occur, usually to assist in an attack. Rook-lifts to the third rank, on the other hand, happen relatively frequently; often they will move horizontally to help with an attack on the opponent's king. Another common rook-lift in the opening is to the second rank, because a rook which moves horizontally along the second rank can defend extremely sensitive squares such as the ones immediately in front of the king. This 'second-rank defence' is essential against some attacks, and such rooks may also be able to swing to the e- and d-files to support the centre.

4. Apart from wide-open games in which

the centre pawns are blown off the board early on, the queen tends to stay at home or

22 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

to lurk behind her pawns and pieces in the early stages of the opening. Increasingly, advanced players are bringing the queen out early but in a judicious manner to control more of the board - a practice that you'll see in this book. There's nothing wrong with exchanging queens in the opening, but there's also no reason to go out of your way to do so, as so many young players do. Activity and Initiative I shall refer time and again to a player's active pieces and to activity in general. This is a con cept that may encompass a coordination of forces, but to a first approximation simply ex presses the mobility and reach of one's pieces. Active pieces control more squares. Such pieces aren't necessarily involved in a direct attack but can serve to harass opposing forces, support a pawn advance, and generally accrue more terri tory. You will see that in opening play the active player tends to get the better game, in part because active pieces tend to force slower ones onto the defensive, resulting in the creation of weaknesses in the enemy camp. The balance that generally exists between attack and de fence in chess will break down if one player is working with direct threats and gaining more control of the board. Gathering momentum like this is called 'having the initiative'. As long as the aggressor is able to force his opponent to keep reacting to threats, he will maintain his initiative. Sometimes the initiative peters out, especially if handled poorly; it can even change hands. In this book, you will run across an as sessment of mine that reads simply 'Black has the initiative'. While it is ambiguous how much advantage that confers on Black, the initiative constitutes an advantage in and of itself. This chapter has covered terminology and general ideas that I hope will serve you well. Re member that most of what is discussed in these first three chapters will be applied and rein forced in the investigation of specific openings that occupies the larger portion of this book.

2 Opening Ideas and Positional

[diagram]

24 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lt:lf3 lllc6 3 .i.c4 .i.c5 4 b4 .i.xb4 5 c3 .i.a5 6 O-O the likes of 6 ... 'i!Vf6!? were largely replaced by safer defences such as Lasker' s 6 ...d6 7 d4 .i.b6. In addition, provocative openings such as the Philidor Countergambit ( 1 e4 e5 2 lllf3 d6 3 d4 f5), and the Schliemann Defence to the Ruy Lopez (1 e4 e5 2 lt:lf3 lllc6 3 .i.b5 f5) were held to be dubious or were at any rate supplanted by more careful strategies. Lastly, responses to 1 e4 which favoured confrontation over equality also failed to gain a foothold until their playa bility was established. Most masters didn't take seriously such moves as 1...lt:lf6, l ...d6 and 1 .. .g6, nor was 1.. .d5 approved of by the lead ing masters. In fact, the latter has only been convincingly revived in the last ten years. As an alternative to l ...e5, the solid Caro Kann ( l...c6) gained popularity after 1 900, pri marily as an equalizing weapon. In the same 'equality-first' vein, French Defence players employed the unambitious move ... dxe4 (e.g., 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 lllc3 dxe4), and the French De fence generally lacked the dynamic character that it later acquired. (To this day, in fact, ... dxe4 systems are chosen by leading grandmasters, often as a way to simplify the play and equal ize). When players did essay upon 1 d4 instead of 1 e4, l ...d5 was the overwhelming response by Black, with the various 'Indian' defences (beginning with I...lt:lf6) held in low esteem. Looking back, we can see that the legitimate desire to establish a pawn presence in the centre greatly influenced the choice of and attitudes towards opening play. The Sicilian Defence ( 1 e4 c5) neglects to move a centre pawn (see the next paragraph), whereas defences to 1 e4 such as 1...lllf6, l ...d6 and 1...g6 all concede the ideal or at least favourable centre to White. So do several of today's dynamic and/or unbalanc ing replies to 1 d4. For instance, the King's In dian Defence allows White to occupy the centre directly in the main lines after 1 d4 lt:lf6 2 c4 g6 3 lllc3 .i.g7 4 e4 d6 (D). Compare the related discussion at the begin ning of Chapter 3. The Sicilian Defence ( 1 e4 c5), which ac counts for nearly 20% ( !) of all top-level grand master games played today, was at first a more ambiguous case, with a curious evolution. Al though one sees only a handful of modern-style treatments in top-level games throughout the latter half of the 1 9th century and into the 20th, the Sicilian Defence grew to be played in a re spectable 5% of such encounters. At first it was White who failed to play aggressively in the centre, typically choosing the Closed Sicilian (2 lllc3) or 2 f4. As players then turned to the Open Sicilian with 2 lllf3 and 3 d4, Black tended to play active, developing moves, until the Scheveningen V aria ti on with its backward central structure ( ... e6 and ... d6) was brought to general attention in the 1920s by prominent players such as Euwe. Soon, various new inter pretations of the Open Sicilian became estab lished as main lines. But the extent to which Black could disrespect the basics of develop ment and space in favour of other factors be came apparent only much later. During the 1 940s and 1 950s new interpretations of the Si cilian Defence ushered in a modern age of dy namism; players and theoreticians developed the fundamental structures and piece-play that are used today by nearly every major player. Dynamic variations of traditional openings also gained popularity; e.g., the Winawer Variation in the French Defence and the Marshall Attack in the Ruy Lopez. The Alekhine Defence and Pirc Defence had accumulated masses of the ory and stalwart grandmaster adherents by the time Fischer used both openings in his 1 972 World Championship match versus Spassky; today these openings are played less than oth ers in high-level chess but certainly retain their legitimacy. After that lengthy digression, no one will be surprised to find that either of Black's ap proaches to the opening is valid, that is, he can play for equality or aspire to achieve a dynamic

OPENING IDEAS AND POSITIONAL FEATURES 25

imbalance. Some players just starting out, how ever, may not have heard about the latter op tion. White's Goals in the Opening White has choices similar to Black's, assuming that he has the same opportunities. White can work patiently to hold on to his inherent ad vantage, usually by suppressing his opponent's counterplay and 'accumulating small advan tages'. Or White can seek dynamic situations in which he tries to take the initiative and keep Black on his heels. Finally, White can plunge into two-sided slugfests and hope to express his theoretical advantage or superior skills in that environment. Once again all of these methods are admissible. But for White there is a differ ent twist. Curiously, it is sometimes easier for Black to launch an effective attack and to define the quality of early play than it is for White to do the same. Black has the advantage of know ing his opponent's moves ahead of time. If he chooses to play a solid game it may be impossi ble for White to attack aggressively. Of course the reverse is also true: White can play 1 d4, 2 'Llf3 and 3 .i.f4 against most openings, or, for example, 1 'Llf3, 2 g3, 3 .i.g2, 4 d3 and 5 O-O against practically anything. But most players aren't interested in giving away the advantage of the first move with such conservative moves and so will choose to play more ambitiously. Paradoxically, this can let Black set the pace in certain openings. Central Types Several very important central formations will be explored in detail in the next chapter. Among them will be centres characterized by: a) isolated pawns; b) majorities and minorities; c) restrained central pawns; and d) pawn-chains. Most other types of centre that have practical significance will be represented somewhere in the main body of the book. It's useful to look at some of those central formations to get a feel for how they can be analysed and assessed. Be aware that the material in this chapter will be gin at an elementary level but quickly move into complex areas that are not essential for the inexperienced player to master.

1. The 'vanishing centre'. As the name im

[diagram]

[diagram]
CLJf3!? 5 cxd4 is the main move. 5 .. .tg4 6 .i.e2 (

D)

6 ... d3! 7 .txd3 .i.xf3 8 gxf3 White's doubled pawns are a serious disad vantage. His bishop-pair on an open board offers some degree of compensation, but probably not enough, since it's easy for Black to develop his pieces. Here's an illustration from a d-pawn open ing:

[diagram]

D)

26 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is a well-known version of the Exchange Variation of the King's Indian Defence where a series of early exchanges has decimated the centre. According to theory, Black stands slightly better. White has weaknesses on d3 and d4 that can be occupied by Black's minor pieces, whereas White can't find good squares other than f6 to exploit in Black's position. If White waits around, Black will occupy the d4- square by ... lbc6-d4, so White should move quickly and play 1 1 j,_g5 j,_xb2 12 j,_xd8! j,_xal 13 j,_xc7 lbc6 14 O-O j,_g7, when Black has only a small positional advantage.

[diagram]
O-O j,_d6 6 d4 exd4 7 'iVxd4 f6 8 l:tel l2Je7 9 e5 fxe5 10 lbxe5 O-O ( D) This position and ones like it have occurred regularly in the Ruy Lopez Exchange Varia tion. The centre pawns have been swept away but static factors are still controlling the play. Black has the weaker pawn-structure but he also has the bishop-pair. White has a mobile majority on the kingside, which can theoreti cally be used to create a passed pawn. But that's far down the road and in the middlegame, espe cially with the vanished centre, one would ex pect that Black's two bishops would be more effective than the bishop and knight. The prob lem is that White controls more space and Black has no centre pawn with which to drive White's pieces away. The position is about equal. The vanished centre shows up in old gambit lines which were popular 1 00 or more years ago. Some of these lines have never been per manently stowed away. A case in point:

[diagram]
O-O l2Jxe4 6 l:tel d5 7 j,_xd5 'iVxd5 8 lbc3 'iVh5 9 l2Jxe4 j,_e6 10 j,_g5 h6 11 j,_f6! 'iVg6 12 l2Jh4 iVh7 13 c3 dxc3 14 bxc3 (D) This is all theory, that is, published knowl edge. The centre has been cleared out and there's no way to make a simple assessment. Only a lot of brainpower, computer analysis and corre spondence chess can solve this sort of thing; in fact, only those things got chess researchers this far! Which brings me to another point: my aim in this book is to have you understand strat egy, including typical methods for both sides to handle attacking positions. It's often possible to indicate recurrent themes and some connec tions among them. However, I shall rarely ana lyse chaotic positions like this one featuring moment-to-moment variations in tactical events. The correct moves are so unpredictable that they really can't be 'explained' except on a case-by-case basis. You may be able to find out

OPENING IDEAS AND POSITIONAL FEATURES 2 7

more about them in books that make specific detailed investigations; better yet, you can try to work them out for yourself ! 2 . We have already seen and discussed cases of the 'ideal centre' (also known as the 'classi cal centre'), in which one side has pawns on e4 and d4 (or e5 and d5). Normally the ideal centre constitutes an advantage, but that's only true if it has some positive effect on the position; for example, tying down the opponent's pieces, ad vancing with tempo, creating a passed pawn, and/or serving as the pivot point from which pieces can launch an attack. Otherwise the op ponent might be able to attack the centre pawns from afar with little risk. In a typical situation Black restrains White's ideal centre but can't break it down. This imbalance arises in certain variations of the Queen's Gambit Accepted, Slav, Grlinfeld, and this main line of the Semi Tarrasch:

[diagram]

3. The formation arising from what is called

the 'surrender of the centre' appears in many different openings. It involves a single white central pawn on e4 or d4 facing a lone black pawn on d6 or e6, respectively. Generally, White has somewhat the better game by virtue of his greater control of space, but Black has a compact structure and an open file aiming at White's 4th-rank pawn, so the advantage can range from tiny to moderately significant. Here's an illustration taken from the 'classi cal' Philidor's Defence:

[diagram]
tt:lc3 .te7 6 .tc4 O-O 7 O-O l:Ie8 8 .tf4 .trs 9 f3

(D)

White has a pleasant advantage because he controls more space and has freer development. A surrender of the centre occurs in the old main line of the Caro-Kann Defence:

[diagram]

28 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the d4-based centre with the move ... c5. White has the easier game, but against accurate play he will retain little if any advantage. This type of 'restraint centre' will be discussed at some length in Chapter 3. Flank versus Centre It's always hard to assess whether a flank pawn advance in the opening is strong or weak. It's often said that a centre has to be safe in order to justify a pawn advance. That is true in many sit uations; e.g.:

1 e4 cS 2 ll'Bf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ll'Bxd4 ll'Bf6 S

[diagram]

1 e4 cS 2 tt:\f3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:lxd4 tt:\f6 S

[diagram]

8 g4 dS!? (D)

9 gS tt:\fd7 10 exdS .i.xgS 11 .i.xgS xgS At this point the position doesn't look that bad for Black, but a simple move illustrates how effective it was to drive Black's knight away from f6. 12 d2! xd2+ 13 @xd2 tt:lb6 14 .l:!.el White stands comfortably better. Black will have serious weaknesses after 14 ... O-O 15 dxe6 fxe6 16 .i.d3. In these examples, the flank de fends the centre. As long as you're aware that each situation has to be assessed on its own merits, you should always consider responding to a flank attack with a central counterattack, and vice-versa. But neither response should be made into a rule. Weaknesses The word 'weakness' refers to problems with pawns and pawn-structures. Some terms relat ing to pawns still need to be defined, which we'll do presently. First, however, I want to make a broader comment. Pawn weaknesses are to be avoided at any stage of the game if you get nothing in return for them, and understand ing pawn-structures (a subject much wider than

OPENING IDEAS AND POSITIONAL FEATURES 29

pawn weaknesses) is more important than any other factor in understanding chess. But that in sight should not be confused with a general phobia towards weaknesses. Generally they are not as important in the opening as they are later in the game. Tarrasch' s dictum 'Before the endgame the gods have placed the middlegame' is part of the explanation, yet it is not the whole story here. As the middlegame progresses and considerable simplification has occurred (or is imminent), a player must be particularly con cerned with current weaknesses, and eventu ally with what an endgame might bring if that pawn-structure persists. Sometimes this calls for radical action. But in the opening stage (partic ularly within the first 10 moves or so) structural weaknesses are generally more of an immedi ate defensive problem than one which must be attended to for the sake of the ending. They can be incorporated into an overall approach to a position that works extremely well; e.g., a terri bly weak pawn may temporarily provide pro tection from the opponent's play and allow you to gain the advantage. That holds true because of the ever-changing nature of most openings and middlegames. Especially players who are beginning to gain experience with chess should not overestimate the drawbacks of weaknesses such as doubled, isolated or backward pawns and thus ignore good opportunities for attack or other positive activity. I find that students gen erally err on the side of caution in this respect, when they could aggressively pursue the initia tive. So yes, try to avoid unnecessary weak nesses and take advantage of those in your opponent' s position, but don't make decisions that are too focused on just this one aspect of the game. Y our pawn-structure may be telling you other important things about how to handle the position as a whole. There follow some definitions and short ex planations of pawn types and properties. In Chapter 3 we investigate and evaluate these in much greater detail.

1. An isolated pawn is one that has no

pawns of its own colour (i.e. friendly pawns) on any adjacent file. In practice, we are especially concerned with such a pawn when it's on an open file. In Chapter 3 you will find a lengthy discussion and many examples of isolated pawns. In some very typical situations, their advantages are famously in balance with their disadvantages, which is why so many players rush to take them on and others to play against them. White has three isolated pawns, on a4, c3 and e3. Black has one isolated pawn on b7. The pawns on a4, c3 and b7 are on open files and thus relatively more exposed than the pawn on e3, which is masked by an opposing pawn on the same file.

2. A backward pawn is one that has at least

one pawn of its own colour on an adjacent file, but that neighbouring pawn is situated one rank or further ahead of its compatriot. In this well-known position from the Sicilian Defence, Black's d6-pawn is a backward pawn. Often the square in front of the backward pawn serves as an outpost for the opponent, as it does

30 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

here (see Chapter 1 for a description of the out post). We care most about backward pawns on open file, as is Black's on d6. Backward pawns are usually weak, but not always so.

3. A doubled pawn is one that resides on

the same file as another of your pawns. As usual, doubled pawns on an open file are weaker than those that are masked by enemy pawns. Doubled pawns can be weak or strong, but most of the time isolated doubled pawns on an open file are a serious disadvantage, both because they are hard to defend and be cause there is a wonderful outpost in front of the pawns, just asking for an opposing piece to occupy it. Here is a well-known situation in which a knight is stationed in front of doubled f-pawns.

4. Pawns that block the path of pieces are

always a problem, and the most famous of such problems involve 'good' and 'bad' bishops. I'll be using those terms throughout the analysis section, so I should attempt a definition. A 'bad' bishop is one whose central pawns are on the same-coloured squares as the bishop; con versely a 'good' bishop lives on the squares that are of the colour opposite to its central pawns. Notice the emphasis on central pawns. By far the most important pawns in determining the 'goodness' or 'badness' of a bishop are the d and e- pawns. Adjacent c- and f-pawns can be factored in if they seem relevant to the bishop's overall mobility, but these pawns must be given considerably less weight. Let's look at this situ ation in the abstract: Assessing Black's bishops is the easiest task. Black's pawns on e6 and d5 are on light squares, so his bishop on d7 is 'bad' and the one on e7 is 'good'. It happens that all of Black's other pawns are on light squares as well, but except for the c- and f-pawns, which are of limited im portance, they aren't factors in the way we as sess whether a bishop is good or bad. White's light-squared bishop may look use less because it is blocked by pawns on f3, h3 and g3, while even those pawns on c2, c3 and a4 might provide obstacles. But it is a 'good' bishop because White's centre pawns are on dark squares. By contrast, the a5-bishop has two nice open diagonals and can even reach the wonderful outpost on e5. Nevertheless, it is a 'bad' bishop because it is on the same colour as the central pawns. The point is that a 'good' bishop can be a poor or even dysfunctional piece whereas a 'bad' bishop may be the best piece on the board. However, those situations are exceptional. In a considerable majority of cases a 'good' bishop really is the one that serves you the best (and that you don't want to exchange!), while a 'bad' bishop tends to be ob structed and passive. This generalization goes back to the extraordinary importance of the centre. Bad bishops can serve as decent defenders but they can be particularly unhelpful when op posed by a good knight (see following dia gram):

13...dS?!

In a fairly conventional Sicilian position, Black plays the standard ... d5 break, thinking to free his pieces. But he may not have considered the full consequences of a general liquidation.

OPENING IDEAS AND POSITIONAL FEATURES 31

V. Gurevich - Zakharov Azav 1995 14 exdS tt::l bxdS lS tt::l xdS tt::l xdS 16 ii.xdS! exdS This is a type of end-position that can result from a number of other openings, such as a French Defence with 3 tt::l d2 c5 or a number of Queen's Gambits in which Black plays ... c5. The simplification that has occurred favours White, who now succeeds in getting rid of Black's good bishop.

17 Ji.f4! Ji.d6

[diagram]

D)

[diagram]

26... a4 27 bxa4 .l:!.xa4 28 .l:!.xa4 ii.xa4 29 tt::l

[diagram]

35...

[diagram]

1 d4 tt::l

[diagram]

32 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a sequence such as 11 tbd3 f5 12 tbxc5 tbxc5, White shouldn't play 13 exf5? !. He might do this for the sake of avoiding Black's dangerous attack that follows from 13 f3 f4. But 13 exf5? ! i..xf5 14 'iVdl runs up against 14 ...e4!, when the g7-bishop has gone from a passive onlooker to a major force. In this and similar positions, the dark-squared bishop serves as a prophylac tic measure versus White's exf5, which might otherwise hamper Black's plans. I should add that in some cases where Black replies to exf5 with ... gxf5, that will also allow him to play a favourable ...e4 and free his bad bishop. What's the lesson? That a bad bishop can discourage moves that would otherwise hurt his cause. It doesn't take a fianchettoed bishop to fill that role, of course. In the Closed Ruy Lopez when White constructs a pawn-structure with e4 and d5 and places his bishop on c2, one might say that White's bad bishop on c2 has a natural prophylactic effect against the move .. .f5, because then exf5 brings the bishop into a kingside attack. If Black has a pawn on c7 (with the same piece placement), then the move ... c6 can be answered by dxc6 and i.. b3, taking over the open a2-g8 diagonal. For these ideas see, for example, the Breyer Defence or Zaitsev Variation in the Ruy Lopez (Chapter 8). Colour Complexes In a great number of openings, one player or both will concentrate his forces either largely or exclusively on squares of one colour or the other. This is particularly logical in Black's case because he doesn't have time to keep up with White on both colour squares. One case in point is the Nimzo-Indian Defence, in which the first three moves all control light squares (1 d4 tbf6 2 c4 e6 3 tbc3 i..b4), and several main lines continue with ... b6, ... i..b7 and ... tbe4 (strictly speaking this last move aims at dark squares, although it 'plays on' light squares and prepares another light-square move, ...f5). In doubled-pawn variations such as 4 a3 i..xc3+ 5 bxc3, we might see Black play ... b6, ... i..a6, ... tbc6-a5 and ... d5, which is truly playing on a colour complex. The following game combines complementary themes of backward pawns, outposts, and playing on a colour complex. Taimanov - Karpov Moscow teams 1973

[diagram]
Karpov departs for a move from the light square strategy but he will soon return to it. 5 i..d3 O-O 6 tbf3 d5 7 O-O dxc4 8 i..xc4 cxd4 9 exd4 Now White has an isolated pawn on d4. .. b6 10 'iVe2 i..b7 1 1 .l:i.dl tbbd7 12 i..d2 .l:i.cS 13 i..a6?! (D) This is the key move to the early part of the opening. A colour complex takes on stronger meaning when a bishop residing on the colour opposite that of the centre pawns (i.e., a good bishop) is exchanged. Thus White risks losing control of the light squares. 13 ... i..xa6 14 'iVxa6 i..xc3 15 bxc3 (D) Now White has assumed a backward pawn on an open file (often the only way a backward pawn is defined), and Black has an outpost on c4, in front of that pawn. Instead, 15 i..xc3? !

OPENING IDEAS AND POSITIONAL FEATURES 33

would put a very bad bishop on c3 whose po tential to be freed by the move d5 is almost non-existent, especially after Black places a knight on the truly powerful outpost on d5. The c3-pawn can be either weak or strong, the latter depending upon two possibilities: a) the c3-pawn does such a good job of sup porting d4 that it allows White the time to orga nize a kingside or central attack; b) the pawn can advance to c4. Taimanov wants to pursue the latter idea, counting upon the superiority of his bishop over Black's d7-knight (which incidentally doesn't have many prospects right now be cause it is restricted by White's d4-pawn). A favourable change of structure might come about, for instance, if White can play c4 fol lowed by .llb4. The problem is that Black strikes first.

15. ..

[diagram]

(D)

Light-square domination! This is a particu larly good illustration of favourable play on a colour complex. The opening stage is over and Karpov has more than enough positional compensation for a pawn. The rest of the game is very accurately played until the last moves before the time control and demonstrates the strength of the blockade and associated outpost:

34 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

23 .l:i.dcl .l:i.c4 24 .l:i.b2 f6 25 .l:i.el @f7 26 'ii dl lbf8 27 .l:i.b3 lbg6 28 'iibl .l:i.a8 29 .l:i.e4 .l:i.ca4 30 .l:i.b2 lbf8 31 'ii d3 .l:i.c4 32 .l:i.el .l:i.a3 33 'iibl lbg6 34 .l:i.cl lbxc3 35 'ii d3 lbe2+ 36 'ii xe2 .l:i.xcl+ 37 ..llxcl 'ii xcl+ 38 @h2 (D) 38 ... .l:i.xf3!? Certainly an intimidating move when there's not much time left. Objectively 38 ... lbf4! would have left Black with a large positional advan tage. 39 gxf3 lbh4 0-1 White should play on (perhaps he Jost on time?) with 40 d5 !, although Black still has the advantage after, for example, 40. .. 'iif4+ 41 @h l exd5 42 'ii e3 'iif5. This game is typical in that the structure re sulting from the opening is indicative of whether players will be concentrating upon a certain colour throughout the game. There are quite a few other openings with a lasting orientation towards playing on one col our. Consider the main lines of the Dragon Variation of the Sicilian: Black's central pawns are situated to control dark squares, and his most active pieces control dark squares: the all important g7-bishop, the c6-knight, his queen on a5 or c7 (more often than not), and even the c8-rook has its greedy eye on c3. Black's f6- knight has a tendency to go to d7 and augment control of the dark squares e5 and c5. Only the queen's bishop doesn't participate, but it has in herent difficulties in that respect. White nor mally castles queenside, when Black's most devastating attacks seem to land on the squares c3 and b2. Nevertheless, when I speak of a position in which 'Black dominates the dark squares', there's usually a persistence of structural weak ness that I'm referring to. For instance: Domination of a colour complex doesn't nec essarily mean a winning position but it probably constitutes a serious advantage, often compen sation or more for the exchange, which was sac rificed in this example by capturing a knight on f3. White still has his dark-squared bishop, but he has lost the dark squares anyway. Internal Weaknesses An important situation arises when one or both sides have 'internal weaknesses'. This means that they have unoccupied squares on their third or fourth ranks that cannot be de fended by other pawns. Often these weak nesses are somewhat masked by a pawn-front, but they can also be exposed when a pawn front disappears or breaks down. Generally, I'll refer to internal weaknesses in the centre of the board, i.e. White's squares e4, d4, e3 and d3, or Black's on e5, d5, e6 and d6. Weak nesses on the flank squares are normally of less note, but those created by a pawn advance in front of one's king are a huge exception; for instance, an attack by f4-f5, g4-g5 and h4 can create critical weaknesses on f4, g4, h4, f3, g3 and h3. Players tend to be very careful about exposing their kings in such a fashion. In my experience, less advanced players fail to rec ognize this type of weakness, especially if the squares in question are not immediately at tacked or occupied.

OPENING IDEAS AND POSITIONAL FEATURES 35

A typical example of a complex of internal weaknesses arises with an advanced centre. In the last chapter we saw a King's Indian Four Pawns Attack in which the front of the centre collapsed and the internal weaknesses were ex posed. It's worth taking the time to look back at that example, especially the final diagram. The weaknesses remain regardless of whether the pawns that mask them disappear. The following game is a classic between two of the greatest players of all time: Karpov - Kasparov Moscow Wch ( 16) 1985

1 e4 c5 2 tt::l

f3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 tt::l c6 5 tt::l b5 d6 6 c4 tt::l f6 7 tt::l lc3 a6 8 tt::l a3 d5!? A shocking gambit prepared by Kasparov for this match. 9 cxd5 exd5 10 exd5 tt::l b4 11 .lle2 .llc5?! 12 o-o? o-o 13 .tr3 .tr5 (

D;

[diagram]

3 The Significance of Structure

[diagram]

[diagram]

3 d5 b5 4 cxb5 a6 you'll find quite a few early

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 3 7

Alekhine Defence) or 1 d4 lLif6 2 c4 g6 3 l2Jc3 (or 3 lLif3 .i.g7 4 g3) 3 ... .i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 lLif3 (

D)

(versus the King's Indian Defence). There are also 1 d4 lLif6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 e6 4 l2Jc3 exd5 5 cxd5 d6 6 e4 g6 7 lLif3 (versus the Benoni) and 1 e4 d6 2 d4 l2Jf6 3 lLic3 g6 4 lLif3 (D) (versus the Pirc Defence). Today we see the more modest 1 d4 l2Jf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 b5 4 cxb5 (4 lLif3) 4. .. a6 5 bxa6 and l2Jf3 followed by l2Jc3 and g3 (versus the Benko Gambit); 1 c4 b6 2 d4 e6 3 l2Jc3 .i.b7 4 a3 or 4 lLif3 (versus the English Defence); 1 d4 l2Jf6 2 c4 l2Jc6 3 lLif3 e6 4 l2Jc3 (versus the Knights' Tango); and 1 d4 lLif6 2 c4 e6 3 l2Jc3 .i.b4 4 'iVc2 (versus the Nimzo-Indian Defence). Of course these are just a few examples, and many other main-line pawn-structures support fast piece development. In these variations the pieces and pawns seem to be in mutual support and one might easily conclude that this is the ideal situation. But the distinction between a philosophy of 'pawns-before-pieces' and one assigning equal priority to both has become increasingly more subtle and context-dependent as time has gone by. I already mentioned in Chapter 2 that when the Open variations of the Sicilian were estab lishing themselves in the first part of the 20th century, there was a tendency on Black's part to get his pieces out reasonably quickly. For in stance, you would see 1 e4 c5 2 lLif3 lLic6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lLixd4 lLif6 5 l2Jc3 e6 and ... .i.b4 and/or the freeing move ... d5 with rapid development. Systems such as the Dragon Variation became relatively popular; for example, 1 e4 c5 2 lLif3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 l2Jxd4 l2Jf6 5 l2Jc3 g6 6 .ll e2 .i.g7

7 O-O O-O 8 .i.e3 lLic6 (D).

In that case four of Black's pieces are devel oped within the first eight moves. We then often see Black make several more piece moves before touching another pawn (e.g., ... l2Jxd4, ... .\le6, .. .l:Ic8); this policy is clearly indicated by the ini tial pawn-structure. In contemporary play, how ever, we regularly see variations of the Sicilian Defence in which the establishment of pawn structure swamps rapid development, not least of which is the most popular Sicilian system of them all, the Najdorf Variation: 1 e4 c5 2 lLif3 d6

3 d4 cxd4 4 lLixd4 lLif6 5 l2Jc3 a6 to be followed

by more pawn moves such as ... e6 and ... b5. Even in the list of 'balanced' variations that I gave two paragraphs back, things will shift dra matically in one direction or another while still in the opening stage. In the King's Indian exam ple, everything follows the harmonious model in the main line 1 d4 l2Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 l2Jc3 .\lg7 4 e4 d6 5 lLif3 O-O 6 .ll e2 e5 7 O-O lLic6 8 d5 lLie 7 (D).

38 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 39

available for action. Nevertheless, the majority of attacks will be informed by describable cate gories of positions. Thus the precedence of pawn-structure, and the motivation for this chapter. It is generally agreed now that pattern recognition and the ability to process patterns in context is the foremost determinant in chess strength (put ting aside competitive factors). The number of patterns one can recognize and associate with other structures correlates to how well one un derstands and plays the game. Grandmasters store and process many more pawn-structures with accompanying piece placements than the average player does, if only because of their repeated exposure to them in preparation and over the board. With study alone it's possible for one to master a great number of standard opening positions in the same way, and to un derstand their interaction with the subsequent play. Appreciation of why a strategy works in one position but not in a similar position is an indispensable part of chess mastery. Further more, if you recognize ideas and manoeuvres from other openings that apply to the one that you are playing, it will help you to focus on the issues and inspire you to make better deci sions. How might we improve our knowledge of pawn-structures? Obviously it's not possible to list them all and memorize their unique fea tures. But there are formations and related is sues that repeat themselves from opening to opening, very often constituting the basis for the fundamental strategy of each. In this chap ter I'll examine some pawn-structures and the issues associated with them, choosing selected areas most likely to impact one's understand ing of the game, or at least to grasp the com mon elements of the opening. These are not strange or irregular formations; one idea is to show how one might use the same approach to study other, more complex, structures. Hope fully their usefulness will extend to players of a wide range of skills. This is not a middle game book, however, and my main goal has been to make the discussion in the forthcom ing openings section more readily comprehen sible. When presenting individual variations and games, I'll often assume your familiarity with this chapter. Isolated Pawns We saw some broad characterizations of posi tional features in the last chapter. Now I want to look at the structural elements across the board that bear upon the opening stage. We'll begin with the fairly straightforward case of the iso lated pawn, also called the 'isolani', which we defined in the Chapter 2. Textbooks almost al ways concentrate upon the isolated d-pawn, also called the 'isolated queen's pawn' (abbre viated as 'IQP'). Most authors do so to the ex clusion of isolated pawns anywhere else on the board, writing chapters and even whole books on this specific case. Granted, it's very impor tant to give the IQP its due because it can arise from so many openings, and so early in the game. Why is that? To generate an IQP in the opening, it's generally necessary to have the moves d4 and ... d5 appear early on, and it's ex tremely likely that one or both of the moves c4 or ... c5 were also played in the first stage of the opening. To show this, let's take a list of several openings that lead to the same, well-known type of isolated queen's pawn position, and sometimes to the very same position: Queen's Gambit Accepted: 1 d4 d5 2 c4 dxc4 3 CLJf3 CLJf6 4 e3 e6 5 .llxc4 c5 6 O-O cxd4 7 exd4 .ll e7 8 CLJc3 O-O 9 .l:!.el . Nimzo-Indian: 1 d 4 CLJf6 2 c4 e6 3 CLJc3 .llb4

4 e3 c5 5 CLJf3 O-O 6 .Bd3 cxd4 7 exd4 d5 8 O-O

dxc4 9 .llxc4 CLJc6 10 .llg5 .ll e7 11 .l:!.el . Alapin Sicilian: 1 e4 c5 2 c3 d5 3 exd5 'iVxd5

[diagram]
cxd4 .ll e7 9 CLJc3 iVd8 10 .l:!.el O-O. Caro-Kann: 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 exd5 cxd5 4 c4 CLJf6 5 CLJc3 e6 6 CLJf3 .ll e7 (6 ... .llb4 7 cxd5 CLJxd5 8 .Bd2 .ll e7 9 .\ld3 CLJc6 10 O-O O-O 1 1 .l:!.el CLJf6 12 .llg5 would be a typical transposi tion; White can also play 8 'iVc2 followed by 9 .Bd3) 7 cxd5 CLJxd5 8 .\ld3 (or 8 .llc4 O-O 9 O-O CLJc6 10 .l:!.el CLJf6) 8 ...

O-O 9 O-O.

Semi-Tarrasch: 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 CLJc3 CLJf6 4 CLJf3 .ll e7 5 cxd5 CLJxd5 6 e3 O-O 7 .\ld3 c5 8 O-O cxd4 9 exd4 CLJc6 10 .l:!.el . This is the basic picture (see diagram over leaf): The most significant difference among these openings is the position of White's light-squared bishop (it's on c4 or d3). Sometimes the queen is already placed upon c2 or e2, and the king's

40 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

rook is usually but not always moved to e l . The basic position and its variants have been played thousands of times and investigated in depth. In fact, more words have been written about the IQP than about any other specific positional feature in chess. Neither side can be said to stand inherently better, which is why both sides are willing to enter into these positions. With out going into detail, here are the basic struc tural properties and strategies that should be stressed. For ease of discussion, let's assume that White is the possessor of the IQP before we attend to specific examples. Disadvantages of the isolated d-pawn:

1. The IQP is a relatively easier target than

most pawns because it can only be protected by pieces, several of which may be required for the task (as opposed to needing only a sin gle pawn). Also, the d-pawn is almost always on an open file potentially facing Black's rooks and/or queen.

2. Defence of the isolated d-pawn can tie

down White's pieces which might be used more effectively elsewhere.

3. Black gains an influential outpost in front

of the isolani, which means that it is very diffi cult to drive his pieces off that spot.

4. The IQP tends to be a more serious weak

ness in simplified positions, the more so in an endgame. Notice that the mutual possession of the open c-file increases the chances of simpli fication. Nevertheless, Black must be skilful to make the right kind of simplification that doesn't come with other disadvantages. Often a new equilibrium will result from exchanges. Advantages of the isolated d-pawn:

1. White will be able to develop more easily

and aggressively, having more space and open lines for his bishops.

2. The IQP creates a support-point for a

knight (or other piece) on e5.

3. The threat of the d-pawn's advance ties

Black's pieces to the defence of d5.

4. Black, with less space, will have difficulty

developing actively without making some con cession such as creating a weakness or ceding the bishop-pair.

5. White has good kingside attacking chances

based upon the support-point on e5, the e-file, and his bishops aimed in that direction. In terms of strategy, White will have several ways of proceeding. He will usually complete his development by putting his queen on e2 or d3 (less frequently c2 or b3) and queen's rook on d l . Then one of the first goals is to provoke a weakness on the kingside. To do this, he can play lbe5 and swing a rook to the kingside via e3. Or he can line up his bishop and queen to create a threat on h7. Black will generally de fend by keeping a knight on f6 and playing ...g6 if necessary. With that set-up White can attack the dark squares by i..h6, work to soften up the kingside by h4-h5 and/or play for d5, often by bringing his bishop back to the a2-g8 diagonal. The safe advance of the d-pawn to d5 beto kens success in most cases because it opens lines or broadens potential uses for almost all of his pieces (notably, the rooks on d l and e l , bishop on a2 and knight on c3) and breaks down the defender at e6; it also liquidates the isolani itself. After d5 White usually has the far superior pieces, and he often has tactical re sources that win material. The d5 break is prob ably the most frequently successful plan. There are also set-ups with the moves l:.el -e3-g3; or, more commonly, lbe5, ..llc4 and J:.el , intending tactics such as lbxf7, particularly if Black's rook is on e8. These ideas and others only work because White's superiority in space permits him to transfer his pieces rapidly, make threats, and take Black out of his game plan. The more pieces with which to attack, the better. Black's strategy is not excessively compli cated, although implementing it may be. His

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 41

first goal is to maintain the blockade on d5, usu ally with a knight. Simply leaving a knight there is often not enough, however, because White may be able to capture the piece at a point where ... exd5 is forced, eliminating the threat to d4 and sometimes transforming the pawn structure in White' s favour. Thus, whether oc cupied or not, d5 itself needs to be reinforced. Often Black's knights will go to f6 and d5 (via ... tt::l b4-d5) or to d5 and e7. His c8-bishop will be developed to b7, either by ... b6 or by ... a6 and ... b5. A rook on d8 can also act to support a piece on d5 or restrain White' s pawn advance to d5. One of Black's goals is simplification: the more pieces that are exchanged the less likely it is that White can break through. More over, the closer that Black can get to an endgame the better his prospects usually are. Exchanging White's minor pieces is a high priority, because they can have considerable range from squares around the isolated pawn. Knights in particu lar are dangerous when posted on e4, e5 and c5; and even seemingly 'defensive' knights on c3 and f3 can quickly come into action. Ex changing White' s light-squared bishop is a real coup for Black; whether on c4, d3, a2 or c2, it is the piece most likely to be involved in a direct attack. By contrast, a rook on d l defending the isolani is much less likely to do any damage. For all that, simplification can be double edged because sometimes it clarifies White's attacking themes, especially if he has support points along open files in conjunction with pawn advances. A wonderful illustration of this is seen in Chapter 5 on the Giuoco Piano (in the main line with 1 0. .. tt::l ce7). All that is rather abstract, so here are some examples of strategy by both sides. There are literally thousands of isolated-pawn positions in games between masters, many of which can be found in books on the opening or middle game. As indicated, these positions will be taken from openings in which an IQP situation is nor mally created (for instance, in the same open ings listed above). What you will eventually find is that isolated pawns are formed in a wide range of positions, many of them appearing af ter the opening stage because of an exchange on d4 or d5. Here is a brief lesson about the main danger posed by the d-pawn: its advance. Spassky - Avtonomov Leningrad 1949

1 d4 d5 2 c4 dxc4 3 tt::l

f3 tt::l f6 4 e3 c5 5 .ltxc4 e6

6 O-O a6 7 'l'Be2 b5 8 .ltb3 tt::l

[diagram]

[diagram]

42 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This next game is not as easy to understand, but expresses the same theme. Yusupov - Lobron Nussloch 1996

1 d4 tll

[diagram]

[diagram]
Unmasking the rook against White's d-pawn. 18 i.b3 a6? 19 d5! (D) There's the thematic break.

19. . tlla5

[diagram]

1 c4 e6 2 tll

c3 d5 3 d4 i.e7 4 tllf3 tllf6 5 i.g5 h6 6 i.h4 O-O 7 .l:.cl dxc4 8 e3 c5 9 i.xc4 cxd4 10 exd4 The isolated queen's pawn arises.

10. ..

tllc6 11 O-O ctJh5! (D) Black's goal is simplification, to draw the sting out of White's attacking chances. The knight went to h5 so that the bishop couldn't es cape capture by going to g3. It also looks at f4. 12 i.xe7 tll xe7 The knight covers the key square d5. 13 i.b3

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 43

[diagram]
J..

[diagram]

13. ..

[diagram]

1 d4 dS 2 c4 dxc4 3 lll

f3 e6 4 e3 lllf6 S .ltxc4 cS

6 O-O a6 7 J..

[diagram]

44 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black plans ... "!J.c7 or if possible . . . "!J.d7, to stop d5. 14 "!J.adl i.b7 Since 14 ... "!J.d7 allows llle5, Anand wants to play . . . i.xf3 and then ... "!J.d7 with at least equal ity. 15 d5! (D) Again, this sacrifice is intended to cut off Black's pieces and free White's own.

15. . i.xd5!

[diagram]

[diagram]
i.xe7 tllxe7 25 i.xe4 dxe4 26 "!J.xe4 'it>xg7 27 "!J.d6! JJ.c5 28 "!J.g4+ @h7 29 ctJf3! tllg6 30 tllg5+ 'it>g7 31 tllxf7 "!J.xf7 32 "!J.dxg6+ '.t>h7 33 "!J.6g5 "!J.xg5 34 l:rxg5 l:rc7 35 a3 b4 36 axb4 l:tcl + 37 'it>g2 "!J.bl 38 l:ra5 "!J.xb2 39 "!J.a4! 1-0 Lautier - Karpov Monte Carlo (rapid) 1995

1 d4 tll

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 45

[diagram]

46 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

reverse approach, exchanging rooks (if any thing has to be exchanged) and keeping minor pieces on the board. That's getting into the realm of middlegame theory, however. At any rate, activity is at a premium: rooks on open files, bishops attacking weak points, etc. And of course if you can safely get ...d4 in, your odds of a happy conclusion increase. Isolated e-Pawns The IQP isn't the only isolated pawn of interest in chess openings. First, we might ask why we don't see more isolated e-pawns in the opening. That's fairly easy: at some point an f-pawn would have to advance and that's not part of most openings, especially since there would have to be another central capture at some point. However, in the Sicilian Defence we do see a situation that is rare in other openings, i.e. the pawn-structure often leads to isolated e- and d pawns on adjacent files. There are a great num ber of lines like 1 e4 c5 2 tllf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ctJxd4 ctJf6 5 tllc3 a6 6 i.e2 e5 7 ctJb3 i.e7 8 O-O O-O 9 @h1 ctJbd7 1 0 i.e3 "V/i/c7 1 1 f4 exf4 1 2 i.xf4 (D) involving the routine moves . . .e5, f4 and ...exf4.

Sometimes Black has his pawn on e6 and the advance f4-f5 can lead to the same struc ture, that is, if White responds to . . .exf5 by capturing with a piece (usually a knight, i.e. tllxf5), or Black does the same after White's fxe6 (for instance, by ... i.xe6). The character istics of those positions are fairly consistent and will be discussed in Chapter 1 I on the Si cilian Defence. Isolated c-Pawns Isolated c-pawns are very common and we shall see them frequently throughout this book. They may arise a little later in the game than in the standard isolated d-pawn openings, partly because they can easily stem from them. The Sicilian Defence offers some examples: Sicilian Defence, Alapin Variation: I e4 c5 2 c3 ctJf6 3 e5 ctJd5 4 d4 cxd4 5 cxd4 d6 6 ctJf3 tll c6 7 i.c4 ctJb6 8 i.b5 dxe5 9 tllxe5 i.d7 1 0 i.xc6 i.xc6 1 I tllxc6 bxc6 (D). Sicilian Defence, Rossolimo Variation: 1 e4 c5 2 ctJf3 tllc6 3 i.b5 e6 4 c3 tllge7 5 d4 cxd4 6 cxd4 d5 7 exd5 tllxd5 8 O-O i.e7 9 tlle5 VJifb6 1 0 i.xc6+ bxc6 (D ). Here are some other examples: Queen's Gambit Declined: 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 ctJc3 i.e7 4 ctJf3 ctJf6 5 i.g5 h6 6 i.h4 ctJbd7 7

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 47

[diagram]

48 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

another pawn-chain, i.e. interlocking. The text book example is the French Defence Advance Variation, 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 e5 c5 4 ctJf3 tllc6 5 c3. The line of pawns from b2 to e5 is called a 'chain' , and the directly interlocking pawns are on e6 and d5, but of course Black' s pawn on f7 holds up the ones on e6 and d5. Most books on strategy discuss this French Advance Variation when they want an example of pawn-chains, and also the main lines of the King' s Indian De fence. Those are excellent starting-points. We don't always think in terms of pawn-chains even if they share classical properties, for in stance, in the Slav with 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 ctJf3 ctJf6 4 e3 a6 5 c5, in which White' s pawn-chain is lengthy indeed. But in fact ...e5 is the natural way to attack that chain, and of late we've even seen the arduous b4, a4 and b5 by White to at tack the base of Black's pawn-chain at c6 (this has occurred a bit more often in the line that goes 4 tllc3 a6 5 c5 followed by i.f4, but that' s another matter). Furthermore, much of what relates to those pawn-chains is relevant to a great number of other 'pawn strings' that aren't fully or di rectly opposed by other pawns. In accordance with some other sources, I'll call these pawn chains as well. For example, if you look at the Modem Benoni ( 1 d4 ctJf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 e6 4 tllc3 exd5 5 cxd5 d6 6 e4, especially with 6 . . .g6 7 f3) you see short 'pawn duos' pointing in opposite directions. In several openings only partially overlapping chains emerge but have chain-like properties; for example, things like c3/d4/e5 versus f7 /e6 and e4/d5 versus c7/d6, and so forth. We see a truncated chain in some Ruy Lopez variations, when White plays d5, thus forming an opposition of e4/d5 ver sus c7 /d6/e5). Furthermore, pawn-chains with doubled pawns at their base will emerge from exchanges. Almost all of these can be looked at in the same terms as the traditional French and King's Indian chains; for example, in methods of attacking and defending them. Study of their common and contrasting ele ments will help you to master this part of the game. Let's start with the traditional examples and see what we can discover. We'll start out with the French Defence, probably the only opening in which the majority of its main variations have pawn-chains.

[diagram]
The logic behind this move for White is that it claims space on the kingside and cramps the de velopment of Black's pieces. After 3 e5, Black's king's knight cannot go to its 'best' square on f6, and Black's queen's bishop, which was al ready blocked by its pawn on e6, is further in carcerated by the inability of the e6-pawn to advance. As mentioned, a variation well-suited for a discussion of chains continues: 3 ...c5 4 c3 tllc6 5 tll f3 (D) The last two moves are natural in that 4 ... tll c6 develops and exerts influence upon d4 and e5, whereas 5 tllf3 defends those points. Note first that if White had played 5 dxc5 he would have broken the chain, which would have weakened the front of the pawn-structure at e5. That pawn would then be subject to a greater threat of capture, like an isolated pawn which can't be defended with other pawns. It also could be exchanged more easily due to insufficient re sources for maintaining it. A direct attack could come by the moves ... 'filc7 and ... tll ge7-g6. Or the offer to exchange could be pursued via the pawn move ...f6. This leads to the idea that if Black can break down the d4 point, sometimes called the 'base' of the pawn-chain, he can cripple or destroy the pawn-structure itself. To what end? By getting rid of the pawn on d4 and then winning or ex changing the one on e5, a natural place would appear on f6 for the knight currently doing nothing on g8, and the move ...e5 would be more feasible. With a little luck that advance

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 49

[diagram]

50 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

of attacking the base, Black will end up by at tacking the protected front of the chain. For ex ample, after White successfully protects his base by 8 b3 lllf5 9 i.b2, Black's next step is to attack the front of the pawn-chain by .. .f6. For instance, one line goes 9 ... i.b4+ 1 0 @fl i.e7 1 1 tllc3 O-O 12 g3 f6 ( D) and White will soon surrender the leading pawn by exf6. Or, in the same Advance Variation, the phe nomenon is illustrated in the variation 3 e5 c5 4 c3 tllc6 5 tllf3 i.d7 6 i.e2 tllge7 7 O-O tllg6 with the intention of .. .f6 next or soon thereaf ter; for example, 8 tlla3 i.e7 9 lll c2 (White is still concerned with protecting the base at d4) 9 ... O-O 1 0 .l:.el cxd4 1 1 cxd4 f6 (D). Now the front of the pawn-chain disappears because of the three-way attack: 1 1 exf6 i.xf6. This time Black ignored the base and came out fine. Other French pawn-chain variations are clearer in that respect; e.g.:

[diagram]
c5 6 c3 tllc6 7 tlle2 cxd4 8 cxd4 f6 The e5-pawn is attacked three times. 9 exf6 tllxf6 10 ctJf3 i.d6 1 1 O-O ( D) In this instance Black made only a half hearted attempt to attack the base of the pawn chain and then successfully attacked the front of it. So perhaps the procedure should be to attack the base and then the front? But then there's the following unadulterated example of attacking only the front of the chain:

1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 llld2 tllc6 4 tllgf3 tll

f6 5 e5 llld7 6 i.d3 f6 (D) I should note that according to theory Black stands perfectly well in this position. Other openings attack chains in this manner; for ex ample, English Opening variations in which Black plays ...e4 and White eliminates the front pawn by f3. There are also Ruy Lopez varia tions in which d5 is met by ...c6 (e.g., the

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 51

Breyer Defence), and several King's Indian variations as well. Clearly we need a broader way of looking at this subject. Let's go to the King's Indian De fence example that's always used in the books:

[diagram]
O-O 6 J..

e2 e5 7 O-O tt:Jc6 8 d5 tt:Je7 ( D) We'll quickly look at two very distinct ap proaches to this position, but only in terms of pawn-chains. A: 9 lLlel B: 9 lLld2

A)

9 lLlel tt:Jd7 10 J.. e3 f5 11 f3 f4 Black ignores the first 'effective' base at e4, the one that he attacked in the French Defence situation. Indeed, 1 l ...fxe4 1 2 fxe4 xfl + 1 3 i.xfl lLlf6 14 J..f2 only helps White because Black has no kingside targets to bite upon. By playing .. .f4 instead, he extends the chain to f3 in preparation for the march of his g-pawn. These are all normal moves, details of which will be given in the chapter on the King's Indian Defence in the next volume.

12 J..f2 g5

[diagram]

B)

9 ltJd2 (D) A very different approach emerges from this move in the same variation. In some games the traditional pawn race en- sues: 9 ... tt:Je8 10 b4 f5 Attack on the base. 11 c5 Likewise. 11 ..tt:Jf6 12 f3 f4 13 tt:Jc4 g5 14 i.a3 ltJg6 15 b5 lLle8 White is threatening the base at d6 three times, so Black has to defend it. 16 b6! (D) A nice picture ! White transfers the base all the way down to Black's second rank, the

52 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

ultimate undermining theme. This pure form of attacking the base of such a long chain almost never occurs in any opening. ..axb6 17 cxb6 cxb6 18 \\!Vb3 h5 19 .l:iabl g4 (D) Now if only Black could play ... h4-h3, he could duplicate White's achievement! 20 ttJxb6 Having destroyed the very back of the pawn chain, White has a very good position, though must be careful that the tactics don't get out of control. This example illustrates how important it is, in a game with pawn-chains, to have at least one file open for a rook to work with in a direct way next to the pawn-chain. Other pieces alone usu ally can't completely break down the oppo nent's position. Since White's pawn-chain is so impervious to assault in the foregoing variation, Black can think about challenging the front of the pawn chain, even when it's protected to the hilt. As seen in the French Defence examples, there are benefits to that approach. 9 ... a5 (D) First Black defends against b4, in tum pre venting the key move c5.

10 a3 ..ll

d7 11 b3 1 1 .l:ibl would be answered by l 1...a4! (two pawns holding down one, a theme that pops up periodically through this book) 1 2 b4 axb3 1 3 .l:Bxb3 b6 and White will never get c5 in. After 11 b3, however, White is ready for .l:ibl , b4 and c5. l l ...c6 (D) A strike against the front of the pawn-chain. The first point is that the leader of the chain on d5 will now be vulnerable if White plays c5. 12 .l:ibl \\!Vb8!? 13 b4 cxd5 Sometimes Black skips this move and an swers b4 with ... b5, a dynamic attack on the en tire chain, which is at least interesting if not entirely convincing.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 53

14 cxd5 14 exd5 gives Black a type of kingside ma jority that we shall see more of as we proceed. ... f5 will follow shortly. Suffice it to say that in general that situation is favourable to Black.  Jks 15 .Bb2 axb4 16 axb4 The pawn-chain has been neutralized, prov ing that Black needn't only play on the side of the board where he has the undermining moves. The same applies to White. Chess is not so one-dimensional that you aren't permitted to think about more than one theme, at least not in the opening where we have so many pieces on the board. What's the upshot of all this? Is the practical player left without any guidance whatsoever? Not at all, because the more positions you see and play, the more tools that you acquire. As in any other situation in chess, you have to make an assessment of which positions call for which treatment. For instance, notice that Black ad dressed the front pawn on the queenside and never attended to the e4 base. How realistic is that in general? Let's imagine a similar position of a type that does arise in the French Defence:

[diagram]
6 c3 tt:Jc6 7 lLldf3 .Be7 8 g3 'iVa5 9 Rf2 (D)

Here White has safeguarded his king (it can even go to g2 if necessary) and his pieces are about to spring out to aggressive positions; e.g., ..ild3, lLle2, with perhaps g4 and f5. How likely is that plan to succeed? The structure is analogous (d4/e5/f4 to c4/d5/e4), so Black's procedure would have to do with ...f6, perhaps preceded by ... h5, connected with ...g5. But the crucial difference is that this is the side of the board where Black' s king resides, so such a plan is unrealistic. A simple analysis (with a little bit of calculation) also tells you an attack on d4 won't get very far: not enough pieces and plenty of defenders. But if you're thinking in terms of pawn-chain experience, you'll see that Black should play to undermine White' s pawn-structure b y 9 b5! followed b y ...b4 and moves such as ... .l:Ib8, ...bxc3, ... .Ba6 and ... lLlb6-a4 in some intelligent order. This can be an effective idea as long as Black is alert to the defence of his king. With those ideas in mind, let's look at exam ples from the Caro-Kann Advance Variation. Anand - Karpov Wijk aan Zee 2003

[diagram]
tt:Jge2 tt:Je7 7 f4 (D)

7 .c5! As we saw above, once f4 is in, it's less likely that 7 .. .f6?! will do any good. White simply shores up the centre by 8 .Be3, when 8 .. .fxe5 9 fxe5 gives White f4 for his knight. I should add that in some lines in which White plays h4-h5 instead of f4, ... f6 is the best defence. 8 lLlg3!? cxd4 9 lLlb5 lLlec6! A piece sacrifice to win the centre.

10 f5 ..tc5 11 tt:Jd6+

Black's point is that after 1 1 fxg6 fxg6 he picks up a second pawn and threatens the total decimation of White's centre by ... lLlxe5. Then 1 2 'ie2 O-O prepares ... tt:Jd7 winning the last

54 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 55

[diagram]

1 d4 lLlf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 d6 4 lLlc3 e5 5 e4 (D)

Black would like to play for .. .f5 or ...b5, White for f4 or b4. In practice, White's breaks are more likely to succeed because of Black's lack of space or good squares for his pieces; e.g., he lacks c5 for his knights, or anywhere ac tive for his king's bishop (which is sometimes reduced to the exotic idea ...h6 and ... i.e7-g5). In particular Black has trouble enforcing .. .f5 if White sets up a structure involving ..ild3, ltJf3 and h3. Notice that the same pawn-structure in the King's Indian Main Line is more bearable for Black because with his bishop better-placed, he can get counterplay with .. .f5 before White squelches it. A Benko Gambit pawn-chain analysis re veals a little about the gambit's strengths. After

1 d4 lLlf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 b5 4 cxb5 a6 5 bxa6 fol

lowed by Black's recapture of the pawn over the next moves, White is very seldom able to en force an attack at the effective base of Black's pawn-chain at d6, and can only dream of achieving a successful b4 (it does happen, but only rarely). Black on the other hand has al ready eliminated the base of White's pawn chain on c4, and the move ...e6, cracking up the front pawn at d5, characterizes most Benko Gambit variations at one point or another. Take the Alekhine Defence, which actually includes a lot of pawn-chains. Here's the Four Pawns Attack, producing a partial chain after 1

56 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

e4 CLJf6 2 e5 CLJd5 3 d4 d6 4 c4 CLJb6 5 f4 dxe5 6 fxe5. Where to attack? Let' s see: 6 ... CLJc6 7 ..lle3 ..llf5 8 CL:lc3 e6 9 CLJf3 ..lle7 10 ..lle2 O-O 1 1 O-O f6 ! . In front, that' s the best plan! These con cepts cement themselves with study and experi ence. Here' s a recent high-powered example: Grishchuk - Ponomariov Torshavn 2000

[diagram]
CLJb6 6 ..ll b3 ..ll g7 7 a4 a5 8 CL:lg5 e6 9 f4 (D) This is a solid chain that must be taken care of quickly, or Black must find counterplay else where, which is no easy task. 9 . .  dxe5 10 fxe5 c5 Base of the chain. 1 1 c3 cxd4 12 O-O O-O 13 cxd4 CL:lc6 14 CLJf3 f6 Front of the chain.

15 CL:lc3! fxe5

It's a little late to tum around. 16 ..llg5! \\!Vd7 17 dxe5 CL:lxe5? The best chance is 17 ... \\!Vxdl ! 1 8 .l:iaxdl CL:lxe5 19 CL:lxe5 l:.xfl + 20 Wxfl i.xe5 21 i.e3 ..llxc3 22 .l:td8+ Rf7 23 bxc3 and the bishops are worth more than a pawn, but Black can at least hope for survival. However, he should avoid 23 ... CLJd7 24 Wel ! b6 25 l:.h8 Rg7? 26 ..llxe6 ! Rxh8 27 i.d4+.

18 CL:lxe5 .l:ixfl+ 19 \\!Vxfl \\!Vd4+

Or 1 9. .. ..llxe5 20 l:tdl ..lld4+ 2 1 Whl .

20 Whl \\!Vxe5 21 ..lld8 \\!Vc5 22 CL:le4 \\!Vb4

Black is also dead in the water following 22 ... \\!Vf5 23 i.xb6 \\!Vxe4 24 l:.dl h5 25 .l:Bd8+ Rh7 26 \\!Vf7.

23 CL:lg5 Rh8 24 \\!Vf7 ..ll

d7 25 ..llxe6 l:.xd8 26 \\!Vg8+! .l:Bxg8 27 CLJf7# (1-0) Hopefully this section will give you a feel for what's happening when we encounter cases of pawn-chains in other openings throughout this book. Doubled Pawns and Related Pawn Captures Understanding of doubled pawns is essential to playing openings and eventually mastering them. As above, I'll approach this subject with some standard examples and then try to intro duce some more complicated ideas for you to chew over. Other structures will be discussed in conjunction with individual openings. Doubled pawns are a recurring motif in the Nimzo-Indian Defence. After 1 d4 CL:lf6 2 c4 e6

3 CL:lc3 ..llb4, capturing the c3-knight produces

doubled pawns, whose structure is such that the forward c-pawn is particularly vulnerable. Without getting into the jargon, you can see that a structure with pawns on c4, c3 and d3 is more secure than one with pawns on c4, c3 and d4. In the former case each pawn can be protected by another, whereas in the latter the c4-pawn is un supported. Here's a game with several thematic ideas in a typical Nimzo-Indian: Geller - Smyslov USSR Ch (Moscow) 1949

[diagram]
bxc3 White now has doubled pawns on c3 and c4. The forward pawn is the target; note that if White's d-pawn were on d3, his doubled pawns would be protected. 5 . CL:lc6 6 f3 Having secured the advantage of the two bishops in compensation for his doubled pawns at c3 and c4, White wants to build a large centre and use his extra space to help in a kingside at tack. The kingside is a particularly good target because Black's dark-squared bishop has been exchanged and can't guard vulnerable squares around the king. 6 .. b6 7 e4 ..lla6 Black is taking aim at White's weak c4- pawn.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 57

8 ..llg5 And White begins to drift to the right. 8 h6 9 ..th4 tt:Ja5 There are more examples of this structure in Volume 2. 10 'iVa4 'iVc8! 11 lLlh3 lLlh7?! Better is 1 1 .. .iVb7 ! 1 2 ..ild3 'iVc6! (D). By this means the c-pawn would have fallen, although Black's advantage might not be enough for a win after 1 3 'iVxc6 dxc6 1 4 e5 lLld7 1 5 Rf2 ii.xc4 1 6 .llc2. Capturing the c4-pawn di rectly is one theme; what happens in the game is related. 12 ..td3 O-O 13 e5 .l:Ie8 14 O-O tt:Jf8!? 15 tt:Jf4!? White should always maximize his kingside play in such positions and not worry much about a pawn or two on the queenside. Thus 1 5 f4 ! d5 16 f5 was called for, attacking the pawn chain. Notice that White's attack benefits greatly from the lack of Black's dark-squared bishop, which was exchanged off on the fourth move. 15 . d5! Black may not win the c-pawn but he wins the light squares. This is often the result of fighting against doubled pawns: the squares they are on become more important than the pawns themselves. 1 5. .. g5? isn't worth it after 16 ltJh5 gxh4 17 tt:Jf6+. 16 cxd5 ..txd3 17 lLlxd3 exd5 18 f4 ltJg6! Smyslov anticipates the idea of ... lDe7-f5. 19 ..tg3 iVf5! Now Black begins a series of moves de signed to conquer an entire colour-complex. This was discussed in Chapter 2. 20 lLlb4 c6! 21 .tt ael 2 1 lLlxc6? iVd7.

21...h5! 22 'iVc2 lLle7 (D)

[diagram]

58 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

variation is generally another good illustration of how Black can play on the queenside in King's Indian Defence. 13 ..ll e3 \\!Vc7!? 14 ..llxc5!? The exchange on c5 to get doubled pawns can occur in many, many distinct positions of the King's Indian. White has to decide whether to give up his best bishop in order to cripple Black's pawn-structure. He usually declines the bargain. Here, however, he's a little ahead in time and goes for it. ..dxcS 15 dxc6 bxc6 ( D) The first point is that 1 5. .. \\!Vxc6 would give White a huge and favourable outpost on d5, one that might be reinforced by CLJd2-fl-e3. What are the main characteristics of the po sition? Black's doubled pawns are isolated, and what's more he has an isolated pawn on a5. We've already mentioned, however, that iso lated a-pawns are usually not serious weak nesses until the endgame. What is typical about the doubled c-pawns is that they control very important central squares, both the black out post on d4 and most importantly White's d5, which is protected from intrusions. On the other hand, Black' s dark-squared bishop has very lit tle scope, so the advantage of two bishops is not yet a factor, and he has no pawn-breaks other than ...f5, which White can keep under control.

16 CL:la4

The forward doubled pawn is usually the more vulnerable one. Here White has no pros pects of attacking it along an open file because of his own c4-pawn, but he can focus pieces on it in order to tie Black's pieces to its defence. When a player's doubled pawn can be pro tected by adjacent pawns then his pieces need not be diverted to defend it. That's why iso lated doubled pawns are so much worse than connected ones, assuming that other factors aren't at work. 16 .. ..trs 17 \\!Vb3 CL:lhs 18 \\!Ve3 \\!Va7 Black's pieces are passive and now White could try to transfer his f3-knight to b3, but if necessary Black can bring his knight to e6 or d7. What Portisch does instead is quite clever. 19 h4! This has the obvious idea of ..llh3, trying to exchange his bad bishop for Black's good one at c8. Bu.t White also sees that Black's best plan is the manoeuvre ... CL:lg7-e6-d4, which will leave his kingside less defended against the moves h5 and hxg6. .. CL:lg7 20 @h2 f6 21 ..llh3 ..llxh3 22 @xh3 CLJe6 23 hS (D) 23 ... gxhS!? Black takes on yet another set of isolated doubled pawns! And he gives up the valuable

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 59

square f5. But Fischer realizes that he will be able to cause trouble down the g-file in con junction with ... lLld4. Normally 23 ... lLld4 would solve all of Black's difficulties but the opening of the h-file would cause a few problems after 24 hxg6 hxg6 25 l::t h l . 24 l::t hl .l:Iad8 25 'it>g2 'i/Bg7 26 'it>fl 26 .l:Ixh5?? loses to 26 ... lLlf4+. 26  'ilig4 27 l::t h4 'ilig6 28 'ilie2 ..th6 29 b3 l::t d7 29 ... ..llg5 30 lLlxg5 fxg5 3 1 l::t xh5 .l:If8 was also suggested, as in the game. Black is doing fine in any case. 30 .l:Idl l::t xdl+ 31 'ilixdl l::t d8 32 'ilie2 ..llg5 33 lLlxg5 fxg5 34 .l:Ixh5 l::t d2! 35 'i/Bg4! 35 'ilixd2 'ilixh5 threatens ... tt:Jd4. White's knight has served a good function but now looks out of play. 35 . h6 36 l::t h2 'it>g7 37 tt:Jc3 l::t d3 38 lLldl!? White is ready to take up an outpost by lLle3-f5.

38. ..

'ilif7 39 'it>g2 But he never gets a chance. At this point 39 tt:Je3?? loses to 39. .. l::t xe3.

39. 

'ilid7! 40 'i/Bf5 (D) White decides to bail out. 40 lLle3 l::t xe3 41 'iff5 ! (not 4 1 fxe3?? lLlf4+ 42 'it>f3 'ilidl +) is an other way to do so.

40. ..

l::t xdl 41 'ilixe5+ 'it>g8? Perhaps Fischer was trying to win, but this gives White a real attack. Black had a draw by 4 1 . . .'it>g6 42 'ilif5+ 'it>g7 43 'ife5+ with perpet ual check. 42 l::t xh6 ltJg7 43 l::t g6? An error in tum. Good winning chances were to be had by 43 'ilixc5, or by 43 'ilib8+ lLle8 44 l::t g6+ and l::t xg5 with a third pawn and play against Black's exposed king. The game ends with true equality. 43 .. g4! 44 .l:txg7+ 'i/Bxg7 45 'ilie8+ 'it>h7 46 'ilih5+ 'it>g8 1/z-1/z The subject of doubled pawns is boundless but especially for the sake of opening investiga tion we can narrow our focus considerably and look at cases that significantly influence practi cal play. Specifically, doubled c-pawns arise more often than any other type and they deter mine the nature of the play in many of those games. For the sake of clarity I'll concentrate on them, with a brief look first at a particular central situation. Doubled Centre Pawns Doubled centre pawns arise much less often in the opening than doubled c-pawns. They are generally produced by exchanges of minor pieces on the third or fourth rank, and usually don't allow of the choice of recaptures that we saw above. Their effects on the position tend to be ambiguous. This is a position from Chapter 6 on the Two Knights Defence; similar situations can arise from a number of 1 e4 e5 openings. White plays ..ll e3 to challenge the enemy bishop on c5 (like wise with colours reversed, of course). Cap turing that bishop on e3 will help White to gain central control (in particular of d4, which was a potential support-point for Black's knight), and he will have the open f-file to work with. But the resulting centre e3/e4/d3 is generally not

60 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

mobile. What does that mean? After the ex change on e3, White' s pawns are initially well protected; it's usually difficult to get at the single weakness at e3. However, if White plays d4 thereafter, the forward e-pawn will be unpro tected by another pawn and therefore vulnera ble, just as the c4-pawn was in the Nimzo-Indian example above. And if the d-pawn advances fur ther to d5, the e-pawn may not be able to move for the rest of the game. Both sides have to weigh whether one advantage or the other is more important. If Black isn't going to exchange on e3, one of his options is to leave the bishop where it is on c5. Normally the doubled pawns that Black would get if White played ..ll xc5 wouldn't be harmful (see the discussion of c pawns below); but that's not always true. The same idea comes up in the Ruy Lopez after 1 e4 e5 2 CLJf3 CLJc6 3 i.b5 a6 4 ..lla4 CLJf6 5 O-O ..ll e7 6 .l:tel b5 7 ..llb3 d6 8 c3 ..ll e6, as well as in some queen' s pawn variations; e.g., 1 d4 d5 2 CLJf3 e6 3 ..ll f4 CLJf6 4 e3 CLJbd7 5 i.e2 ..ll d6 (D). Again the choice arises of whether White should: a) exchange bishops on d6, allowing ... cxd6 if Black wants to; b) leave his bishop on f4, inviting ...i.xf4; or c) retreat to g3. In master play all three solutions are played. This position is simplified but shows the basic situation that arises in many variations. Isolated doubled e- and d-pawns are rare when the queens are off the board; neverthe less, an opening line such as 1 e4 d6 2 d4 CLJf6

[diagram]
..lle6 ! ? 7 ..llxe6 fxe6 shows that it' s possible to adopt such pawns in that situation. The result ing position is one that current theory indi cates is equal. See Chapter 7 on the Philidor Defence, in particular the discussion of early move-orders. It bears repeating that the exchange of queens by no means betokens entrance into an end game, because there can be many active pieces remaining on the board producing astonish ingly complex positions. The phrase 'queenless middlegame' doesn't appear often enough in chess discussion, written or otherwise. It de scribes an extremely large set of situations, often lasting for the bulk of the game. The conditions for a decisive result are still there, as shown by literally thousands of games. But for our pur poses it's important to note that a lot of queen exchanges such as the one above result in queenless openings! Although the boundaries of the queenless opening, middlegame and end ing are to some extent a matter of judgement, variations in which the queens have been ex changed within the first 10 moves are routinely analysed by players and theoreticians for an other 10 moves, and clearly belong to the terri tory of the opening proper. Finally, we run across 5th-rank doubled pawns in just a few openings; for example, 1 c4 c5 2 CLJc3 CLJc6 3 g3 g6 4 ..llg2 i.g7 5 d3 CLJf6 6 e4 O-O 7 CL:lge2 d6 8 O-O CLJd4 9 CLJxd4 cxd4 10 CLJe2 (D).

Keene referred to the doubled pawn on d4 as a 'dead point' , so called because it has little or no dynamic potential. It makes Black's central

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 61

play difficult because White will be ready to re spond to ... e6 and ... d5 by cxd5 and e5 ( espe cially if the move f4 has been played), whereas Black' s move ...e5 would restrict his own bishop and isn't very helpful with respect to mobility. The opponent (in this case White) can play 'around' the pawn by f4, intending f5 and g4, and/or by b4. This is a theme worth remember ing as it arises fairly frequently in openings such as the Closed Sicilian, King's Indian and English Opening. It tends to occur in the move sequence above, with a knight on d4 (from White' s point of view) being captured by a knight on e2 or f3. In many cases there would be a bishop on e3 in the above case, say, by 8 ... llld7 9 .Be3 lll d4 (D). In this instance White's knight can't capture on d4 because of the fork, and most players will avoid giving away their good bishop by .Bxd4, dead spot or not. So you will commonly see players wait until a bishop comes to e3 before occupying the outpost with their knight. It also frequently happens that when a bishop arrives at e3, White is just ready to play d4, so Black's knight jump has a double purpose. Obviously all of this is true with colours reversed as well. Naturally there are no absolutes and the dead-point structure isn't always bad, but one should be careful that there are compensating factors before adopting it. Doubled c-Pawns Now let's move on to doubled c-pawns, which are far more common than central ones. The most frequent exchange in the opening that leads to doubled pawns is when a knight on c3 or c6 is captured by a knight or bishop. Then a basic decision often presents itself: whether one wants to recapture with a b-pawn ( 'strength ening' the centre) or with the ct-pawn, opening lines for development. There are plenty of situ ations in which there is no choice; for instance,

[diagram]
bxc3 or 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 lll c3 .Bb4 4 e5 c5 5 a3 .Bxc3+ 6 bxc3, both cases where the prece dence of structure is conspicuous. In neither case does either player have many pieces de veloped, but by their pawn moves both sides have established a structure that will serve and determine their development. In both of these cases the players were forced to capture 'towards the centre', the advice given to students everywhere. But it's more re vealing to look first at recaptures requiring a decision. Ruy Lopez Exchange Variation

1 e4 e5 2 lll

[diagram]

62 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

5 d4 lbd6 6 xc6 dxc6 7 dxe5 lLif5 8 xd8+

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 63

play) 6 ... lll g6 7 c3 iL.e7 8 d4 O-O 9 lll bd2 cxd4 10 cxd4 f5 ! and Black has freed all of his pieces. b2) 4 ... dxc6 is inferior because White will get a pawn to e5 that cramps Black's game; e.g.,

5 O-O 'Viii

c7 6 e5 and moves such as b3, iL.b2, d3 and llld2-c4 can follow. If he had an extra cen tre pawn (as he does after 4 ...bxc6), Black could play ... f6 and break up White's centre, but in this case exf6 would expose a weak pawn on e6. In making a decision how to recapture in the Rossolimo Variation, a major consideration is whether Black can achieve ...e5 after taking with the d-pawn. If so, White has no particular way to gain space, because now c3 followed by d4 merely opens the centre for Black's bishops. But if Black captures with the b-pawn he has to watch out that an early d4 doesn't leave him too far behind in development (he has no open d-file to challenge a white piece on d4). In particular, the variations in which Black fianchettoes his bishop can put his development behind sched ule. Petroff Defence

1 e4 e5 2 lll

f3 lllf6 3 lll xe5 d6 4 lll f3 lll xe4 5 lll c3 (this move is fashionable at the moment, but it is not the only example of doubled pawns in the Petroff: 5 c4 !? is an interesting move whose very purpose is 6 lll c3 lll xc3 7 dxc3 !, aiming for active development) 5 ... lll xc3 6 dxc3

Recapturing with the ct-pawn is the very point of 5 lll c3, to get White's pieces out quickly with additional pressure down the open d-file if O-O-O follows. Having pawns on c2 and c3 is easy for White to handle, just as ... dxc6 was in the Ruy Lopez. The difference is that in this Petroff line both sides have two bishops, so it' s unlikely that White has anything special in the way of a permanent advantage. Nevertheless, taking with the ct-pawn is more promising than 6 bxc3, which would leave White with a restricted cen tre in which one of his bishops wouldn't be able to assume an active role. Scotch Game In the Scotch Game with 1 e4 e5 2 lll f3 lll c6 3 d4 exd4 4 lll xd4 lllf6 5 lllxc6, 5 ...bxc6 is the almost automatic recapture. This is still an un resolved line, but Black's queenside structure doesn't hurt him in most lines. Two examples with this type of structure: Rublevsky - Bologan Dortmund 2004

1 e4 e5 2 lll

f3 lll c6 3 d4 exd4 4 lll xd4 iL.c5 5 lll xc6 'Viii f6 6 'Viii d2 bxc6 7 lll c3 lll e7 8 lll a4 iJ..b6 9 iJ..d3 O-O 10 O-O d6 1 1 'Viii e2 lllg6 12 lll xb6 axb6 (D) Thus White has given Black a compact struc ture on the queenside but gained the bishop-pair and a mobile kingside majority as well. But Black has some advantages too. His bishop is good and he has two useful files for his rooks. Right off, ... lllf4 is a positional threat.

13 f4 'Viii

[diagram]

64 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

(D)

18 c4+ Otherwise, White's bad bishop and weak squares down the e-file will give him a serious disadvantage.

18. ..

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 65

14 .. .Bxd3 15 'ii' xd3 'ii' f6 16 g3 .:re8 17 @g2 .Bc5 18 l:lf4 'ii' e6 19 lldl .Bd6 Versus 'ii' d7. 20 .i::r. c4 c5 Now Black won't be able to defend the c and a-pawns, especially the former. 21 'ii' f3 .:ab8 22 .Bd2 f6 23 :al .i::r. bd8 24 .Be3 'ie5 25 .i::r. c3 :as 26 :as There goes the c-pawn. 26 . e4 27 .Bxc5 'ii' xf3+ 28 @xf3 .Be5 29 .i::r. e3 .Bxb2 30 .i::r. xa7 .i::r. xe3+ 31 @xe3 llxa7 32 .Bxa7 f7 33 @d3 l-O Finally, giving up a fianchettoed bishop on g7 for a knight on c3 (or one on g2 for a knight on c6) is a traditional technique that crops up in many variations. The question is always whether the bishop-pair compensates for the doubled c-pawns. By themselves the bishops usually aren't sufficient to offset the pawns, but the capture has also seriously weakened squares on the opponent's kingside. Getting a feel for this trade-off is more a matter of expe rience, so here's a small selection of a few very lightly annotated games. The first is a win by White in a variation that's arisen hundreds of times: Korchnoi - H. Bohm Wijk aan Zee 1980

1 c4 c5 2 lllc3 lll

f6 3 g3 d5 4 cxd5 lll xd5 5 .Bg2 lllc7 6 lll f3 lll c6 7 O-O e5 8 d3 .Be7 9 lll d2 .Be6 Later, 9 ... .Bd7 became the main line, to avoid the doubled pawns: 10 .Bxc6+ bxc6 11 'ia4 'id7 12 lll c4 f6 (

D)

[diagram]

1 d4 lll

f6 2 c4 g6 3 lll c3 .Bg7 4 e4 O-O 5 .Be2 d6 6 lllf3 .Bg4 7 O-O lll fd7 8 .Be3 lll c6 9 d5 .Bxf3 10 .Bxf3 1 0 gxf3 ! ? is definitely worth thinking about. It keeps more queenside options open, and White's king is perfectly safe. ... llla5 11 'ia4 White could also try keeping the position open for the bishops by 1 1 .Be2 .Bxc3 1 2 bxc3 e5 ! ? 1 3 f4 ( 1 3 dxe6 fxe6 14 f4). 1 1. .. .Bxc3!? 12 bxc3 b6 13 i.. e2 e5 14 g3 14 dxe6 might be better. The rest of the game gets one-sided as the knights dominate the bishops.

MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

14  ltJcS 15 \i'c2 \i'd7 16 h6 .l:!.fe8 17 a4 f6 18 'it>g2 :e7 19 h4 .l:!.ae8 20 e3 lbab7 21 h5 g5 Geller closes the kingside. It's hard to be lieve that he can win on the queenside alone.

22 g4 .l:!.c8 23 f3 lba5 24 .l:!.tbl lll

[diagram]

[diagram]

21. . \i'f8! (D)

22 f3 It's too late for 22 lbxe5 \i'f5. 22 .fxg3 23 hxg3 \i'f5 24 .l:!.c2?! 'li'h3 25 l:!.g2 lbg5 26 \i'e2 e4! 27 dxe4 lbxe4 28 fxe4 .lii. g4 29 .l:!.h2 .lii. xe2 30 :xh3 .l:!.xh3 31 .l:!.f4

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 67

.Bxc4 32 bxc4 l:lxg3+ 33 lit>f2 l:!.h3 34 .Bxc5 .Bxc5 35 lll xc5 l:!.f8 36 e5 g5 37 l:!.xf8+ @xf8 38 lll e6+ 'iit> e7 39 lll xg5 l:!.h2+ 40 @f3 l:.xa2 41 lll xh7 a5 0-1 It's worth adding that in the Accelerated Fianchetto Sicilian the capture ... .Bxc3 often comes without White having made a move like c4. The best example of this situation occurs af ter 1 e4 c5 2 lllf3 lbc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lll xd4 g6 5 lbc3 .Bg7 6 lll b3 .Bxc3+ 7 bxc3, a line which usually continues 7 ... lll f6 8 .Bd3, and now Black has the interesting choice between 8 . .. d6, in tending to blockade the c-pawns, and 8 ...d5 9 exd5 'ixd5, when Black develops so quickly that White's pieces tend to be tied down. The usual considerations with respect to Black's dark squares on the kingside apply in principle, but there is little chance that they will become a real factor. If you want to continue investigating the is sue of captures away from and towards the centre, there will probably be instances of both in the openings that you play. The more that you study these and get to experience them, the better a player you'll be in the widest sense. Hanging Pawns The term 'hanging pawns' is habitually used to refer to black pawns on c5 and d5 separated from Black's other pawns by at least a file on both sides. The hanging pawns are usually pit ted against a white pawn on e3 and open d- and c-files. Of course the same applies with colours reversed. This structure generally arises from two pawn exchanges on c5 and d5, but it can also come about when an isolated pawn is transformed by a piece exchange on c6. Like 'isolated pawns' , the term 'hanging pawns' is defined more broadly, but it doesn't seem to extend beyond this single case when actually being discussed. That is understand able, because so few analogous structures reg ularly arise, at least in the opening. You could call pawns on e4 and d4 'hanging' under cer tain circumstances, but that's not convention ally done. Returning to the basic position, Black's hanging pawns have advantages and disadvan tages. Much as is the case with an isolated d pawn, Black has the persistent possibility of breaking the position up by ... d4, thus extend ing the range of his pieces, initiating favour able tactics, and/or creating a powerful passed pawn. The hanging pawns also cover key cen tral squares and give Black's pieces somewhat more manoeuvring room than White's. Finally, the e- and b-files can be used to create dynamic chances. From White's point of view there are many promising ways to attack this structure. Most of them begin by restricting the advance of the d pawn. White has a pawn, a knight (sometimes two), and a rook or two on an open file to achieve this, with a bishop on b2 for good ef fect. Once the pawn is 'fixed', White can do one of several things: a) Attack it with his pieces; e.g., a bishop on g2, knight on c3 and/or f4, and rook(s) on an open file. The queen and rooks are particularly effective attackers of hanging pawns. b) Advance a pawn to b4 or e4 to force a desirable change in pawn-structure. If White's advancing pawn either captures Black's or vice versa, an isolated pawn remains in Black's camp. Or, if one of Black's pawns advances, it creates a juicy outpost for White to the side of it. For example: if White attacks with e4 and Black responds with . . .d4, then the c4-square is available for a piece. c) Exchange pieces and simplify the posi tion; as is the case with an isolated queen's pawn, this reduces the pawns' dynamic possi bilities and makes them easier to put under pressure.

68 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

In the following game White strives to fix the hanging pawns and Black to use them dy namically. Seirawan - Short Montpellier Ct 1985

[diagram]

10. ..d5 1 1 cxd5 exd5 12 .l:!.dl lbbd7 followed by

[diagram]

16 h3 :d7 17 a3 .l:!.ad8

17 ... .l:!.b8 is the other natural move, to take advantage of the open file and potentially probe the holes left by a3. 18 a4 d5!? A huge decision, changing the character of the game, although not necessarily to Black's detriment. Preventing b4 by 18 ...a5 looks equal. 19 cxd5 exd5 (D) A standard picture of the hanging pawn duo c5/d5.

[diagram]
Short may have been hoping for 2 1 lbxd5 .l:!.xd5 22 .l:!.xd5 lbxd5 23 l:!.xd5 lbd4 ! , when Black is at least equal.

[diagram]

27 Bg2

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 69

[diagram]

[diagram]
36 ... l:.cc8 keeps the possibility of lateral de- fence by ... l:!.c5 alive. The d-pawn is tough to corral, but ultimately the threat of a break by e4 will overload Black; for example, 37 gl (37 lll c3 l:!.c5 !) 37 ... llle4 38 l:!.d4 ! lll c5 39 tll xc5 .i::r. xc5 40 'ib4 a5 41 'ic3 f5 42 b3! cxb3 43 'ixb3 and Black is reduced to total passivity. 37 lll c3 'ie6 38 l:!.d4 l:!.6d7 39 l:!.ld2 g6 40 llla4 Back to c5! 40 ... 'ie7 41 lll c5 l:!.c7 42 lll xb7 A typical exchange of a horrible piece for a good one in order to eliminate the best de fender. 42 .. l:!.xb7 43 .Bxd5 l:!.xd5 44 .i::r. xd5 lll xd5 45 'ixd5 and wins. Here's the flip side: Korchnoi - Karpov Merano Wch ( 1) 1981

1 c4 e6 2 lll

c3 d5 3 d4 .Be7 4 lll f3 lll f6 5 .igS h6 6 .Bh4 O-O 7 e3 b6 8 1:!.cl .Bb7 9 ii.e2 lll bd7 10 cxd5 exd5 11 O-O c5 12 dxc5 bxc5 (

D)

13 'ic2 l:!.c8 Obviously . . .d4 is on Karpov's mind, in or der to exploit White's queen's position. 14 l:!.fdl 'ib6 This is a perfect spot for the queen. It supports ... d4, will attack the b-pawn if ...c4 is needed, and, not least, Black's rooks are connected. 15 'iYbl l:!.fd8 16 l:!.c2 Korchnoi would like to double rooks on the d-file, as in Seirawan-Short.

70 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

16 ... 'Yi'e6! 17 g3 But now 17 .l:!.cd2? fails to 17 ... lbe4 ! l 8 lbxe4 dxe4 1 9 xe7 exf3 20 xd8 fxe2 2 1 .l:!.xd7 Yi'g4 ! 22 .l:!. l d5 (the only move) 22. .. i.xdS 23 .l:!.xd5 Yi'b4 and wins. This gives Black just enough time to rid himself of White's bishop.

17. ..

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 71

there is a single centre pawn on the board and it is connected with other pawns on the flank, I may group them together, an important case being the 4:3 kingside set-up that we shall run into in the course of discussing openings with that pawn distribution. One way of thinking about the Griinfeld De fence main line above is that White's centre is under pressure by direct threats and other in conveniences from an enemy who has no tar gets of attack in his own position. What's more, there aren't even prospective targets of attack in the near future! This sounds one-sided until you take into account that White is protecting a central majority, possibly the most valuable as set in chess in the realm of pawns and struc tures. How is that? First, two central pawns control more central points than one, in itself an advantage. Then, after a protracted struggle to survive the constant threats to their lives and/or their integrity, a central pawn-majority can sweep across the board and scatter the op ponent's pieces, sometimes exacting material tribute along the way. Even more frequently a central majority can be transformed into a passed pawn that is difficult or impossible to stop. That is precisely what happens when things go wrong for Black in many variations of the Griinfeld Defence. Barring such a trium phant journey, a central majority has other ad vantages. It can advance far enough to grant abundant room for friendly pieces to roam, but can also provide the maximum security to the pieces behind it. There are even advantages to having a central pawn-majority that resides on the third rank. The most important situation in which that occurs is in the Open Sicilian, in which Black always has a central majority to begin with, because White has played 3 d4 cxd4 4 lll xd4, as in this example (see following diagram): The pawns on d6 and e6 protect against threatening incursions by putting all of White's important 5th-rank squares under pawn super vision. They combine that with a threat to ad vance, when they would give Black's pieces freer play and begin to restrict White's. Such a majority can compensate for a space disadvan tage elsewhere, because the main value of a space advantage is the ability to shift forces about more easily, and that can be limited by the necessity of keeping White's pieces fairly rigidly poised to prevent Black' s central expan sion. Even though White' s centre pawn in this example is more advanced than Black' s are, it can still cover only one central square, namely, d5. To illustrate this, we might ask why ...b5 is so effective in the Sicilian Defence (when Black has pawns on e6 and d6). A large part of the rea son is a well-timed ... b4, of course, to drive away the c3-knight (e.g., to e2) and then either put pressure on White's e-pawn or successfully achieve a pawn-break in the centre. But White often plays g4-g5 himself and drives away the f6-knight (e.g., to d7). Often that has less effect as regards positional con siderations in the centre. What's the differ ence? The central majority. Let's pretend that Black had only a pawn on d6 and White has his usual central pawn on e4. Then driving away White's c3-knight might be of about the same importance as White's driving away the

71 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

f6-knight. Furthermore, the lack of an e-pawn for Black would mean seriously weakened de fence against White' s pieces occupying cen trally-oriented squares, specifically d5 and f5. For example, if Black' s e-pawn were missing, then d5 would be an attractive outpost that would be further weakened if White could force Black' s knight off f6 by g4-g5 . In that kind of a position a knight on f5 is also notori ous for tearing Black's position to shreds. As it is, since Black's pawn is on e6, White's lim ited central pawn presence in the Open Sicil ian also allows Black to use influential squares for his purposes, such as c5 and e5 for his knights. Then the knights will have fewer ob stacles to reaching c4 or attacking e4. Of course, in 'extra-positional' terms, White has the opportunity for violent attacks based upon the pawn advances e5 and f5, and/or sac rifices on f5, e6, d5 and b5. With a single inac curacy by Black (or merely choosing the wrong variation), these attacks can be so powerful as to decimate the defence. Otherwise no one would play White's side of an Open Sicilian. I simply want to demonstrate Black's underlying reason for accepting a cramped position. See Chapter 1 1 on the Sicilian for other illustrations of how his central majority functions in diverse situa tions, such as the Paulsen and Dragon Varia tions. The next diagram shows another type of cen tral majority in the Open Sicilian arising from 1 e4 c5 2 lZ'Bf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lLixd4 lZ'Bf6 5 lLic3 lZ'Bc6 6 j_e2 e5 7 lZ'Bb3 j_e6 (D). Although by comparison with the previous example, Black has a more vulnerable structure of pawns (on d6 and e5), White's knights are denied e4 and d4, so that defending d5 is really Black' s only practical concern, just as White himself must watch out for ... d5. Again, see Chapter 1 1 on the Sicilian for various exam ples. What are some other common central pawn majorities? White finds himself with this ma jority in several variations of the Griinfeld De fence such as the one mentioned above and in the important variation 1 d4 lZ'Bf6 2 c4 g6 3 lZ'Bc3 d5 4 lZ'Bf3 j_g7 5 l'lb3 dxc4 6 l'lxc4. In the Queen's Gambit Exchange Variation White as sumes a 2: 1 majority on move four ( 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 lLic3 lZ'Bf6 4 cxd5 exd5), and in the Queen's Gambit Accepted he gets it on move two ( 1 d4 d5 2 c4 dxc4). White also ends up with an extra centre pawn in many variations of the English Opening in which Black plays ... d5 (an example would be 1 c4 c5 2 lZ'Bc3 lZ'Bf6 3 lZ'Bf3 d5 4 cxd5 lZ'Bxd5). Finally, every Modem Benoni variation has Black accepting a 2: 1 deficit from the start ( 1 d4 lZ'Bf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 e6 4 lZ'Bc3 exd5 5 cxd5). There aren't a great many 2:0 central majori ties in standard openings, although examples do exist. Take the Nimzo-Indian variation with

[diagram]
l'Bxd5 6 lZ'Bf3 l'Bf5 7 l'Bxf5 exf5 (D ). Ironically, this position seems to be perfectly playable for Black. White's difficulty is that when he finally organizes f3 and e4, Black can capture on e4 and will have an f-pawn in re serve to restrain or even attack the centre. There are a growing number of openings in which this structure arises.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 73

In conclusion, whether central majorities are inherent to a specific opening or not, they are extremely important and tend to assert them selves in the long run. Defenders must be sure to have a clear plan for neutralizing them, some times by transforming the structure itself before the pawn-majority can do any damage. The corresponding issue has to do with queenside majorities and minorities, since cen tral majorities for one side almost always leave the other side with a queenside majority. Since most majorities can in principle be transformed into a passed pawn, it has been said that a queenside majority is advantageous because the resulting passed pawn will usually be an outside passed pawn and thus of special value. That is, in a king and pawn ending, one king will have to go chasing after the queenside passed pawn in order to stop it from promoting, while the other king mops up on the enemy pawns on the kingside. Unfortunately, several considerations interfere with this optimistic scenario. First, if both kings are centralized (as hap pens in many endings) neither majority neces sarily results in a passed pawn further 'outside' than the other. Secondly, the hypothetical ad vantage of the queen side majority is reversed if the parties castle queenside. But since kingside castling is the rule, a more compelling issue arises that especially impacts the opening (our area of concern, after all): the relation of ma jorities to king safety. Since there are more pieces on the board in the opening, the ad vance of kingside pawns to create a passed pawn carries with it the risk of exposing one's own king; obviously, doing the same with a queenside majority is safer. On the other hand, the results of a kingside advance may be to put the opposing king in danger, whereas defence against a queenside majority doesn't require any compromise of the king's position! These many considerations suggest a sort of theoretical balance between the types of major ities, depending upon concrete features of the position. As a practical matter in the opening stage of the game, one shouldn't pay much at tention to the matter of majorities and minori ties, apart from their value in beginning to pursue a specific plan. The odds are that the pawn-structure will be transformed prior to the onset of the endgame. This brings us to the minority attack, which involves two pawns attacking three. It is fa mously effective in the Sicilian Defence, in volving ... b5 and ... b4, sometimes supported by ... a5, driving away White's knight from c3 and/or gaining open files. The exposure of White's queenside renders his majority irrele vant in most cases, at least in so far as creating passed pawns is concerned. The most famous minority-attack structure is 2:3, 2: 1 and 3:3, sometimes called the Carls bad pawn-structure. Numerous books discuss the minority at tack by b4-b5 in great detail because its appli cation is widespread, although not necessarily in the pure form shown. The most important examples that directly conform to the model in the diagram are in the Queen's Gambit Ex change Variation and a few other variations of the Queen's Gambit Declined. The Carlsbad pawn-structure also emerges in the Nimzo Indian Defence following 1 d4 llJf6 2 c4 e6 3 lZ:Jc3 .tb4 4 Wic2 d5 5 cxd5 exd5 6 .tg5 h6 7 .txf6 Wixf6 8 a3 .txc3+ 9 Wixc3. Then Black often feels compelled to play ... c6 in the face of c-file pressure, making White's minority attack by b4-b5 all the more effective. Interestingly, the Caro-Kann has the same pawn distribution with colours reversed after 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 exd5 cxd5 4 .td3 lZ:Jc6 5 c3 llJf6; in fact, you will find an example of a pure minority attack by Black in Chapter 12. The most thorough discussion of minority attacks in this set of books will naturally be linked to the Queen's Gambit Exchange Variation (covered in Vol ume 2).

74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 75

of this opening with the same structure, includ ing lines with ... ..Bg4, ... ..Bxf3 and ...e6. In the Scandinavian, as in the Caro-Kann, White is left with a c-pawn but no e-pawn. c) The Slav/Semi-Slav: in the traditional Slav lines we have 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 lLif3 lLif6 4 lLic3 dxc4 5 a4 ..Bf5 6 e3 e6 7 ..Bxc4, and in the Semi-Slav Meran Variation 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 lLif3 lLif6 4 lLic3 e6 5 e3 ltJbd7 6 ..Bd3 dxc4 7 .llxc4. These are two of many examples of the basic structure. By contrast with the first two openings, White remains with an e-pawn but no c-pawn. d) The Queen's Gambit Declined: in the Classical Capablanca and Lasker Variations, we have 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 lLic3 lLif6 4 ..Bg5 ..Be7

[diagram]
.llxe7 'fll xe7 9 .l:!.cl lLixc3 10 .t:rxc3 c6 1 1 ..Bd3 dxc4 12 ..Bxc4 ltJd7) 7 .:te l c6 8 ..Bd3 dxc4 9 .llxc4. In this opening White again ends up with an e-pawn but no c-pawn. Generally, White's first goal is expansion in the centre, in the one case by c4 and d5, in the other by e4 and d5. These are difficult to achieve given Black's pawn-structure, which is specifi cally designed to prevent d5, and Black is ready to play ... e5 or ...c5 at the first opportunity. But White also has other resources, including using the support-point at e5 (and sometimes at c5) to make threats and favourably transform the cen tral situation. Or he can expand on the wings. In some of these variations, Black's light squared bishop comes out in front of its pawns. Then Black already has some freedom for his pieces and can take more time to play for a transformation of the pawn-structure. When the bishop is stuck behind its pawns, as in the Queen's Gambit or the Caro-Kann with 4 ... ltJd7, Black needs to get ...e5 or ... c5 in as a freeing move, preferably sooner rather than later, if he is to equalize. The ... c5 move not only loosens White's grip on the centre but if followed up by ... cxd4 it claims the c5-square for Black's pieces, often a knight. In that case we have something similar to various French Defence lines with 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 lLic3 (or 3 ltJd2 dxe4) 3 ... dxe4 (or 3 ... lLif6 4 ..Bg5 dxe4) 4 lLixe4 lLid7 5 lLif3 ltJgf6 6 lLixf6+ lLixf6, where Black will generally play for . . .c5. If Black can play ...e5, he attacks the centre but also frees his light-squared bishop. It's better to show a few examples than to speak in generalities. Gulko - Lakdawala USA Ch (San Diego) 2004

[diagram]
..Bf5 6 e3 e6 7 ..Bxc4 ..Bb4 (D)

76 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Here's the ... c6/ ... e6 structure. Thanks to Black's control of the centre via ... .tb4 this may be considered about equal.

8 O-O O-O 9 l'le2 i.g4!?

9 ... .tg6 is a popular move, preventing e4 for the moment. Then ...lZ'ibd7 and ...'iVa5, with the idea . . .c5 or ... e5 might follow. But 9 ... .tg4 has proven quite playable. 10 h3 White grabs the two bishops without delay. This means that Black will have to do something in the centre or simply stand worse. Knights are often the equal of bishops in such positions; it depends upon the timing.

10. . 

.txf3 1 1 'iVxf3 lZ'ibd7 12 J:!.dl l:!.c8 (D) Black plays a subtle move designed to an swer a potential d5 by White with ...cxd5. At the same time ...l:!.c8 lends strength to the ad vance ...c5.

13 e4 eS

The standard idea: Black doesn't wait around for the centre to become protected and stabi lized; rather, he wants to break it up and estab lish strong points for his pieces. The only other positional solution in such lines is ...c5; one of these pawn-breaks is just about obligatory. 14 i.e3 l'la5 15 dS!? (D) White could delay this thematic push, but then he would have to deal with ...exd4 and ... lLie5. Now we're in another typical and critical struggle between two bishops with a passed pawn versus immediate pressure by opportu nistic knights. The issue is whether the bishops can consolidate. 15    i.xc3?! This seems to win something but there are tactical problems. Black could justify his two knight strategy and ... l:!.c8 move by playing 15 ... lZ'Bb6 ! . Then all of Black's pieces combine with tempo and he can capture on d5 to better effect. Still, never underestimate those bishops ! For instance: 16 i.a2 (16 .txb6 l'Bxb6 1 7 l:!.abl keeps more tension, but the opposite-coloured bishops don't really help either side's attack ing chances and therefore the position might prove drawish in the end) l 6 ... .txc3 17 bxc3 cxd5 1 8 exd5, and now 1 8. .. J:!.fd8 isn't clear because 1 9 c4 ! ? lZ'Bxc4 20 .tg5 ! sacrifices a pawn to maximize the bishops' power. The am bitious 18 ... .l:i.xc3 19 .td2 l:!.xf3 20 .txa5 l:!.f4!? 2 1 d6 is also hard to assess. The bishops seem to balance out Black's extra pawn. These are raw chess fundamentals at work! 16 bxc3 cxdS 17 .txdS (D) 17 lLicS The first point is that 17 ... l:!.xc3? 1 8 i.d2 ! .l:i.xf3 19 .txa5 traps Black's rook. On 17 ... lLixd5

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 77

18 xd5 'fll c7, White has 19 'fll f5 ! (or 19 a5)

19. ..

lLib6 20 l:!.c5 (20 .txb6 'fll xb6 21 'fllxe5) 20 ... 'fll d6 21 l:he5 g6 22 'flif4 with the idea 22 ... lLixa4? 23 Wih.6!. These lines show the bish- ops in their best light.

18 c4 lLixd5 19 cxd5

The opening is essentially over and White has won it because the restraint upon his centre broke down. True, Black has the c-file and a comfortable knight on c5 but as is so often the case, the advantage of an ideal centre is trans formed into a powerful central passed pawn that wreaks havoc. 19  lLixa4 After a slow move the bishop and passed pawn are too much; e.g., 1 9. .. l:Ifd8 20 'flig4 'it>h8 21 J:Iac l b6 22 l:!.c4 and l:Idc l . 20 'fll f5! f6 Or 20 ... l:Ife8 2 1 d6 l:Icd8 22 l:!.d5.

21 d6 l:Icd8 22 'fll

e6+ l:If7?! Losing, but after 22 ... @h8 23 d7 the pawn is strong, backed up by the advantage of bishop versus knight. l:Iac 1 -c8 is one problem. 23 l:Idcl @rs 24 J:Ic8 b5 25 l:!.acl 1-0 Bogoljubow - Kramer Travemiinde 1951

[diagram]

78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

20  .  'Yi'b6 Not 20 .. . .l:i.xd4? 2 1 tll b3. 21 tlle2 cS! Just in time, Black manages to get this move in with the help of tactics. Of course, the nor mally dangerous response d5 isn't remotely possible. 22 tll c4 White cedes a pawn but what else? 22 dxc5 i.xc5 ! 23 'Yi'xc5 (23 .l:lxc5 .l:ld3 ! ) 23 ... 'Yi'xc5 24 l:!.xc5 .l:lxd2 threatens e2 and b2. 22 .. 'Yi'c6 23 f3 cxd4 Black's strategy has succeeded . . . . tllh7-g5 was quite a blow to White's position. 24 'Yi'd3 tll h7 2S f4 tllf6 26 tlld2 'Yi'xc2! 27 'Yi'xc2 d3 28 'Yi'c4 dxe2 29 .l:lel .l:lxd2 Black is winning. G. Lee - Taulbut British Ch (Morecambe) 1981

1 e4 dS 2 exdS 'Yi'xdS 3 tll

f3 Instead of the usual 3 tllc3. 3  tll f6 4 d4 .trs s .te2 e6 6 O-O c6 7 .tf4 tllbd7 8 c4 'Vias 9 tllc3 (D) In this situation, White has a c-pawn, not an e-pawn as in the last two examples. Although both configurations arise regularly and have differences, Black's main strategy is still to get ... e5 or ...c5 in, and White would like to play d5. 9 .. .lib4 10 'Yi'b3 O-O 11 tlleS!? tll xeS 12 i.xeS tlld7 13 i.g3 eS! He has to play this way to get counterplay. White will transform the centre in response. 14 a3! .lixc3 lS bxc3 .l:i.fe8 16 .l:i.fel 'Yi'xb7 is an option here and next move.

16. .h6 17 'Yi'b4 'Yi'b6 18 cS!? 'Yi'xb4 19 axb4

exd4 20 cxd4 .l:i.e4 21 i.f3!? 21 .l:i.adl .l:lae8 22 Wfl is solid and equal. 21  .l:i.xd4 22 bS! tll xcS 23 bxc6 bxc6 24 i.xc6 .l:lc8 2S .tbs i.d3!? With White's two bishops gone, Black has won a pawn for very little, but White manages to scare up play. 26 .txd3 tll xd3 27 .l:i.edl .l:i.d7 28 f3 .l:lcd8 29 Wfl tllb4 30 .l:i.xd7 .l:lxd7 31 .tf2 tllc6 32 .l:la6 .l:lc7 33 i.g3 .l:i.c8 34 .lif2 .l:lc7 3S i.g3 .l:i.c8 36 .lif2 tllb4!? 37 .l:lxa7 .l:i.cl+ 38 Re2 The game is about equal and was eventually drawn. Djuric - Larsen Copenhagen 1979

1 e4 dS 2 exdS 'Yi'xdS 3 tll

c3 'Vias 4 d4 tll f6 5 tllf3 i.fS 6 .tc4 tllbd7 7 'Yi'e2 e6 8 .td2 .tb4! 9 a3 O-O 10 O-O i.xc3! 11 .txc3 'Yi'b6 (D) This was a shocking idea at the time: giving up the bishop-pair and accepting less space at the same time! But the ...c6/ ... e6 structure is very handy for such a position: knights are tem porarily as good as bishops and ...c5 or ...e5 is not to be stopped forever. 12 .tb3 as 13 .ta4 c6 14 i.d2! Rerouting from a passive square to a nice lengthy diagonal is logical.

14. . h6 lS i.e3 .l:i.fe8 16 c3

16 c4 is the thematic move. Then Black might

think about exchanging off his other bishop by 16 ... .tg4!? (16. .. 'Yi'c7 would prepare ... e5 and also makes sense) 1 7 h3 i.xf3 18 'Yi'xf3 'Yi'a6! ? 19 .l:i.ac 1 b 5 20 cxb5 cxb5 21 .tc2 tll d5 and this

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 79

[diagram]

[diagram]
ltJgf6 6 lLixf6+ lLixf6 7 .tc4 .tf5 8 'fll e2 e6 9 .llg5 .te7 10 O-O-O .tg4! (D) A familiar idea. A knight on d5 becomes as strong as a bishop.

11 h3 .txf3 12 'fll

xf3 lLid5 13 .txe7 A very important point is that Black will get a great attack if White tries to conserve his bishpp-pair: 1 3 ..Bd2 b5 14 .tb3 a5 ! . 1 3 . 'fll xe7 1 4 .t:rhel O-O 1 5 @bl 15 .txd5 Wlg5+ 16 'it>bl cxd5 is equal. 15  .t:radS (D) Here we have a d4- and c-pawn versus ... c6/ ...e6 again. Obviously White needs to play c4 if he's going to claim any advantage, but Petrosian has a way of dealing with that. 16 .tb3 'fll f6!? Considering what happens, there's really no reason for this. 17 'fll e2 White could have admitted to his difficulties and exchanged the knight on d5. But the posi tion seems so innocent. 17  .t:rd7 18 c3 The advance 1 8 c4 is way too committal and weakens d4: 18. .. lLie7 1 9 .tc2 .t:rfd8 20 'flid3 ltJg6 and the pawn will fall.

[diagram]
A simple idea designed to prevent c4, and Black also has in mind a minority attack with ...b4.

19 g3 .t:rfd8 20 f4!?

[diagram]

80 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w .l:i.xdl+ 34 'iVxdl 'Yi'xc3+ 35 @bl l'Bxh3 36 a4 hS! 37 gxhS 'iVfS+ 38 @b2 'iVxf4 39 @b3 'iVfS 40 @c4 @h7 41 'Yi'd2 0-1 The opening of the following game com bines this ... b5 idea with our earlier theme of the fight between an isolated d-pawn and iso lated c-pawn: lordachescu - Wohl Naujac sur Mer 2002

1 e4 lZ'Bf6 2 eS lZ'idS 3 d4 d6 4 lZ'Bf3 dxeS S lLixeS

c6 6 .tc4 lZ'Bd7 7 lZ'Bf3 e6 8 O-O Again we've arrived at the ...c6/ ... e6 re straint structure, coming from a slightly unusual source. Now Black makes a very committal but logical move: 8 ...bS!? 9 .td3 .i.b7 (D) The bishop may not seem to be doing much here, but Black wants to play ...a6 and ... c5. If you know the Meran Variation of the Semi-Slav you might recognize that idea right away and take action against it, as Iordachescu does. 10 a4! The same technique as in the Meran. 10  a6 Now ...c5 is prevented for a while. 1 1 .l:i.el .te7 12 lZ'ibd2 White seems to be planning a stock attack by lZ'Be4 but Black's next move changes his mind. 12 . 'Yi'b6?! (D) 12 ...O-O 13 lZ'Be4 'Yi'b6 is better since it takes the bite out of c4 . 13 c4! White takes on an isolated and fully block aded pawn on d4. But having seen this d4 ver sus c6 structure before (hopefully many times) he assesses this as a favourable isolated queen's pawn position. Black is well-developed, and if he gets ...c5 in it will open up the b7-bishop and activate his game. The issue then is whether White can make use of any particular advan tages that he has in advance of that freeing move. The dark squares and aggressively-placed pieces look good, so the first question is: where is Black weak? The squares c5, e5 and d6 may be vulnerable, and if you've foreseen the move 15 .tg5 before playing 1 3 c4, that should be enough to convince you to go ahead. 13 . bxc4 14 lZ'Bxc4 'Yi'c7 15 .tgS! (D) 15 .cS?! Black's position is still solid, so he shouldn't allow the exchange of dark-squared bishops. Other moves are 15 ... lZJ7f6 16 l:tc l O-O and 15 ... .tb4, just to get castled. The b4-square is a nice outpost for Black, who has a future ... .l:i.b8 in mind.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 81

16 l:Icl!? O-O 17 il.xe7 0,xe7 18 0,ce5 l:Iad8 19 b4 Admirably sticking to his purpose, even though the tactic 1 9 il.xh7+ xh7 20 0,g5+ 'it>g8 2 1 0,xd7 ! does ultimately win after com plications.

19. .

0,xeS 20 0,xe5 Black's c-pawn falls, and the opening is over. Previous knowledge of the properties of ...c6/ ...e6 restriction and the standard IQP posi tion, as well as recognizing the similarity to the Meran Variation, undoubtedly helped White to find his way in this game. That is an illustration of what I call 'cross-pollination' , discussed be low. Rather than trying to fight directly against the ...c6/ ...e6 complex, it's sometimes better to give up on d5 and transform the structure. In this famous game White does so by using his support-points: Spassky - Petrosian Moscow Wch (13) 1966

[diagram]
13 O-O-O O-O-O ( D)

14 0,e5! 0,xe5 15 dxe5 0,d7 16 f4 White stands well. He has more space and no worries about the kind of central attacks that we've seen from Black. Of course, White still needs to break through Black's defences; he does so by creating another support-point on c5. .. il.e7 17 0,e4 0,c5 18 0,c3 f6!? w This creates a weakness on e6 but otherwise White can squeeze Black by expansion on ei ther or both wings. 19 exf6 il.xf6 20 c4! b6 21 b4 0,a6 22 0,e4! White has the advantage. He can exploit the weakness on e6, or play for a well-timed 0,c5. Spassky went on to win the game. Space and Structure The relationship of space to structure is poten tially an immense subject, but I just want to make a few comments about it. We know that White is the one who will generally grab more space in the opening (particularly in the major openings discussed in this book). Several situ ations can arise for Black. In the Closed Sys tem of the Ruy Lopez and several other double e-pawn openings, Black's strongpoint on e5 (based upon the pawn-chain c7-d6-e5) and his b5-pawn establish a sufficient command of ter ritory that he doesn't usually feel the need to acquire more. The Chigorin set-up with ... 0,a5 and ...c5 is an exception, in that it is clearly aimed at extending Black's territorial reach; but that this policy is not necessary is shown by the popular Breyer, Zaitsev, M0ller and Smyslov Variations (see Chapter 8 on the Ruy Lopez for examples). To some extent this is also true with the double d-pawn openings such as the Queen's Gambit Declined and Slav. Nevertheless, in the traditional Queen's Gambit variations Black tends to play for ...e5 at some point, arguably exchanging one type of territorial control (the d5-pawn) for another that also activates his pieces. In the Dutch Variation of the Slav ( 1 d4

82 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

d5 2 c4 c6 3 lllf3 lllf6 4 lll c3 dxc4 5 a4 iLf5 6 e3), Black is generally in no hurry to play ... e5 or even ... c5, which also true of several of the other ...e6/ ... c6 restraint openings that we saw above, especially since his queen's bishop is outside his pawn-chain. By contrast, look at many of the other major d-pawn openings. In the King's Indian Defence main lines (e.g., 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 g6 3 lllc3 ii.g7 4 e4 d6 followed by ...O-O and ...e5), once White takes space in the centre, Black will seldom be satisfied that the single central pawn on e5 fully represents his interests in that sector. Without further pawn moves he will slowly be strangled by White's central and queenside pawn ad vances. Therefore you will almost always see a rapid .. .f5, or in some cases an attempt to take over territory on the queenside by ... c6 or ...c5. Likewise in the Modern Benoni (1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 e6 4 lll c3 exd5 5 cxd5 d6 followed by ...g6, ...ii.g7, ...O-O, etc.), Black can almost never be satisfied with the central control of fered by his c5-pawn. In most variations he is almost compelled to win more space by ... b5 or .. .f5 or get strangled by White's pieces and on rushing pawns. In the Semi-Slav, a combina tion of ... dxc4 and ... b5, or ... dxc4, ... ii.d6 and ... e5 is customary before White extends his con trol over the central squares (note that Black's light-squared bishop is trapped behind his pawns). What about the Sicilian Defence? In general, if he has the ...e6/ ... d6 centre, Black is in a re markable lack of hurry to take on more space. At most he will play ...b5, and if White stops that by playing a4 it is hardly a matter of great concern. But look at White's various strategies against the Sicilian. It seems practically man datory to expand his reach over the board. Re cently there are players who set up with f3, g4, g5 and h4 (and even h5 and g6) against the ma jority of Sicilian variations. Traditionally, f4 has been a standard way of proceeding, with f5 to follow or perhaps e5 (although the latter is sometimes more of a tactical device, because the pawn will seldom stay on e5 long enough to be a true claimant of territory). These days there are also more combinations of f4 and g4. Barring those kingside moves, White will at least play a4 to stake out some space on the queenside. In the Maroczy Bind and Hedgehog Variations, in which White already has control of space with pawns on c4 and e4, Black finds it a little more urgent to achieve ...b5 or ... d5, or at least threaten to do so. Almost every opening can be looked at_ in this way, that is, how vital is it for the side with less space (usually Black) to win space, and how quickly? What about the need for White to take on more space quickly, or can he be pa tient? If you understand the urgency (or lack of it) in achieving these goals, you will have a much better feel for the logic and timing behind the opening moves. Cross-Pol I ination Sometimes manoeuvres and positional ideas will arise across openings that are not specifi cally related, a phenomenon that I call 'cross pollination' . We have seen repeated examples of structures that show up in various openings, and in a way everything that we've seen about structures to this point has involved cross pollination, that is, every structure has been re lated to other structures. Here I'll briefly discuss the process that may lead you to recognize such similarities and therefore play an unfamiliar or only partly familiar variation with increased confidence. Grandmasters are very good at see ing this type of relationship in subtle ways. You'll gain a lot from the very process of using your study and experience from one position and then applying it to another. All the more reason to keep your opening knowledge broad and not overspecialized. As an example, you've probably wondered whether to play with an isolated queen's pawn in a given position. This requires judgements based upon experience. We already know that the isolated pawn offers similar lessons across a wide range of openings. We even see standard IQP positions that are essentially the same in the Nimzo-Indian, Caro-Kann, Sicilian and Queen's Gambit. But you'll consistently be given the option of deciding whether a new IQP position in a foreign position has more good features than defects, and experience with other open ings will do more than an author's generalities can. A more interesting illustration of cross pollination relates to decisions about when to

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 83

bring your queen out, and whether you can do so productively at an early stage. If, as Black, you've captured some 'poisoned' pawns on b2 or gambited them as White, you'll certainly get a better feel for when to take the risk in either way. Here are a few examples that you might run into:

1 e4 c5 2 fllf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lll

[diagram]

1 e4 g6 2 d4 J.g7 3 lll

[diagram]
6 J.e2 cxd4 7 cxd4 lll

[diagram]

[diagram]

1 d4 lll

[diagram]
1 d4 lll

[diagram]

[diagram]

1 d4 lll

[diagram]

2 c3 d5 3 exd5 xd5 and c3 is occupied so that

[diagram]

84 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

with 1 c4 lllf6 2 lll c3 e6 3 e4 d5 4 cxd5 exd5 5 e5 llle4 6 lll xe4 dxe4 7 Vi'a4+ il.d7 8 Vi'xe4 ii.c6. The broader your exposure to typical structures, the better you'll be able to handle unfamiliar situations. See Chapter 14 on the Pirc Defence for more details about this varia tion; the next thing that happens is that it turns into an Open Variation of the Ruy Lopez! Along the same lines (bringing queens to d4 or d5), a tricky anti-Sicilian variation goes 1 e4 c5 2 lllf3 d6 3 c3 lllf6 4 ii.d3 ! ? lllc6, when some players may not want to face ... ii.g4, so they play 5 h3. But with that pawn on c3, 5 ... d5 should be considered, with the idea 6 e5 llld7, and nowWhite can play 7 ii.b5 Vi'b6 (a French Defence pattern), or he might enter into the se quence 7 e6! ? fxe6 8 lllg5, a tactical ploy that arises in a good half-dozen other opening varia tions. With experience in any of those, you may be helped by recognition of associated patterns such as 8 ... lll f6 9 lll xh7 (9 ii.xh7 lllxh7 10 Vi'h5+ 'it>d7 1 1 lllxh7 'it>c7, etc.) 9 ... l!Vd6 (or maybe 9 ... lllxh7 10 Vi'h5+ 'it>d7 1 1 il.xh7 b6, even if you haven't seen that one before). The fact that you've seen and/or played other posi tions with the e6 move helps you to make more accurate calculations and gives you confidence that the resulting positions should be fine for Black. There are plenty of other cases of an early 'it'xd4 (or ... l!Vxd5) in which the c3-square (or c6-square for Black) isn't occupied. The sim plest of these is the Scandinavian Defence (Centre Counter) 1 e4 d5 2 exd5 l!Vxd5, when 3 lll c3 forces the loss of a tempo with the queen, still out early and subject to further attack. I think that it's fair to say that the reason that Black can get away with this is that the knight isn't all that well placed on c3, such that Black can play moves like ... ii.f5, ... e6 and ... c6 at some point, when White would prefer to have his c-pawn free to advance and increase his central control. Or the queen, when attacked, may use the tempo 'lost' to make a second pro ductive move. A good example comes up in the line 1 c4 e5 2 g3 lllf6 3 lt:Jf3 e4 4 lt:Jd4 lllc6 5 lllc2 d5 6 cxd5 Vi'xd5 7 lllc3 Vi'h5 ! intending ... ii.h3, when Black has an excellent game. That leads to many other examples, such as those in which a knight on c3 (or ... c6) is pinned, so that a queen can come to d4 (or d5). A well known case is the Nimzo-Indian line with 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 e6 3 lllc3 ii.b4 4 l!Vc2 d5 5 cxd5 Vi'xd5; and a related one is the Chigorin De fence with 1 d4 d5 2 c4 lllc6 3 cxd5 l!Vxd5 4 e3 e5 5 lllc3 ii.b4. From the white side, we have a Sicilian Defence with 1 e4 c5 2 lllf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 Vi'xd4 lllc6 5 il.b5, which we might compare with a Philidor Defence 1 e4 e5 2 lt:Jf3 d6 3 d4 exd4 4 l!Vxd4 lllc6 5 ii.b5. In both cases the queen is allowed to stand her ground, but often at the cost of the bishop-pair. Do you spot the main difference? In the Sicilian line, Black keeps his central majority intact; in the Philidor Black surrenders the centre. After a while it be comes second nature to look for these situa tions, and advanced players do so. Cross-pollination between 1 d4 and 1 e4 is more common than you'd think. The chess player with some experience may have noticed that the Benoni pawn-chain ...c5/. ..d6 versus White's e4/d5 will often arise in the King's In dian Defence, after, for instance, 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 g6 3 lll c3 ii.g7 4 e4 d6 5 ii.e2 O-O 6 ii.g5 c5 7 d5 h6 8 ii.e3 e6 9 lllf3 exd5 10 cxd5 and in several other major lines. But if you're playing the black side of a Ruy Lopez, you might consider heading for this same structure by way of vari ous Closed lines. For example, in the Keres Variation you may arrive at this main position:

1 e4 e5 2 lllf3 lllc6 3 ii.b5 a6 4 ii.a4 lllf6 5 O-O

[diagram]

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF STRUCTURE 85

White will prevent it. All Black needs to do next is 'fianchetto' his bishop by ... J.f6 and he will obtain an excellent game. White doesn't want to allow this and plays 15 lllxe5, but as it turns out that frees Black's game or at least gives his pieces places to go. Cross-pollination will appear in contexts that are not strictly structural, but relate to the scope of plausible structures. I think that a lot of this shows up in the opening preparation of players and their borrowing of ideas from each other. Grandmaster X will see a new move that Grand master Y has played on the 1 8th move of a cer tain variation of the Sicilian. Then he may apply that move to his 14th move in a closely-related variation. That is an interesting exchange of ideas, of course, but it's more exciting to see players latch on to the same moves or general ideas across the range of openings. The number of older, well-known, positions in which White has recently found and played the move g4 can not be coincidental. Whole articles have been written about this move appearing in so many new and interesting contexts. The list of open ings thus affected includes several variations of the English Opening, the Semi-Slav, the Two Knights Defence, the Bogo-Indian Defence, the Dutch Defence, the Caro-Kann Defence, and just about every variation of the Sicilian De fence! And I could make a similar although shorter list of openings in which Black has be gun to use the move ... g5. Obviously, once the idea struck players' imaginations they began to look for it in every position. Something that has struck me about chess from the last several decades, actually stretch ing back more than a century but only recently flowering, is the phenomenon of semi-waiting moves in the opening. That is, moves that serve a definite purpose but only just so, and which seem to need the opponent' s cooperation to take on meaning. It is fascinating to see, how ever, that these moves are a little more effective than my description would imply, i.e. the oppo nent hasn't really the luxury of doing nothing in return without giving ground. A lot of these ideas are unassuming; for example, develop ment of pieces to the second rank that appear to have five good answers and yet are hard to meet. Or a sequence of moves that seems to lose a tempo but puts the opponent' s pieces somewhere they' d rather not be; for instance, in d-pawn and c-pawn openings with an early ...e6 we see many new cases of ... i.b4+ followed by ... J.e7, and ... J.a6 followed by ... J.b7. In the Sicilian Defence and English Opening, Black always seems to be playing ... J.c5 or ... i.b4 followed by ... i.e7. I find the little rook's pawn moves to be par ticularly thought-provoking, and I suspect that grandmasters are finding inspiration from such moves' success in some openings to experiment with them in others. These are not necessarily new moves but often obscure older ones which later received general acceptance. For instance, Kasparov's strengthening of Petrosian's little move 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 e6 3 lllf3 b6 4 a3 ! ? led to an explosion of games and investigations, and 4 a3 has been going strong in the Queen's Indian Defence for many years now. Variations such as

1 c4 c5 2 lll

[diagram]

86 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

and so forth. These all seem fully playable, in part because ...c5 can follow and 'threaten' to go into a favourable Sicilian Defence, an ex ample of cross-pollination. Recently players started looking at long-established openings and found a new idea or rediscovered it in older literature; for instance, 1 e4 e5 2 lbf3 lbc6 3 lllc3 lllf6 4 a3 ! ?. This is another waiting move that doesn't do much but achieves a little some thing; for example, 4 ... ii.c5 5 lll xe5 ! , when the resource ... ii.b4 isn't available after 5 ... lllxe5 6 d4. Or in the Pirc Defence, the remarkable 1 e4 d6 2 d4 lllf6 3 lllc3 g6 4 f4 ii.g7 5 a3 !?, prevent ing the usual 5 ...c5 in view of 6 dxc5 l!Va5 7 b4, and otherwise waiting for Black to make a com mittal move, of which it turns out that many have disadvantages. In the Sicilian Defence, 1 e4 c5 2 lll f3 lllc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lll xd4 lllf6 5 lllc3 e6 became a popular way to avoid major Sicil ian theory; after a century of experience with that line players noticed the possibility of 6 a3, preventing 6 ... ii.b4 and again waiting to see what Black is going to do. There's a current in terest in 1 e4 c5 2 a3 (not to mention 2 llla3 ! ?), and even a monograph devoted to it. Similar things have been going on with Black. In the French Defence with 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 lllc3 (and 3 llld2), grandmasters have been using 3 ...h6 (the other rook' s pawn!), asking White to commit while preventing il.g5 and finding the move ...g5 useful in a remarkable number of positions. Likewise, Anand and many others have played 1 c4 e5 2 g3 lllf6 3 ii.g2 h6. It seems obvious that these sorts of ideas feed off each other, with each new explorer inspired by the most recent discoveries. But if you look at the details of the newly discovered theory and practice of such lines, you will see that standard structures from other chess openings appear everywhere throughout them. In other words, experiments like these are successful only be cause of the vast knowledge of traditional open ings that lets players find old patterns in new contexts. The moral of the story is not to play the move a3 in every position (or any position!), but to realize that mastery of openings comes from a broader set of structures and techniques that ap pear across the board. While you study the tra ditional openings, be sure to look at ideas from every other source to reinforce what you're learning. Furthermore, you can look at structural themes in the same way, comparing them from opening to opening. The more that you examine and compare outposts and support-points, for example, the more you will find yourself able to work with them. Ask simple questions when you play over games by grandmasters: when are outposts on squares like e5, d5, e4 and d4 similar, and how do they differ? Does the out post piece radiate influence and make counter play fruitless? Can the outpost be maintained? Can a piece on the outpost be exchanged off fa vourably in order to change the pawn-structure? Is there a situation in which the outpost can be 'played around' , leaving an impressive-looking but uninvolved piece occupying it? Similarly, is a piece on an outpost in front of doubled or backward pawns so powerful that it's worth a rook, or will it just sit there and block one's own play? Either result is possible. Cross-pollination turns out to be an unlimited subject and contributes to the fact that we take so strong an interest in chess. There are examples throughout this book and in most sources of chess information. Keep an eye out for them, es pecially as you study and play openings. You'll find it a fun exercise, and helpful for your chess.

4 Introduction to 1 e4 and the Open

Games Want to play a game of chess? I'll move first:

1 e4 (D)

Advancing the e-pawn two squares is the old est and still the most popular way to begin the game. Beginners who know little more than the rules proudly play 1 e4 before they start losing their pieces. Chess in the movies is dominated by e-pawn play. The majority of the world's top ten players use 1 e4 more often than not. What's so great about this move? On the most basic level, 1 e4 fights for control of the key central square d5, and it frees the fl-bishop to join the fray. Indeed, in the 1 e4 e5 openings that dominated chess practice for so many years, we find the bishop being developed at an early stage. Surprisingly, however, that doesn't hold true for most of Black's other defences to 1 e4. What other advantages stand forth? Well, mov ing the e-pawn also opens up the d l -h5 diago nal for White's queen to come out on, although she doesn't use that privilege much in the early stages, so as not to become an object of attack. White's queen does prevent or discourage cer tain uncommon deployments of Black's pieces and pawns, such as rash advances involving .. .f6 or .. .f5. These are not exactly compelling reasons for

1 e4 to have ascended to the throne of the open

ings realm. Maybe we should think on an even more fundamental level. What's the first goal of opening play? To control the centre. And what's the best way to do that? To set up an ideal cen tre. There are only two moves involved in that project: e4 and d4. To some extent, playing the one creates the threat to play the other. Thus, playing one of these two moves right away nar rows Black's set of logical responses and in some sense establishes a degree of control. At that point there are various advantages to either move, and indeed 1 d4 is White's second most popular opening move by a landslide. The over all preference for 1 e4 then comes down to more subtle factors, and I may as well cite the obvious fact that in the great majority of open ings, 1 e4 prepares the way for kingside cas tling more quickly than does 1 d4. Now things get a little more complicated. Notice that the e4-pawn is undefended. Not surprisingly, Black will often attack it and try to compel White to spend a move protecting his pawn. This immediate vulnerability is not shared by other popular first moves by White such as 1 d4, 1 c4, or 1 lllf3. Hence Breyer's proclamation that 'After 1 e4, White's game is in its last throes' ! That is melodramatic, of course, but it does reflect the direction in which Black's defences will tend to go. He will gener ally create threats to White's e-pawn, usually by the move ... lllf6 or by ... d5. We find such an attack on White's e4-pawn in most of the major defences to 1 e4, usually within the first two or three moves of the game. For example: a) The Caro-Kann: 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5; b) The Alekhine: 1 e4 lll f6; c) The Petroff: 1 e4 e5 2 fllf3 lll f6; d) The French: 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 (and 3 lll c3 lll f6 or 3 llld2 lll j6, among other examples);

88 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

e) The Scandinavian: 1 e4 d5; f) The Pirc: 1 e4 d6 2 d4 t:fJ/6. After 1 e4 e5 much the same holds; for ex ample, 2 f4 exf4 3 t:fJf3 d5 (or 3 ... t:fJ/6). Or, after

[diagram]
t:fJ/6 and many other Ruy Lopez positions with ... t:fJf6 at a very early stage. An exception to all this is the Sicilian De fence: after 1 e4 c5, Black's move ... d5 is nor mally inferior and in the main lines he doesn't usually get to play ... t:fJf6 until the 4th or 5th move (e.g., 2 t:fJf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 t:fJxd4 t:fJf6), or perhaps later (after 2 t:fJf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 t:fJxd4 t:fJc6 5 t:fJc3 a6 6 ii.e2 'W/c7 7 O-O t:fJf6, for exam ple). Nevertheless, attack on White's e4-pawn is a consistent theme of Black's strategy in these Sicilian variations; he very often follows ... t:fJf6 with moves such as ... ii.b7, ... t:fJbd7-c5 and the like. Finally, one of White's principal alternatives to 1 e4 c5 2 t:fJf3 is 1 e4 c5 2 c3, to which Black normally replies 2 ... d5 or 2 ... t:fJf6, both attacking e4. This observation may seem trivial, but in how many queen's pawn openings (i.e., those stemming from 1 d4) does Black attack the d4- pawn at all? Certainly not early on in openings like the following: a) The Queen's Gambit Declined: 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 and, for example, 3 t:fJc3 t:fJf6 4 il.g5 ii.e7

5 e3 O-O, etc.;

b) The Nimzo-Indian: 1 d4 t:fJf6 2 c4 e6 3 t:fJc3 ii.b4; c) The major Indian defences that begin with I ...t:fJf6 and 2 ... e6 or 2 ...g6, with the exception of the Benoni ( 1 d4 t:fJf6 2 c4 c5). This is not universally the case, but for the most part it holds true. After 1 t:fJf3, of course, White's knight is ex empt from direct attack by Black; in practical terms, so is White's pawn after 1 c4. We there fore have a fundamental difference between 1 e4 and other first moves. The Open Games It is interesting that 1 e4 is commonly thought to be an 'attacking' move. To some extent that derives from the very exposure of the e4-pawn to attack, which can lead to early confrontation and the kind of dynamism often associated with king's pawn openings. But the characterization of 1 e4 as an 'attacking' opening, and of 1 d4 as a 'positional' opening doesn't really follow. The openings arising from 1 e4 e5 are called the 'Open Games' because pieces tend to come out rapidly and at least part of the pawn-centre tends to evaporate. In particular, the association of 1 e4 with aggressive play stems in large part from the tradition of tactically-based annihila tions that spring from 1 e4 e5. Openings deriv ing from 1 e4 e5 (D) are also combative from at least one perspective, namely that even within the first few moves the players so often make threats to pawns, pieces, or even the king. We can see this reputation illustrated by nu merous standard variations. The move 2 t:fJf3 immediately threatens the e-pawn, and after 2 ... t:fJc6 3 ii.c4 t:fJf6, 4 t:fJg5 already attacks the king! Such things don't happen after 1 d4 d5. It might be useful to look at some of the more traditional openings after 1 e4 e5. We have 2 f4 (the King's Gambit, an opening ubiquitous in master chess of the 1 9th century). After 2 ...exf4 White tries to attack the king down the f-file in conjunction with ii.c4, t:fJf3 and O-O. 2 d4 is an other way to attack the pawn, and after 2 ...exd4 3 c3, White is already trying to blast open the centre with tempo (after 3 ...dxc3, 4 ii.c4!? cxb2 5 il.xb2 is the Danish Gambit, and 4 t:fJxc3 is the Goring Gambit). The Vienna Game with 2 t:fJc3 t:fJf6 3 ii.c4 t:fJxe4 4 l!Vh5 has all the ele ments of attacking chess. Even the generally calm Giuoco Piano main line, 2 t:fJf3 t:fJc6 3 i.c4 ii.c5 4 c3 (don't forget 4 b4, the Evans Gambit) 4 ... t:fJf6 5 d4 exd4 6 cxd4 ii.b4+, can result in violent play after 7 t:fJc3 !? t:fJxe4 8 O-O ii.xc3 9 d5 and similar variations. There are

INTRODUCTION TO I e4 AND THE OPEN GAMES 89

[diagram]

[diagram]
So which is objectively better, 1 e4 or 1 d4? The short answer is that it depends upon the prefer ences of the individual player. To go any fur ther, we should address the state of theory. Many of us will remember that for some time 1 d4 was Garry Kasparov's main opening move, played in order to generate attacks. Indeed, a significant portion of his most brilliant and ag gressive games begin with 1 d4. Attackers like Shirov also used d-pawn openings, as did a younger and more aggressive Kramnik. Korch noi rarely deviates from his adherence to 1 d4/1 c4 openings and of course many other top-level grandmasters use 1 d4 almost exclusively. Nev ertheless, at this moment we see a distinct pref erence for 1 e4 among most of the world's strongest grandmasters. Is that because 1 d4 isn't an exciting move? Would you say that the Exchange Variation of the Griinfeld, the Bot vinnik Variation of the Semi-Slav, the Exchange Variation of the Queen's Gambit Declined, the Taimanov Variation of the Benoni, and any number of King's Indian lines, are not aggres sive attacking systems? In reality, what happens is that in different eras, individual defences prove to be temporary barriers to the general use of 1 e4 or 1 d4 at the very highest levels. At this moment in time I would say that the Nimzo-Indian ( 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 e6 3 lll c3 i.b4) is such a defence, with Black complementing its use with the Queen's Indian Defence or Queen's Gambit Declined when confronted by 3 lllf3. Recently, however, White has done reasonably well against the Queen's Indian and it has tradi tionally been possible to create chances against the Queen's Gambit. Furthermore, White's score against the Nimzo-Indian is somewhat better than his score against other openings,

90 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

including those beginning with 1 e4. In the Ruy Lopez, on the other hand, we currently see White avoiding the Marshall Attack with, for example, an early h3 followed by moves such as d3, a3, lll c3 and ii.a2 (see Chapter 8). Given the unambitious appearance of this method of play (although it's faring tolerably well so far), one wonders if the pendulum might swing back to 1 d4. Or perhaps players will amend their tastes some years hence, for unrelated reasons. That is part of the fun of following opening the ory. At any rate, the average player (and even 'ordinary' master) need not worry about such matters; either first move will produce games with plenty of opportunities for victory. Don't worry if the recital of names in the last few paragraphs befuddles you. My point is to present 1 e4 from a broad perspective. It can be as much an option for positional players as for attacking players. There are ways to fight for very small and lasting advantages against nearly every defence to 1 e4, and there are ways to try to decimate the opponent with slash-and-bum tactics. Most of the latter methods come up short of their goal against proper defence, or in the face of counterattack by Black. Still, once the smoke has cleared, a bold attack may be just as effective as any other approach at producing a small but durable advantage. Rather than measuring degrees of aggres sion, a dispassionate investigation of e-pawn openings turns up a more interesting distinction between 1 e4 and 1 d4. This has to do with the acquisition of space by the pawn advance e5, which is prominent in the Semi-Open Garnes (defences other than 1 .. .e5), but can also occur in double e-pawn openings. Consider that White can play e5 on the third move of both the Caro Kann Defence ( 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 e5) and French Defence ( l e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 e5), and on the sec ond move of the Alekhine Defence ( 1 e4 lllf6 2 e5). Against the Pirc Defence, e5 is a common move in the variation 1 e4 d6 2 d4 lllf6 3 lll c3 g6 4 f4, and played in several lines with 4 lll f3 and 4 ii.c4. Just a bit further on in French De fence games, we have 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 lllc3 ii.b4 4 e5, 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 lll c3 lt:Jf6 4 ii.g5 ii.e7 5 e5, and so forth. After 1 e4 e5, there are moves such as 2 lllf3 lllc6 3 ii.c4 lllf6 4 d4 exd4 5 e5, or the more complex 2 lllf3 lllc6 3 d4 exd4 4 lll xd4 lZ:lf6 5 lllxc6 bxc6 6 e5, the latter revived and brought into prominence by World Champion Kasparov. Where do you find similar advances in the practice of 1 d4 d5, or in any line beginning with 1 d4? In a d-pawn opening, White seldom plays d5 with a threat within the first six moves. In fact, only in a few openings (such as 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5) does the d-pawn even reach the fifth rank, whether there is a threat or not. It's true that d5 will fairly often occur in the King's Indian Defence (e.g., 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 g6 3 lllc3 ii.g7 4 e4 d6 5 lllf3 O-O 6 ii.el e5 and now

7 d5 or 7 O-O lllc6 8 d5); and similarly in a few

lines of the Griinfeld. However, such d5 ad vances don't occur often after 1 d4 d5 and will usually happen well past the first several moves of the opening. In e-pawn openings, an analo gous situation would be the advance d5 in the Ruy Lopez, normally played after the 10th move. What does that mean? That by using 1 e4, at least in some openings, White has the option of staking out a significant space advantage early on. This is indeed an aggressive stance, but not one that involves open centres and multiple ex changes - quite the contrary. And keep in mind that when pawns are advanced they can become vulnerable; again we hark back to Breyer's 'last throes' . If you are an e-pawn player, you have to take that possibility into account when you advance your pawns. Failure to tie your oppo nent down or make other difficulties for him can sometimes leave you on the defensive. On the other hand, an aggressive pawn presence in the enemy camp can reward you with a winning advantage. You will see examples of both of these results throughout the book.

5 G iuoco Piano

1 e4 e5 2 tbf3 tbc6 3 J.c4 (D)

The move 3 J.c4 has been used consistently since the early days of chess in its modem form. Although far behind the Ruy Lopez (3 J.b5) in popularity, 3 J.c4 is White's second favourite continuation. Placing the bishop on c4 agrees with the principles of development and central ization, and prepares to castle quickly. It is also the move that most directly attacks Black's po sition, in particular the sensitive f7-square. In addition, White wants to control the central d5-square and thus prevent Black's freeing move . . .d5. In this respect 3 .ltc4 fulfils a positive po sitional role that, for instance, 3 J.e2 doesn't. As always, there are drawbacks, not obvious at first. Because the bishop on c4 makes no threat, Black himself is able to develop freely. That would also seem to be true of 3 .ltb5, which also has no direct threat; but the latter move discourages a number of black set-ups that .ltc4 doesn't, by virtue of the potential threat of .ltxc6 and tbxe5. In the Giuoco Piano, moreover, we shall see that if Black does achieve the move ... d5, White may lose a tempo or suffer some positional disadvantage. These considerations are rather abstract, and can only be shown by example. I should mention that the Bishop's Open ing, l e4 e5 2 J.c4, is a respectable choice that will sometimes transpose to 3 J.c4, for in stance after 2 ... J.c5 3 tbf3 tbc6. The inde pendent line 2 J.c4 tbf6 3 d3 c6 4 tbf3 d5 5 J.b3 J.d6 can lead to complex play, and of course Black can play ... tbc6 on one of the first few moves. One of the problems with 2 J.c4 is that Black has various ways to control the direction of play. That interferes with some players' desire to be in command as White, particularly when facing a symmetri cal variation such as l ...e5. 3 ... J.c5 (D) This development of Black's bishop is the oldest well-analysed response to 3 .ltc4. I'll use the generally accepted name 'Giuoco Piano' for 3 ... J.c5; it is also called 'the Italian Game' in recognition of the Italian players who published analysis of the move in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. With 3 ... J.c5, Black attends to White's move d4, the idea of which is to form an ideal centre. Moreover, the move tbg5 is lurking in the back ground; since that would attack the f7-square twice, Black wants to be ready to defend against the threat by castling. The straightforward posi tion after 3 ... J.c5 contains a majority of the ba sic classical ideas about development, centre and attack. That should motivate us to examine it in some depth.

92 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

4 c3 I shall concentrate upon this continuation as representing the purest intent of the opening: to establish an ideal centre and drive Black's pieces away with tempo. 4 c3 leads to play that resembles other openings and is therefore of general value. For organizational reasons, the line 4 d3 tllf6 is discussed in Chapter 6 about the Two Knights Defence. It will arise via the move-order 1 e4 eS 2 tllf3 tllc6 3 .ltc4 tllf6 4 d3 .lies. The similar 4 c3 tllf6 S d3 is placed at the end of this chapter.

4...tll

[diagram]

4 b4 .ltxb4 S c3), in which something like this

[diagram]

S ...

[diagram]

GIUOCO PIANO 93

pawns on the open c-file. However, he has the bishop-pair and is ready to assault White's centre by ...c5. There's little White can do about that; for example, 1 1 b4 ! ? (to stop ...c5; some other moves are 1 1 'ilic2 i..g4 ! and 1 1 h3 c5 ! 12 i..e3 cxd4 1 3 lt'Bxd4 'ilie8 ! , having in mind . . . 'ilixe5, or ...c5 and ...f6; lastly, 1 1 i..e3 i..a6 12 l:Iel c5 1 3 dxc5 lt'Bxc5 is good for Black) 1 l ...a5 1 2 i..a3 axb4 1 3 i..xb4 c5 14 dxc5 .ltxc5 15 i..xc5 lt'Bxc5 1 6 'iiic2 lt'Be6 1 7 l::t d 1 c5; then Black has two passed pawns and a nicely centralized position. Notice the combination of 1 3 ... c5 and 17. ..c5. This double-hammer with the c-pawns with the intent to destroy White's centre is a common theme. White should take that possibility into account when playing .ltxc6. This type of posi tion will frequently arise in other opening vari ations. 6    .ltb4+ (D) It's worth a look to see how powerful the possession of an unopposed ideal centre can be: 6 ... .ltb6? 7 d5 ! lt'Be7 8 e5 lt'Be4 9 O-O O-O 10 'ilie2 lt'Bc5 1 1 b4 lt'Ba6 12 d6 cxd6 1 3 exd6 lt'Bg6 14 .ltg5 'ilie8 1 5 .lte7 @h8 16 lt'Bc3 lt'Bxb4 17 l::t ael lt'Bc6 18 .ltxf8 'ilixe2 19 l::t xe2 lt'Bxf8 20 l::t e8 @g8 21 lt'Bd5 g6 22 lt'Be7+ 1-0 Euwe-Jutte, Am sterdam 1 927. See also the sample game in Chapter 1 . 7 .ltd2 The tactics that follow 7 lt'Bc3 lt'Bxe4 8 O-O .ltxc3 9 d5 lead to some 20 moves of theory and are not dealt with here. Various books will sup ply the details. 7 @fl , the 'Krakow Variation' , should be met by the standard counterthrust 7 ... d5 ! 8 exd5 lt'Bxd5 and it's not clear what the king is doing on f l . 7 ... ii.xd2+ Recently the older 7 ... lt'Bxe4 8 i..xb4 lt'Bxb4 9 i..xf7 + @xf7 10 'ilib3+ has again been tried for Black, often leading to 10. ..d5 1 1 lt'Be5+, when 1 1 ...@e6 ! ? 12 'ilixb4 c5 results in complex play. This line is unresolved; many players will not trust it because Black's king comes to the centre, and others will embrace its adventurous char acter. In any event, it's refreshing that long discarded variations can spring to life again. 8 lt'ibxd2 d5 9 exd5 lt'Bxd5 ( D) 10 'ilib3 White usually plays this immediately, in or der to attack Black's blockading knight on d5 before it is fully secured and before Black's king reaches safety. There are two instructive alternatives, the second of which keeps the game interesting for both players: a) 10 O-O is playable but allows Black more options after 10 ...O-O, when 1 1 'ilib3?! lt'Ba5 ! eliminates White's c4-bishop without compro mise. A demonstration of how White can pit his

94 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

10. ..e7+, then 1 1 @fl is good for White; like

[diagram]

GIUOCO PIANO 95

In this situation, the battle between piece activity and positional factors revolves specif ically around the isolated pawn and its block ader. Some samples of the play follow. O'Kelly - Euwe Amsterdam 1950

11 O-O c6 12 l::t

fel O-O Black has shored up d5 with no obvious dif ficulties. However, White has energetic minor pieces and can create significant problems. First, he stakes out some territory. 13 a4 Gaining space is often the best policy when there are no direct targets. White operates against ...b5, but also plans a5, serving the dou ble function of preparing an attack on b7 and keeping a knight from b6. The other strategy is to emphasize piece-play, for instance by 1 3 lLie4. White can also develop immediately by 1 3 l::t ac 1, as he has done in a few games; for ex - ample, 13 . . .a5 !? (or 1 3. .. iVb6 14 iVa3 .lte6 15 ctJe4, with nagging pressure involving moves like ctJd6, lLic5 and ctJfg5, Rossolimo-O'Kelly, Amsterdam 1 950; Black would most likely do better to play 13 ... ctJb6 14 .ltd3 .ltf5 15 lLie4 iVc7 with some kind of dynamic equality) 14 lLie4 a4 15 iVa3 ctJf5, Renner-Gabriel, 2nd Bun desliga 2000/1 ; at this point White had the op portunity for the transformation 16 .ltxd5 ! ? iVxd5 1 7 l::t c5 iVd8 1 8 iVb4 when Black is tied down; e.g., 1 8. .. l::t e8 19 l::t e5 ! .

13. ..

iVb6! Euwe's continuation is probably the most logical response. Simplification should help the defender and Black avoids weaknesses as well. The irritating effect of the pawn-push a5 shows up in the beautiful game Rossolimo-Reissman, Puerto Rico 1 967: 1 3. .. b6 14 ctJe5 .ltb7 15 a5 ! l::t c8?! (15 .. .f6! 16 ctJd3 @h8 is the consistent strategy, guarding d5; Black should use his own strengths) 16 ctJe4 iVc7 17 a6 .lta8 1 8 iVh3 ctJf4 19 iVg4 ctJed5 20 l::t a3 ! . Now Black's king is under serious attack before he has the chance to play ...c5 and free his a8-bishop. The game continued 20 ... ctJe6? (a poor move, but 20 ...c5 2 1 g3 ctJg6 22 lLixg6 hxg6 23 iVh4 is also good for White, with ideas including 24 ctJg5 ctJf6 25 l::t ae3 !) 2 1 .ltxd5 cxd5 22 ctJf6+ @h8 23 iVg6 ! !

Naturally the brilliance of this move strikes one first (reminiscent of the famous Levitsky Marshall ... iVg3 ! ! game) but an eye for detail will also pick up Black's bishop stuck behind the d5-pawn. That was of course the blockading square which was the pride and joy of Black's position. The game continued 23 ... iVc2 (mate on h7 is threatened, but accepting the queen sacrifice loses instantly: 23 .. .fxg6 24 lLixg6+ hxg6 25 l::t h3#; 23 ... hxg6 24 l::t h3#; or 23 ...gxf6 24 iVxf6+ lLig7 25 l::t g3 l::t g8 26 ctJxf7+) 24 l::t h3 ! 1-0. Either the rook or queen threatens to capture on h7 with checkmate on the next move, but 24 ... iVxg6 25 ctJxg6+ fxg6 26 l::t xh7# is checkmate. Instead of 1 3. .. iVb6 or 13 ...b6, a defence which avoids weakening the queenside and maintains the bishop on the h3-c8 diagonal is 1 3. .. l::t b8; for example, 14 a5 f6! ? (D). Any move of Black's f-pawn is double-edged: why would he allow a hole on e6? The answer is that, by protecting e5, Black prepares ... .ltg4

96 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

19. ..

[diagram]

16. .. !Ife8 gives a more solid impression.

Black is probably close to equality hereabouts but it's hard to counter White's queenside pres sure. 16 ... a6? would create a strongpoint on c5 which White could immediately occupy to good effect. 17 l:tacl After 17 tllxf7, Black's trick was l 7 ... tt:led5 ! with the threats of ... !Ixf7 and ... tll c2.

17. ..

tt:ledS 18 a6! (D) White destroys the foundation of Black's light-square bulwark.

18. ..bS 19 .ltxd5 cxd5 20 tt:lc6 tt:lxc6 21

!Ixc6 !Ife8 112-112

GIUOCO PIANO 97

Pachman analysed this position and showed that White stands much better, confirming the general idea that White's knight is superior to Black's bishop: 22 l:Ixe8+ l:Ixe8 23 f3 (23 h3 is also good) 23 ... l:Iel + (23 ... l:Ic8 24 l:Id6 i.e6 25 Clic5) 24 @f2 l::t b l 25 Clic5 l:Ixb2+ 26 @g3 g5 27 l::t c7 @g7 28 llxa7 lla2 29 l':.b7 i.c8 30 l::t xb5 i.xa6 3 1 Clixa6 l:Ixa6 32 l::t xd5 with a technically winning game. All this material is terribly instructive for the developing player, and even masters might find the ideas intriguing. Chasing the Pieces

10. .

[diagram]

11. . 

[diagram]

12 O-O!? (D)

[diagram]

10 O-O O-O 1 1 c2, mentioned above in the note

[diagram]

... O-O

98 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

14. ..

[diagram]

1 e4 e5 2 tll

f3 tllc6 3 .ltc4 .ltc5 4 c3 tllf6 5 d3

(D)

This is the kind of slow move that White typ ically makes in order to play it safe and engage Black in a battle of positional skills. His ideas by setting up this structure are: a) to protect his e4-pawn; b) to cover the d4-square against intrusions by Black's pieces (in particular ... tt:ld4); and c) to hold off on the move d4 until his pieces are more developed, thereby avoiding the forc ing variation that we saw in the main variation after 5 d4 exd4 6 cxd4 .ltb4+, which was soon followed by the centre-clearing move ...d5. On the other hand, Black now has much more freedom to develop his pieces. Without

GIUOCO PIANO 99

[diagram]

10 O-O!, because 10. ..

'ilixe5?? loses to 1 1 .l:.el . Also weak would be 5 ... O-O 6 O-O d5?! 7 exd5 tbxd5 8 b4! followed by 9 b5. These lines show one of the benefits that White gets by playing c3.

6 O-O O-O

6 ... .ltg4 is also possible, with more or less the same kind of position that we shall discuss in Chapter 6 when we look at 4 d3 in the Two Knights Defence. 7 tiJbd2 (D) 7 ... a6!? Advancing the a-pawn so modestly has two ideas: to put the bishop on the safe square a7 and to be able to play ... tba5 and capture the c4-bishop. That exchange would gain Black the advantage of the bishop-pair with no conces sion on his part. Note that 7 ... tba5 right away would have allowed 8 .ltb5 ! a6 9 i.a4 b5 10 .ltc2, which saves White's bishop from ex change and threatens b4. So we can see another advantage of White's move c3. After the text move, the positional threat of 8 ... tba5 is real, so play can continue as follows: 8 .ltb3 .lta7 9 h3!? (D) Karpov's move. It prevents ... .ltg4 in some situations, but mainly it prepares l:.el without having to worry about ... tbg4. White is now ready to reorganize by moving his knight to c4 and e3, or to play l:.el followed by tbfl , in tum followed by tbg3 or tbe3. Perhaps you're fa miliar with this sequence of moves, but if not, it must look rather odd. In fact, the knight ma noeuvre tbbd2-fl -g3/e3 is standard practice. I won't go into detail at this point, but the princi ple here is that if the centre is stable, players may be able to embark upon long trips with their pieces without being punished. From g3, White's knight lusts after the wonderful square f5 and protects e4; and after tbe3, the knight sets its eyes upon both d5 and f5 (at the cost of blocking off his queen's bishop). We shall see a lot of this manoeuvre tbbd2-fl-g3/e3 in the Ruy Lopez chapter, and it's good to be intro duced to it now. 9 .. .lte6 9 ...h6 is a good option. You will see a lot of these 'little moves' in variations with d3 and ...d6. The idea is to prevent .ltg5 after White's knight moves. After 10 l:.el , there can follow 10 ... tbh5 !. Compare the game and comments below.

100 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

9 ... d5 !? is also playable at this point, al though 10 .l:!.e l is curiously solid for White and asks Black what he's going to do next. 10 .ltc2 d5!? 11 .l:!.el dxe4 Ripperger gives the fascinating line 11.. .d4 12 tt:lc4 dxc3 13 bxc3 .ltxc4 14 dxc4, when White's pawn-structure is thoroughly damaged, but he has the bishop-pair and play down the b and d-files. 12 dxe4 tllh5! (D) This isn't the only move by any means, but it follows a 'mini-rule' that can apply to any opening in which there are pawns on e4 and e5: if White plays h3, the move ... tt:lh5 should be strongly considered. The reasoning is that after ... tt:lf4, the knight can't be kicked out by g3 since ... tt:lxh3 will follow. But if White's bishop captures that knight (i.xf4), he will have ceded the bishop-pair; that is hardly disastrous but usually not a good thing for White (remember how important it is to possess the two bishops). Notice that in the note above about 9 ... h6, the d-file was closed. This time we're about to get an exchange of queens. Of course this sort of technical guidance only fits in certain situations, but it can also ap ply to the Ruy Lopez and Philidor Defences, and the same idea quite frequently occurs in the King's Indian Defence, a very different open ing indeed! 13 tll fl \\Wxdl 14 !Ixdl l:tad8 15 i.e3 f6 16 .ltxa7 tt:lxa7 17 tlle3 tllf4 18 h4 .ltf7 19 tllel At this point Polugaevsky suggests 19 ... tt:le6 20 .ltb3 tt:lc5, which looks equal.

6 Two Knights Defence

1 e4 e5 2 lLif3 lbc6 3 .Jlc4 lLif6 (D)

[diagram]

102 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

same time sidestepping i.xc6+) 8 i.d3 (not 8 'Dxe5?? iVd4) 8 ... i.g4 9 h3 i.h5 10 i.b5+! (denying Black's knight access to the key c6- square; 10 O-O?! iVd5! and 10 g4?! i.g6 are definitely worse) 10. .. c6 11 i.c4 iVd6 12 'iVe2 f6 13 O-O O-O-O with equality. The Calm 4 d3

4 d3 (D)

This move quietly protects the e-pawn with a minimum of risk. It is not dangerous for either side but White's modest pawn-push brings up some important positional points. Instead of doing a systematic analysis I want to emphasize a few characteris tic types of positions that one should know to understand this variation. Before I even get to that, very inexperienced players might want take a look at 4 ... i.e7 (a slow move, but not a bad one) 5 'Dg5?! O-O 6 'Dxf7? .l:.xf7 7 i.xf7+ Rxf7. Few players who have built up playing experience with 1 e4 e5 would even consider such a trade for White, but those just starting out are often attracted to this CDg5/CDxf7 idea (which appears in many 1 e4 e5 openings, such as the Giuoco Piano, Goring Gambit and Ruy Lopez). It's important to know that in most chess openings, two pieces are better than rook and pawn, and usually the equal or better of a rook and two pawns, until there arises an ending or a considerably simpli fied position. Of course, that claim contradicts simple point-count chess (White has 6 or 7 points versus Black's 6). The explanation is that the minor pieces enter the action earlier and co ordinate better in attack and defence, especially on a crowded board. Keep in mind that rooks tend to get developed later and, more impor tantly, to get blocked off if there are too many pawns and pieces around. There are few excep tions to this. Thus 5 'Dg5 and 6 'Dxf7 are mis takes. However, you should know that in an end game with a rook and pawns versus bishop and knight, the latter will often have trouble defend ing each other at the same time as they attempt to hold off the pawns. The bishop and knight may do reasonably well if pawns are on the same side of the board, but if the rook is escort ing a pawn or two far from the opponent's king, the minor pieces will normally have a very hard time of it.

4. . .

[diagram]

104 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

10 ... i.e6, when 11 tl:Bd5 i.xd5 12 exd5 tl:Bb8 13 'irVf3 lands him in big trouble. For instance, 13 ... 'lt>g7 14 h4 tl:ibd7 15 i.b5 (or 15 J::i. h3 J::i. g8 16 'irVf5, etc.) 15 ... tl:Bb6 16 .l:.h3 (there are plenty of options; e.g., 16 c4i.d4 17 .l:.h3) 16 ... tl:ibxd5 17 .l:.g3 'lt>h8 18 'irVf5. Without the opponent castling, this sacrifi cial idea doesn't work, so you can see why both sides tend to play h3 and ... h6 before castling! The old saw about not moving pawns in front of your king has many exceptions. In almost any opening, with 1 e4 or 1 d4, there are plenty of cases where either h3 or g3 will frustrate your opponent's attack. The same applies to ... h6 or ... g6, of course. White targets f7: 4 llJg5 4 tl:Bg5 (D) With this sortie White immediately breaks the rules about moving a piece twice in the opening before the other pieces are developed (and in this case most of White's pieces aren't). For that reason, 4 tl:Bg5 has been called a begin ner's move. Nevertheless, there have been thousands of master games with 4 tl:Bg5 for over a century, and several whole books have been devoted to precisely this position (not to men tion lengthy parts of other books and countless articles). The main point is that, principles not withstanding, Black has a difficult time defend ing f7 without making some kind of concession. White's philosophy is simple: if it works, play it! 4 ... d5 Black cuts off White's bishop with tempo while dramatically helping his central situation and freeing his c8-bishop for action. There are a number of alternatives over the next few moves that I won't be considering. One is the chaotic

4...

i.c5! ?, which has the idea 5 tl:Bxf7 i.xf2+ !? . This has been analysed in excruciating detail, often past 20 moves, by players and theoreti cians. Several experts seem to feel that playing 5 i.xf7+ instead of 5 tl:Bxf7 grants some advan tage. We'll leave the whole mess to them. In spite of the fascinating play that stems from this and other highly tactical sidelines, I shall mainly devote my attention to the main lines and in general the more strategic (and popular) continuations. Naturally the course of events after, say, 4 tl:Bg5 i.c5 or the wilder 4 d4 lines are instructive in the broader sense, conspicu ously so in the realm of attack. They are, how ever, singular in their nature, and the purpose of this book is not to pursue particularities of forc ing play but rather to broaden understanding of openings and tie them together wherever possi ble. 5 exd5 tl:Ba5! (D) Black continues to gain time for development by attacking the c4-bishop. He is willing to sac rifice a pawn to that end. The disorderly 5 ...b5 and 5 ... tl:Bd4 (sometimes transposing) fall into the same category as 4 ... i.c5. A more familiar line to inexperienced players is 5 ... tl:Bxd5, when 6 tl:Bxf7!? 'lt>xf7 7 'irVf3+ 'lt>e6 is known as the 'Fried Liver Attack'. According to theory this line, if properly played, can be defended by Black. White's other try, 6 d4!, has the similar idea 6 ... exd4 7 O-O i.e7 8 tl:Bxf7!, this time lead ing to an extremely strong attack, at least accord ing to the older theory. That's because White

TwO KNIGHTS DEFENCE 105

has more open lines. A lot of study will be re quired of anyone interested in these variations. But we're going to look at 5 ... ll'la5 because most good players choose that move, and be cause the resulting variations are marked by nu merous defined strategic and tactical themes that can teach us about the Open Games. 6 .i.bS+ This is White's point: he will stay a pawn ahead, having no pawn weaknesses himself. His knight may look a little funny out there on g5, but so does Black's on a5. Black has two moves here: 6 ... c6 and 6 ... .i.d7. Be forewarned that what follows is not a complete overview of the latest theory, but examples that will hope fully illuminate the issues involved. Interposition with the Pawn 6 c6!? Black sacrifices a pawn, but he gains another tempo by attacking White's bishop and thereby takes the initiative. 7 dxc6 bxc6 8 .i.e2 h6 9 ll'lf3 e4 10 lt'ieS .i.d6 (D) Of course there are legitimate alternatives for both sides along the way. For instance, White could have played Steinitz's 9 ll'lh3 or, instead of 10 ... .i.d6, both 10 ... 'iVd4 and 10 ... .i.c5 have fairly good reputations. But the position after 10 ... .i.d6 arises more frequently than any other. Black wants to use his space advantage and develop quickly by at tacking the e5-knight. Whatever happens, he's a pawn down and has to keep making active and/or forcing moves before White gets his pieces out. Black's first goal is to attack the king, with the hope that the cramping role of his e4-pawn will render White's defence difficult. If that pawn is exchanged, he will develop pressure down the d- and e-files. His only real problem is the wayward knight on a5, which he hopes to reposition by ... lt'Bb7 followed by ... lt'Bc5 or ... lt'Bd6. For his part, White wants to eliminate the e4- pawn. If he can't do that he can bypass the pawn and put his pieces on more active posts, for in stance by playing d4, .i.e3, lt'Bc3 (or lt'Bd2), and perhaps 'iVd2. In a real game all of these plans conflict. You can only get a feel for the ideas by looking at examples. Because of Black's open lines and pressure down the d-file, White will probably have to keep his pieces on passive squares while he unwinds. 11 f4!? Estrin - Levenfish Leningrad 1949 This pawn advance has a poor reputation be cause it weakens White's kingside, but the re sulting play is fairly balanced. One advantage is that White keeps his d-pawn; compare 11 d4 in the games that follow this one. . exf3 It's not strictly necessary to make this cap ture, but Black craves space and open lines in return for his pawn. 12 ll'lxf3 O-O 13 O-O 'iVc7 14 d4 c5! We've arrived at a position that can arise from other move-orders. Black wants to break up White's centre and bring his rooks to the centre files as fast as possible. White simply needs to

106 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

get his pieces out, secure his position, and prove that the extra pawn means something in the long run. Both sides have won their share of points. 15 tl:Bc3 a6 (D) A move designed to prevent tl:Bb5. 16 dS!? This pawn can become a target or it can pro vide cover for White's pieces. Against other moves Black will most likely play ... i.b7 and .. J1ad8.  J::i. e8 16 ... i.b7 17 Whl J::i. ad8 is an alternative, hoping to put pressure on the d-pawn by direct means. 17 'lt>hl!?

17 h3 would prevent Black's plan. Again,

17 ... i.b7 and ... .l:.ad8 would probably follow and White might answer in the same manner as he employs in the game. 17 ... J::i. b8 (D) 18 a3!? 18 'irVd3 tl:Bg4 19 h3 is obviously risky, yet plausible. Then 19 ... c4 20 'irVd4! i.c5? 21 i.f4! is good for White. This variation is in general double-edged, and neither side can afford to sit passively by.

18. ..

tl:Bg4 Attacking h2 but focusing upon the weak ness on e3.

19 h3 tl:Be3 20 i.xe3 J::i.

xe3 21 .l:!.bl W/e7 Or 21.....Bf4!?. Black is putting extra pres sure on the dark squares and limiting White's plans. He certainly has enough for his pawn by virtue of his bishop-pair and activity. 22 'irVd2? i.f4 23 'irVdl .l:Ib6 24 tl:Bd2! Having messed up once, White finds the right way to reorganize his pieces. .. i.c7 25 J::i. f3 Wies 26 tt::i n J::i. xf3 27 i.xf3

(D)

By a clever reorganization White has de fended his d-pawn and has some control over most key squares. He's not out of the woods yet, but things are looking better. It's interesting that in this game Black never achieved a full central liquidation. 27 ... tl:Bc4 28 tl:Ba4 J::i. bS?!

28. ..

.l:!.f6! is better. It's important to keep some pressure on White's king.

29 Wld3 tl:Bd6 30 'irVe3 'irVd4!?

The next few moves don't work out but Black is in trouble anyway. 31 b3! i.fS 32 J::i. dl 'irVf6? 33 c4 l:tb7 34 tl:ixcS i.b6 35 b4 White is two powerful pawns up. The last tactic 35 ... J::i. e7? can be met by 36 tl:Bd7!. Estrin went on to win, but of course Black's opening was not the cause. Two KNIGHTS DEFENCE 107 Although White had success in that game he was under significant pressure, in part because

11 f4 created an internal weakness on the sensi

tive e3-square. Most players would prefer to have no weaknesses, even if it means having no centre pawns! 11 d4 This is the most popular continuation, get ting White's pieces out as fast as possible.

11. 

[diagram]

13 b3 (D)

[diagram]

108 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

21. .. J::i.

xb5! This move changes the whole equation. Now White's interior weakness on d3 is exposed and Black's two bishops finally are freed for attack.

21...i.b7 isn't as effective after 22 J::i.

[diagram]

23 J::i.

[diagram]

13 h3 (D)

13 . i.f5 Maybe Black should just castle and hold back on developing the bishop. It may want to go to b7. 14 tl:Bc3 O-O

14. ..O-O-O!? would be like Short-Van der

Sterren in the notes to the last game.

15 O-O .l:Iad8 16 l:tel a6

[diagram]

TwO KNIGHTS DEFENCE 109

17 .tn cs 18 'iVf3 lbc6 19 ii.. e3 19 'iVxf5?? lbd4 traps the queen. Trying to make something out of it by 20 1Wxf6 gxf6 21 ii..xh6 lbxc2 is futile.  ii..c8 20 lbe4 lbxe4 21 'iVxe4 lbd4 Black tries to mix things up, since White is completing his development with no problems. 22 ii..xd4 ii.. b7 23 'iVh4 cxd4 24 e2! 'iVaS?! He may lack the firepower but it would be a good idea to try 24 .. .f5 and see how White re- sponds. After the text-move, Black is not only a pawn down but also has the worse position.

25 a3 1Wf5 26 .l:lael 'it>h8 27 'iVg4 'iVf6 28

[diagram]

110 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

8 lllc3 White defends his most important asset, the d-pawn. Watch out for the trick 8 O-O? lllxd5 ! 9 xd7+ 'irVxd7 10 d3 lllc6. To assess this posi tion, just look at Black's central control. 8 .. O-O 9 O-O c6! (D) Now it's a real gambit, one idea of which is to get that inactive knight off a5. 10 dxc6 lll xc6 11 xc6 White has to win time to get organized. In stead, multiple exchanges merely clarify Black's central superiority: 11 lllf3 lll d4! 12 lll xd4 exd4 13 xd7 xd7 14 llle4 .l:Iac8 15 lllxf6+ xf6 16 'irVd3 (16 d3 'irVc7 and Black wins the c pawn) 16 ... 'irVc7 17 c3 J::i. fd8!. This clamps down on White's development and leaves him strug gling, Hendriks-Den Hamer, corr. 1985. ll ...xc6 12 d3 llld5 Here Black's two bishops, control of d4 and mobile kingside pawns give him enough com pensation for a pawn. 13 lll xd5?! Too cooperative. Maybe White should risk winning another pawn by 13 'irVxe5. Then Black has various dangerous moves such as 13 ... lllb4 and 13... f6, but White is two pawns ahead and will only have to give back one as he develops. Another possibility is 13 lllce4. You shouldn't get the impression that White has to sit back and get bowled over in this line. . 'irVxd5 (

D)

[diagram]

21...exd4 22 Whl J::i.

[diagram]

32 Wgl 'irVg3+ 33 @fl xh3+ 34 Wgl f3, but

White would be materially and positionally lost. Central Play: 4 d4

4 d4 exd4 5 e5 (D)

It may seem odd to devote time to this con tinuation instead of its more famous alternative Two KNIGHTS DEFENCE 111

5 O-O, yet the motivation for doing so is strong.

[diagram]

8. ..

[diagram]

After the queens come off, White expects to recover his pawn on d4 and secure the better middle- and endgame by virtue of Black's

112 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

remaining weak isolated d-pawn on an open file. But Black has a clever trick that neutral izes those plans: 8 ... 'iVxe2+ 9 ..i.xe2 ..i.xd6 10 ..i.xd6 cxd6 11 tba3 tbge5 12 tbb5 (12 O-O-O d3! 13 cxd3..i.e6 is equal) 12 ... d3! 13tbxe5 (13 cxd3 <J;;e7 with symmetry and equality again)

13. .. dxe5 14

..i.xd3 <J;; e7! with equality, Fernan dez Garcia-Ivkov, Corunha 1990. We return to 5 ... d5 (D):

6..i.b5

6 exf6?! dxc4 gives Black space, free devel opment, the bishop-pair, and for the moment an extra pawn. 6  tbe4 7 tbxd4 ..i.d7 7 .....i.c5!? leads to complete anarchy in any number of lines, the most absurd-looking idea for White consisting of 8 tbxc6 ..i.xf2+ 9 <J;;fl 'iVh4 10 tbd4+ c6 11 tbf3 tbg3+ 1 2 <J;; xf2 tbe4++ 13 <J;;e3 'iVf2+ 14 <J;;d3 ..i.f5 15 tbd4 ..i.g6 16 .l:!.fl and deep analysis has revealed var ious forced draws. I'll refer you to specialists. 8 ..i.xc6 bxc6 ( D)

9 O-O

As always, there are move-order issues for both sides but that's more a matter of theory than understanding. As a case in point, delay ing O-O at this juncture by 9 ..i.e3 tips White's hand. Black can then do without the ... ..i.c5 idea; e.g., 9 ... ..i.e7 10 tbd2 c5 11 tb4b3 tbxd2 12 'iVxd2 d4 13 ..i.f4 ..i.b5!?. 9  ..i.c5 It may be that 9 ... ..i.e7 is playable, but it al lows a dangerous pawn-roller that represents Black's biggest nightmare in many double e pawn openings. Look at this continuation: 10 f3 tbg5 (10. .. tbc5 11 f4) 11 f4 tbe4 12 f5 c5 (12... ..i.c5!? 13 tbc3!?) 13 tbe2 ..i.b5 14 tba3 ..i.c6 15 c4 d4 16 tbf4 ..i.g5 17 tbd3 !, Svesh nikov-Fercec, Nova Gorica 1996. At first this seems all right for Black. Yet White's knight is the ideal blockader of the d-pawn and targets Black's weak doubled pawn on c5. This frees White's pieces to roam the board, in particular towards the kingside. ..i.e3!? (D) White modestly protects his centre before advancing pawns and exposing his own posi tion, but it may be too slow. White also has the aforementioned f3-f4-f5, although with Black's bishop on c5 that may not be easy to implement. For example, White can trade off kingside expansion for reduced central control by 10 f3 tbg5 11 ..i.e3, when

11...'iVe7 12 f4 tbe4 13 tbd2 or 11...O-O 12 tbc3

is probably about equal.

What is going on in this position? As usual, Black is counting upon his two bishops and ac tivity to compensate for his positional problems. Two KNIGHTS DEFENCE 113 He would like to move his bishop to b6 and then successfully achieve the advance ...c5. Given time, White would take advantage of the pawn structure by a combination of moves such as (in some order) f3, 'it'd2, lbc3-a4 and/or lbb3, dominating the board from c5 and rendering the bishops passive. That takes a few moves! 10  'ii' e7! The side with the bishops often depends upon tactical niceties to avoid disadvantages. Now

11 f3 can be answered by 1 l ...lbd6!, since the

[diagram]

14. . .fxe5! 15 xg5 l'kd6 was a tactical op

[diagram]

17 c3 exd4 18 cxd4 c5 keeps the initiative.

[diagram]

7 Phil idor Defence

1 e4 e5 2 tl:Bf3 d6 (D)

The Philidor Defence has one virtue that few e4 e5 openings have: Black decides what opening is played! The underlying ideas of sur render of the centre in the Philidor were men tioned in Chapter 2; we'll explore them more thoroughly and even look at a wild counterat tacking scheme. Then we'll tum to a version of the Philidor that uses a strongpoint approach in one of its purest forms. The characteristic ideas behind this not-so-old-fashioned opening are extremely instructive and applicable to many other openings. The Philidor is not a frequent visitor to master chess but has a remarkable fol lowing of contemporary players who have used the defence extensively through the years. These include quite a few grandmasters, and even Ad ams and Azmaiparashvili have dabbled in the Philidor. Reaching back a few generations, Tigran Petrosian was probably the last World Champion who tried it out. It should be said, however, that most grand masters who want to play the 'strongpoint' ver sion of the Philidor Defence now use the order

1 e4 d6 2 d4 tl:Bf6 3 tl:Bc3 (thus far a Pirc De

[diagram]

PHIL/DOR DEFENCE 115

3 d4 (D)

3 i.c4 is often overlooked with respect to move-order issues. Then 3 ... tt:'Bf6!? 4 tt:'Bg5 d5 5 exd5 seems bothersome, although a serious ex amination reveals that Black has equality or stands only marginally worse after 5 ...h6 6 tt:'Bf3 e4!; for example, 7 tt:'Be5 (7 'it'e2 can be met by 7 ... i.e7 8 tt:'Be5 O-O {e.g., 9 O-O?! i.c5! } or 7 ... i.b4 !? 8 a3 !? O-O) 7 ... i.d6 8 d4 exd3 9 tt:'Bxd3 'V//i e7+ with the idea 10 i.e3 'it'e4!, equalizing. Nevertheless, Black normally plays 3 ... i.e7 4 d4 exd4 (4 ... tt:'Bd7? fails to 5 dxe5 lt:Jxe5 {5 ... dxe5 6 'V//i d5! } 6 tt:'Bxe5 dxe5 7 'ii' h5 g6 8 'V//i xe5) 5 tt:'Bxd4 tt:'Bf6 6 tt:'Bc3 O-O. However, this transposes into a 3 d4 exd4 line, which means that White has successfully pre-empted Black's strong point approach, that is, one in which Black plays ... tt:'ibd7 without ... exd4 (see the 'Strong point' section below). Thus Black may want to look into 3 ... tt:'Bf6. Otherwise, 3 i.c4 makes an other argument for the move-order 1 e4 d6 2 d4 tt:'Bf6 3 tt:'Bc3 e5. The first and obvious point is that Black has allowed White the greater share of the centre and blocked his own f8-bishop behind the d6- pawn, an unfortunate by-product of ...d6 but no terrible thing in itself. There are now two basic strategies that Black can pursue: surrender of the centre or making e5 a strongpoint. Surrender of the Centre

3. ..exd4 4 tt:'Bxd4

White has a reasonable alternative in 4 'V//i xd4, although this hasn't scored as well as it did in the 19th century after 4 ... tt:'Bf6 (4 ... a6 intending to gain time by ... tt:'Bc6 without being pinned by i.b5 has a respectable record; 4 ...tt:'Bc6?! 5 i.b5 is the original continuation that made 4 'V//i xd4 popular in the first place - after 5 ... i.d7 6 i.xc6 i.xc6 7 i.g5 with O-O-O soon to follow, White achieves considerable pressure) 5 tt:'Bc3 i.e7 6 i.g5 O-O 7 i.c4 tt:'Bc6 with equality. 4 tt:'Bf6 5 tt:'Bc3 ( D) 5 ... i.e7 (D) The alternate strategy of activity and poten tial attack begins with 5 ... g6, when White's most aggressive set-up is 6 f3 i.g7 7 i.e3 O-O 8 'V//i d2, as in a Sicilian Dragon. There usually fol lows 8 ... tt:'Bc6 9 g4 i.e6 10 O-O-O tt:'Bxd4 11 i.xd4. This is a position from which White has won many games (and thus discouraged 5 ... g6). Black could certainly use an open c-file, as in the Dragon. He does succeed in throwing his queenside pawns forward after l l ...c5 12 i..e3 'V/lia5 13 i.h6 i..xh6 14 'V//i xh6 b5! 15 i..xb5 .l:.ab8 16 a4 a6, yet 17 .l:.xd6! axb5 18 e5 gives a ferocious attack that has won several games for White. All this is difficult to improve upon. There have been scads of other attempts by Black but he still seems to be in search of a sat isfactory solution. At any rate I shall concen trate upon lines with ... i.e7. With 5 ... i.. e7, Black introduces a strategy that was explicated by Nimzowitsch: ...

O-O,

... .l:.e8, ... i..f8 and ... tt:'ibd7, both restraining and putting pressure on White's e-pawn. White has more space and can thwart a direct attack but still has to find a way to break down Black's defences without allowing his pieces to spring to life. This situation might remind you of similar positions in the King's Indian Defence, such as

116 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

I d4 tll f6 2 c4 g6 3 tll c3 .i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 tllf3 O-O 6 i..e2 e5 7 O-O exd4 8 tll xd4. In the case of the Philidor, White's c-pawn is on c2 (rather than c4, as in the King's Indian) and Black's bishop is on f8 (rather than g7). You could argue that in the King's Indian, White is more exposed in the centre (d4 is unsupported by pawns); but in the Philidor, Black's counterattacking chances are limited by his passively placed bishop on e 7. Check out what happens in the second game below! 6 .i.e2 White decides to go for a safe space advan tage. He has an active alternative in 6 .i.c4 O-O 7 O-O leading to lines such as 7 ... l:te8 8 l:tel .i.f8 9 a3 tllbd7 10 .i.a2 tllc5 (10 ... a6!?) 11 f3. It takes a born defender (with an opportunistic streak) to embrace this kind of position for Black, yet it is relatively solid. 6 ... O-O 7 O-O l:.e8 8 f4 (D)

With this move White commits to a pawn structure in which he restricts Black's pieces and increases his space advantage, but fails to support the e-pawn (as f3 does). This position has arisen in many games; here's one in which Black takes the slow approach: Restraint lsanbaev - Sizykh Novokuznetsk 1999 8 . .i.f8 9 .i.f3 tll bd7 10 .i:tel c6 (D) The strategies are set. Black has insufficient forces to attack and has to play with the back ward d-pawn that we also see in the King's In dian Defence. But d6 is well-protected, which gives Black the leeway to turn his attention to the queenside; his main positive idea consists of attack on that wing based upon ...b5, with the idea that White's forces are tied to protecting against the freeing move . .. d5. For his part, White will develop, double on the d-file, and slowly increase the pressure. He may prepare a pawn-break via e5 or a general advance by g4. 11 .i.e3 tll c5 12 .i.f2 tll e6 13 't\Vd2 tll xd4 14 .i.xd4 .i.e6 15 !tadl tlld7 Directed against e5.

[diagram]
Black has a passive but playable position. White stands somewhat better but will need time to organize a breakthrough (perhaps the plan g4-g5 should be considered). In the event, the game was quickly drawn. And now for something completely differ ent:

PHIL/DOR DEFENCE 11 7

[diagram]

ECC 1994.

b) 11 .l:.el a5?! (this plan seems to appeal to players, but l l ... l:i.b8 looks considerably better)

[diagram]

118 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

J::!.

[diagram]

. l:.2b3

31..

[diagram]

PHIUDOR DEFENCE 119

Black has decent counterplay if he moves quickly: 8 ... 'ii' e7! 9 i.xg5 ll'lgf6 10 'i!kh4 b5 11 i.b3 ll'lc5 and, for instance, 12 O-O-O O-O 13 i.xf6 'ii' xf6 14 l'kxf6 gxf6 15 f3 a5. White must stand better in this variation as a whole, but not by much. Thus 3 ... ll'ld7 appears to hold to- gether better than 3 ... ctJf6. Again, the lines of the last two notes are a matter of practical play, not of understanding, but they are important if you decide to play the traditional Philidor move-order 1 e4 e5 2 ll'lf3 d6 instead of 1 e4 d6

2 d4 ll'lf6 3 ll'lc3 e5.

4 .ll'lgf6 5 i.c4 i.e7 6 O-O O-O This time we see Black fortifying e5 as he does in so many lines of the Ruy Lopez. 7 l:Iel (D) White frequently plays the set-up with 7 'ife2 c6 8 a4 'V/lic7 9 l:tdl, when Black can do as prescribed in the note to 8 a4. 7 ...c6 A move necessary in order to get a little ma noeuvring room, and also to continue with the overprotection of the e5-pawn by means of ... 'V/lic7.

8 a4 (D)

This move stops ...b5, which would win much-needed space with tempo. The only good way to do without it is to play d5, intending to meet ... b5 with ... dxc6, a theme described be low. But in this position Black could merely work around the pawn by ... a5 and ... lt:Jc5, since dxc6 is comfortably answered by ... bxc6, con- trolling d5. What are Black's goals now? He will gener ally follow up with ... 'V/lic7 and/or ... .l:.e8, to bolster e5 while keeping a careful eye on the d6-pawn. Then we come to the point at which he needs to develop his queen's bishop. This may be prefaced by the safe moves ... h6, ... l:Ie8 and ... i.f8 (or even ... ctJf8), or Black may com mence immediately. If he is allowed to com plete the following plan he will usually have solved his problems: Black places his pawns on b6 and a6, his bishop on b7, and then advances with ...b5. With completed development and queenside play, he should stand well, especially since his ideas of ... b4 and central attack are by no means trivial to defend against. Then what is White to do? There are a num ber of answers depending upon one's style of play and the specifics of the position. He has the challenge of breaking down Black's defences, and this time there is no open file or backward pawn to focus upon. However, at the point that Black plays ... b6 (and before ... i.b7) he is vul nerable to the move d5, since capturing will leave White in possession of the key outpost on d5. If Black already has ... .i.b7 in before White

120 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

plays d5, then Black has better chances of mak ing a favourable mass-exchange upon that square. The game will hang upon whether ex changes and simplification leave White any thing at all, or whether he can stifle Black's counterplay by other means. There are three standard alternatives to d5: a) b3 and ..i.b2 or ..i.a3; b) a5, to hamper Black's queenside plans; and c) tl:Bh4-f5. Incidentally, this kind of analysis suggests that Black's plan would be even more effective were White's bishop on e2 or fl, where it is of ten placed. We shall see these counter-strategies in the following sample game itself and in the note to White's 9th move. Vehi Bach - Cifuentes Platje d'Aro Barcino 1994

8...

'V/J/.c7 (D) A battle of heavyweights, lvanchuk-Azmai parashvili, Montecatini Terme 2000, illustrates Black's loss of the d5-square and his reaction to it: 8 ... l:.e8 9 a5 (9 tl:Bg5 .i:tf8 isn't helpful) 9 ... ..i.f8

[diagram]
fil.c7 looks more natural but Black doesn't want to be squeezed to death) 11 ..i.b3! (11 axb6 tl:Bxb6 12 ..i.b3 cxd5 13 exd5 is a kind of position that we look at in several open ings, where Black's potentially mobile kingside majority is theoretically superior to White's on the queenside; e.g., ... g6, ... ..i.g7, ... tl:Bh5 and ... f5 might eventually follow; granted, the spe cifics of the position will outweigh that factor for some time, but I think that Black stands well) 1 l...cxd5 12 tl:Bxd5 h6 (versus ..i.g5) 13 c3 !? (13 'V/J/.e2! a6 14 ..i.e3 with a small but defi nite advantage), and here instead of 13 ... a6 14 ..i.e3 with a grip on b6, Black should have played 13 ... ..i.b7 14 a6 ..i.c6 when he has the backward d-pawn, but it is well-defended (as in the Sicilian Defence). Then White has only a formal superiority. 9 h3 White has other thematic continuations. Not all of them have been put into practice against challenging opposition. a) White sometimes develops with 9 b3, hav ing either ..i.a3 or ..i.b2 in mind. Then 9 ... b6!? 10 d5!? ..i.b7 11 dxc6 ..i.xc6 12 ..i.b2 tl:Bc5 13 tl:Bd2 .i:tac8 ! provides piece-pressure to com pensate for the d5-square and White's potential along the d-file. b) One of White's main ideas is to try to get a knight to f5; for instance, 9 ..i.g5 h6! (9. .. b6 10 'V/J/.d2 ..i.b7 11 tl:Bh4 ! { 11 dxe5 tl:Bxe5} 11...exd4 12 tl:Bf5 gives White the better game; whenever something like this can't be stopped, the plan of ... l:.e8 and ... ..i.f8 looks best) 10 ..i.e3 l:te8 (D ). 11 tl:Bh4!? (White should stand somewhat better in such positions, although it's not clear what he should play; maybe 11 a5) 11...exd4! (this is normally a good response to tl:Bh4, which weakens control over d4) 12 ..i.xd4 tl:Be5 13 ..i.b3 ..i.g4! 14 f3 tl:ifd7 15 tl:Bf5 ..i.xf5 16 exf5 d5. This position is difficult to assess, since both sides have advantages. c) 9 a5 is a natural alternative to hamper Black's queenside plans. Then one standard idea for Black is to continue to batten down the hatches by 9 ... h6 (versus tl:Bg5) 10 b3 l:.e8 11

PHIL/DOR DEFENCE 121

.i.b2 and now 11....i.f8 or 11...tt:'Bf8!? 12 h3 .i.e6. These are just sketches of various set-ups. In the majority of cases White will probably retain some advantage with proper play, but not enough to invalidate Black's opening. Inci dentally, this kind of analysis again suggests that Black's strategy would be even more ef fective were White's bishop on e2 or f l , where it is often placed. 9 ...b6 10 .i.g5 a6! Neutralizing the idea of a5 and at the same time contemplating expansion by ...b5. 11 iVe2 .i.b7 (D) 12 dxe5 12 l:tadl b5 13 .i.b3 yields a standard pawn structure (also arising in the Old Indian and King's Indian Defences, and sometimes in the Ruy Lopez). Black has sufficient counterplay. 12 .. tt:'Bxe5 ... dxe5?! 13 tt:'Bh4! and tt:'Bf5 . 13 tt:'Bxe5 dxe5 14 :adl b5 Once this move is in, everything is OK. No tice how neither White's knight nor bishop have any forward square to go to. 15 .i.b3 h6 16 .i.h4 l:tad8 17 axb5 axb5 18 l:txd8 l:txd8 19 l:tdl ( D) 19 . .i.cS!? A good idea, rerouting the bishop to a more active position. Since White's e4-pawn is still a concern and his bishop is away from the cen tre at h4, the move 19 ... l:td4 ! was probably even better. In general, Black has achieved excellent activity, creating some problems that White needn't have allowed in his rush to simplify. 20 l:txd8+ iVxdS The opening is over and Black has at least equality and perhaps more, since White's h4- bishop isn' t participating but the exchange .i.xf6 would cede the two bishops.

8 Ruy Lopez

1 e4 e5 2 lll

f3 lll c6 3 ..llb5 ( D) These moves constitute the Ruy Lopez, aptly called the 'King of Openings'. It has domi nated 1 e4 e5 chess for more than 100 years and is considered the best chance for White to gain the advantage in the play that follows 2 ... lllc6. Thereupon hangs the popularity of 1 e4 itself, no small burden for a single move to bear. What's the point of 3 ..llb5? One's first in stinct is that it threatens 4 ..llxc6 followed by 5 lllxe5, but Black's most popular answer 3 ... a6 shows that not to be the case, at least not imme diately. Then of course White wants to castle quickly. But then why do most players use 3 ..llb5 instead of the more aggressive-looking 3 ..llc4, which hits Black's weak f7-pawn? The answer is that 3 ..llb5 is a prophylactic move that works to squelch the opponent's opportuni ties. If you look at the main lines after 3 ..llc4, for instance, it turns out that Black's key defen sive/counterattacking move in a majority of cases is ... d5 (as in most variations after 1 e4 e5), attacking the bishop and establishing him self in the centre. But putting a bishop on b5 ei ther prevents or discourages that move. Let's see how this works in a few simple cases. Obvi ously, the immediate 3 ... d5? is bad due to 4 exd5 'i1Vxd5 5 lllc3 with a terrible loss of time for Black. But what if Black imitates his re sponse to 3 ..llc4 by playing as follows? 3 ... a6 4 ..lla4 b5 5 ..llb3 ( D) After all, White is on the same diagonal as after 3 ..llc4 and Black has a couple of extra moves in ... a6 and ... b5 that may help his posi tion or at least not hurt it. The answer is that the move ...d5 can no lon ger be played with tempo, which negatively im pacts both of Black's normal defences after 3 ..llc4. That consideration overrides all others, as we can see from the following discussion (see Chapters 5 and 6 on 3 ..llc4 if you need to). First, compare the old line 3 ..llc4 lllf6 4 d4 (notice that after 4 lllc3, Black has the excellent response 4 ... lll xe4! 5 lll xe4 d5, whereas this would be a blunder with White's bishop on b3) 4... exd4 5 e5, when 5 ... d5 ! gains a critical tempo. Not so with a bishop on b3 instead of c4. Then, look at other main-line defence to 3 ..llc4, i.e. 3 ... ..llc5 4 c3 lllf6 5 d4 exd4 6 cxd4 (6 e5 d5 !) 6 ... ..llb4+ 7 ..lld2 ..llxd2+ 8 lll bxd2 d5 ! 9 exd5 lllxd5 with equality; the Ruy Lopez prevents such solutions, as I'll show below for clarity's sake.

5. .. ..llc5

The equivalent of the Two Knights Defence would go 5 ... lllf6 6 d4! (D) (6 lllg5 is probably no improvement upon the main 3 ..llc4 lllf6 lines, but this is strong):

RUY LOPEZ 123

6 ... exd4 (after 6 ... lllxe4 7 dxe5 White threat ens 'i1Vd5 and ..llxf7+, so Black needs to play 7 ... lllc5, when 8 ..\ld5 retains the bishop and es tablishes the superior position - the e5-pawn cramps Black's game) 7 e5 lllg4 (there's no ...d5 response!) 8 O-O and White threatens h3 and .l:!.el. A sample line might be 8 ... ..llb4 (pre venting .l:!.el ; 8 ... lllgxe5?? loses to 9 lllxe5 lllxe5 10 .l:!.el d6 11 f4) 9 c3 (or 9 ..lld5 threatening h3) 9 ... dxc3 10 bxc3 ..llc5 11 'i1Vd5! 'i1Ve7 12 ..llg5 'i1Vf8 13 h3 lllxf2 14 .l:!.xf2 ..llxf2+ 15 @xf2 and White's pieces dominate the board. Notice how without the move ... d5 Black wasn't able to contest the centre.

6 c3 lll

f6 7 d4 exd4 8 e5! Were White's bishop on c4, Black would have the resource ... d5! at this point. Instead the knight has to move and lose time. For instance:

8.llle4

8 ... lllg4 9 cxd4 ..llb4+ 10 lllc3 and White chases the knights with h3 followed in some cases by d5. 9 ..lld5! (D) White's move serves not j ust to attack the al most-trapped e4-knight, but also to stop ... d5. That's the consistent theme involved in an early ..llb3. 9 ...f5 Black can try the somewhat cheap win of three pawns for a piece by 9 ... lllxf2?! 10 'it>xf2 dxc3+, but after 11 'it>g3! White connects rooks and threatens 12 ..llxf7+ 'it>xf7 13 'i1Vd5+. Thus Black is stuck with 1 l...cxb2 12 ..llxb2 O-O 13 lllc3! (or 13 h4) 13 ... ..llb7 14 llle4 ..lle7 15 'i1Vd2 and White dominates the board. His king is un touchable, and in general three pawns aren't worth a minor piece this early in the game (un less two or three of them are passed and moder ately advanced). When you factor in White's activity and far superior development, the as sessment is clear. 10 cxd4 ..llb4+ ll lllbd2 Black can't even castle, but White will play O-O and gain a very large advantage. For the record, Black can try to j ustify 1 e4 e5 2 lllf3 lllc6 3 ..llb5 a6 4 ..lla4 b5 5 ..llb3 with the odd move 5 .. . llla5!? (the 'Norwegian Varia tion'), based upon 6 lllxe5 lllxb3 7 axb3 'i1Vg5, etc. But simply 6 O-O d6 7 d4 is thought to give White the advantage. Returning to 3 ..llb5, we have seen one local ized reason for preferring 3 ..llb5 over 3 ..llc4. But what characterizes the Ruy Lopez itself? Since each opening variation that begins on move 3 is so different in attributes, we cannot speak of the 'nature' of the Ruy Lopez without referring to specific systems. The most interest ing way to approach the subject is to take a somewhat impressionistic historical look. In the early days of the Ruy Lopez we saw some understandable experimentation with moves such as 3 ... llld4 and 3 ... f5, both still playable today but on the very margins of legitimacy. As positional concepts solidified, the great masters of the late 19th and early 20th centuries drifted towards 1 e4 e5 2 lll f3 lllc6 3 ..llb5 d6, which is featured in the games of Steinitz, Lasker, Capa blanca and many others. Without taking the time to examine that variation (an exercise that is well worth it), I can't demonstrate its draw backs; but the crucial thing to remember is that Black will immediately or eventually be forced to surrender the centre by means of ... exd4 in

124 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 125

play defensively until he can't protect against every breakthrough on both wings. This game program is what's glibly referred to as the 'Spanish Torture'. We shall see how White's plans evolve when we inspect the individual Closed variations below. In its general con tours, by the way, the above description also applies to the Open Ruy Lopez: White tries to keep Black's dynamism under control and then switches to a gradual augmentation of his posi tional advantages. Let's look at the moves that introduce the Closed Ruy Lopez:

1 e4 e5 2 lll

f3 lllc6 3 i.b5 a6 4 i.a4 We'll see the Exchange Variation with 4 i.xc6 dxc6 later on. Note that after 5 lllxe5 'i1Vd4 Black recovers his pawn. Thus if White's e-pawn becomes protected, the capture on e5 may become a threat. 4 .lll f6 ( D) We saw the move 4 ... b5 above. With this flexible continuation, Black threat ens White's important e-pawn before deciding upon the development of his other pieces.

5 O-O

For example, the passive 5 d3 allows Black to become more aggressive without much risk:

5... b5 (notice that since e4 is covered, i.xc6 and

lllxe5 has become a threat; however, 5 ... i.c5 is another legitimate move-order, since 6 i.xc6 dxc6 7 lllxe5? loses to 7 ... 'i1Vd4 - both f2 and the e5-knight hang) 6 i.b3 i.c5 7 O-O (7 lllxe5 lllxe5 8 d4 i.xd4 { 8 ... lllxe4!? 9 dxc5 i.b7 10 O-O 'i1Vf6 is also possible} 9 'i1Vxd4 d6 leaves Black a full tempo up on the Meller Variation; we devote a section to that variation below) 7 ... d6. Black has his bishop outside his pawn chain and stands solidly. Of course, there's much more that can be said about 5 d3, but in general White would rather wait a move or two until he sees what his opponent is up to. 5 . i.e7 The first major decision about how Black will set his position up. After 5. .. b5 6 i.b3, 6 ... i.c5 is the Meller Variation, examined in depth later; and 6 ... i.b7 is called the Arkhangelsk, a varia tion which I won't be investigating. The main alternative is 5. .. lllxe4, the important Open Vari ation, which reaches its standard position after

6 d4 b5 7 i.b3 d5. This will be discussed in de

tail in its own section. 6 .l:!.el

6 d4 is a sideline that might not be very inter

esting had we not seen something like it in the introduction to the Ruy Lopez above, but with the moves i.b3 and ... b5 included. There White gained the advantage, but here the presence of the bishop on a4 makes equalizing relatively easy. Two brief examples after 6 ... exd4 (D): a) 7 e5 llle4 8 lllxd4 (8 .l:!.el lllc5 empha sizes the bishop's poor position on a4) 8 ...O-O 9 lllf5 d5 10 exd6 (10 lllxe7+ lllxe7 11 c3 lllc5 12 i.c2 i.f5 is equal) l0 ... i.xf5 11 dxe7 lllxe7 12 i.b3 lllc5 13 lllc3 lllxb3 14 cxb3 'ilVxdl 15 .l:!.xdl .l:!.ad8 16 i.f4 11z_11z Kramnik-Adams, Cap d' Agde (rapid) 2003. Neither side has any at tack or structural weaknesses. b) 7 .l:!.el b5 8 e5 !? lllxe5 9 .l:!.xe5 d6 10 .l:!.el (the initially attractive 10 .l:!.xe7+ 'i1Vxe7 11 i.b3 invites 11...c5!) l0 ... bxa4 11 lllxd4 i.d7 12 'i1Vf3 O-O 13 lll c6 i.xc6 14 'i1Vxc6 llld7!? 15

126 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

8 h3 with similar intent (in that case to allow

White to capture the pawn safely after 8 ... d5 9 exd5 lt:Jxd5 10 lt:Jxe5). However, after 7 ... d6, the move 8 a4 is no longer very effective be cause e5 is defended and Black can develop smoothly by 8 ... ..lld7, 8 ... b4, 8 ... ..llb7, or even 8 ...lt:Ja5!?; see the section on the Marshall At tack for details. After 8 h3, Black can play 8 . ..O-O (or 8 ... ..llb7, or 8 ... lt:Ja5!), when 9 c3 re turns us to the main line. To summarise: after 7 ... O-O, White can play the Anti-Marshall 8 a4 or allow the Marshall by

8 c3 d5. By choosing 7 ...

d6 instead, Black fore goes the Marshall but takes the sting out of the Anti-Marshall's a4 move.

8 c3 O-O 9 h3 (D)

[diagram]

1 e4 e5 2 lt:Jf3 lt:Jc6 3 i.b5 a6 4 i.a4 lt:Jf6 5 O-O

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 127

with ... c5, and then adopted a strongpoint policy by defending e5. He feels that an immediate ex change on d4 would amount to a surrender of the centre and puts that idea on hold with l 1 ...'i1Vc7. However, White must constantly watch over po tential central exchanges, a situation that Black hopes will limit his opponent's free develop ment. After l 1...'i1Vc7, Black will generally try to bring his pieces out slowly before taking any drastic action in the centre. There are some drawbacks to this strategy. The first has to do with finding a useful, posi tive plan. Exerting pressure down the c-file is natural but generally White can defend the crit ical squares. Often Black will have to bring enough pieces to bear that a capture or two on d4 will make White's centre vulnerable. At that point White can implement his own ideas. He can exchange pawns on c5 and try to exploit the d5-square, or he can play d5 and then attack on the wings, sometimes by means of a4 and some times by piece-play on the kingside. In general White has the choice of developing his pieces or closing the centre. Black's biggest problem tends to be his knight on a5. He can return it to c6, of course, but that consumes time and can provoke a timely d5. Furthermore, White's d5 advance in and of itself can keep the a5-knight out of play. At that point ... lllc4-b6 isn't bad, but it shows up an underlying problem with ... c5 combined with ... e5: a pawn on d5 can't be undermined by ... c6. We shall come back to the idea of omitting ...'i1Vc7. For the moment, here are two sample games which illustrate the classic Chigorin po sition:

lvanchuk - Graf Merida 2004 12 lllbd2 (D)

12. ..

:ds This is a flexible move. It discourages White from playing dxe5 and leaves the bishop on the c8-h3 diagonal for now in anticipation of d5. We shall see 1 2 ... cxd4 in the next game, with a note on 1 2. .. lll c6. 13 b3! Also flexible: White keeps Black's knight out of c4 and would like to make simple moves such as i.b2 and :c 1. Although it seems ob scure at this point, b3 can also work with the moves a4 and i.d3, which are designed to tar get b5 - watch for this theme in other games with the Closed Ruy Lopez.

13. .. i.d7

Black sometimes plays ... i.b7 instead of ... i.d7, but in the former case he should ex change in the centre first, because of 1 3 ... i.b7 1 4 d5! (D). This gives White almost everything that he could want from advancing his pawn, a com mittal decision that sometimes releases the pressure on Black's game. Let's consider this position. Black's bishop is badly placed on b7 because its scope is limited by White's pawn chain and unfortunately the move .. .f5 is no where in sight. Thus Black will play ... i.c8 and probably ... i.d7 with loss of time. What about that knight on a5? Right now it has no moves whatsoever because of White's pawns on b3 and d5; as a rule if Black permits White to play d5 it's a good idea to have the move ... lllc4 in

128 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

hand. Then even if the knight is driven away, b6 is a good place from which to keep an eye on White's a4 break, and Black reserves pros pects of ... lllbd7. However, in the diagram (af ter 13 ... ..llb7 14 d5), Black will have to move his bishop in order to reroute the knight to the uninspiring b7. From that square, alas, it is blocked from moving by the pawns on d6 and c5. Notice that if Black plays ...c4 and White plays b4, the situation is even worse. All right, it's a closed position and perhaps the knight can make just one more move from b7 to become useful, i.e . ... lll d8. But again, it is completely restricted, this time by White's d5-pawn! Even in a closed position, all this reorganization to little effect gives White plenty of time to pre pare and launch an attack. The moral of the story is that with a bishop on b7, Black should almost always play ... cxd4 and perhaps even ...exd4 once the restrictive move b3 is in. Apart from that, both sides need to develop a feeling about whether to play/allow d5 if c4 is still available to the knight and/or Black's bishop is placed on d7 in support of the queenside. These decisions are terribly difficult and greatly as sisted by playing experience with the opening. 14 lll fl lllc6?! Black gets into trouble after this. 14 ... cxd4 1 5 cxd4 :ac8 looks better.

15 d5 lllb8 16 a4! .l:ta7 17 b4!? c4? (D)

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 129

White could consolidate by means of 29 llle4 ! lllxe4 30 ..llxe4 i.M 31 :e2. 29 ...h6 30 lll f3?! (D) Again, 30 llle4! was quite strong. 30 . i.e7 31 :as lllbxd5 32 h4 lll xc3?!

32. ..

'i1Vc6 was Black's last chance to have a say in things. 33 'i1Vxc3 lll xg4 34 :a6 'i1Vd7 35 'i1Vd4! with a big advantage. White went on to win. J. Polgar - Acs Hoogeveen 2002 12 lllbd2 cxd4 Black opens up the position to get some breathing room. 1 2 ... lllc6 is really asking for White to play dxc5, a Fischer favourite which intends lllfl e3-d5. If practice i s any guide, this general plan causes little trouble for Black. Even in this fa vourable form for White (because the c6-knight is exposed to a recapture on d5), Black can ap parently hold the balance: 1 3 dxc5 dxc5 14 lllfl i.e6 (not a move that Black would like t o make but he has to rush to cover d5) 15 llle3 :ad8 1 6 'i1Ve2 c4 1 7 lllf5 ( 1 7 lllg5 looks attractive but 1 7 ... h6 ! 18 lllxe6 fxe6 gives equality - another case of the doubled e-pawns!) 17 ... .l:!.fe8 ! 1 8 i.g5 lll d7 1 9 i.xe7 lllxe7 20 lllg5 h6!? (or

20...

lllf8!) 21 lllxe6 fxe6 22 llle3 (D), Fischer O'Kelly, Buenos Aires 1970. This is an interesting position of the type dis cussed in Chapter 3. Black's doubled pawns guard important squares and his knights have good prospects, so the apparent weaknesses are not meaningful.

In the game Black should now have played

22. ..

lllc5 ! 23 lllg4 lllc6 with at least equality. 13 cxd4 i.d7 14 lll fl (D) This is the standard Ruy Lopez manoeuvre that has been popular ever since Steinitz started playing it in variations with d3 instead of d4. White's knight will either go to e3, eyeing d5 and f5 (while protecting c2), or to g3 where it covers f5 and protects the e-pawn (this discour ages ... exd4), while leaving the c l-bishop a good view of the kingside. Such meanderings are ordinarily only possible in a closed position or in one with a stable centre.  .l:!.ac8 15 llle3 lllc6 16 ..llb3!? Other players have preferred 1 6 d5 lllb4 1 7 i.bl a5 1 8 a3 llla6. Now 1 9 b4! should keep the advantage because after l 9 ... axb4 20 axb4 lllxb4? 2 1 i.d2 White wins the knight. Black of course hopes that the new weakness of c4 may provide him compensation. Whether or not 1 6 d5 i s good, White opts here for activating the light-squared bishop and keeping lines open.

130 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is a typical choice that the Lopez player faces, and sometimes depends upon the style of the player. Polgar is by any definition an at tacker. 16 . tba5 17 tbd5 tbxd5 18 .llxd5 lbc4 l 8 ... .ll e6 would eliminate the powerful d5- bishop; White maintains just a small edge with 19 a4. 19 i.g5! .llxg5 l 9 ... lbxb2? fails to 20 'i1Ve2 .ll xg5 2 1 tbxg5 lDc4 22 'i1Vh5, winning. 20 tbxg5 h6?! Not best, but White still has the advantage after 20 .. . .llc6 2 1 b3 ! lbb6 22 .l:!.c I . 21 tbxf7! .l:!.xf7 (D) 22 :cl?! The right move-order to implement White's idea was 22 .ll xf7+! 'it>xf7 23 .l:!.c l . Black fails to take advantage of this slip. 22 . 'i1Vb8?! Correct was 22 ... .llc6 ! 23 .llxf7+ 'i1Vxf7 24 b3 lbb6.

23 b3 lbb6 24 .l:!.xc8+ .ll

xc8 25 .ll xf7 + @xf7 26 dxe5 'it>e7 26 ...dxe5 27 'i1Vd8 'i1Vb7 28 .l:!.c l doesn't im prove the situation. 27 exd6+ Still better is 27 lii' h5 !, although that's not clear without lengthy and complicated analy sis, so the text-move is the practical decision. White is winning in any case. 27 .. lii' xd6 28 'i1Vc2 .llb7 29 .l:!.dl lii' c6 30 'i1Vd2 tbd7 31 .l:!.cl lii' f6 32 a4 .llc6 33 'i1Va5 bxa4 34 bxa4 tbe5 35 'i1Vc7+ .ll d7 36 .l:!.dl 'i1Ve6 37 'i1Vc5+ 'it>e8 38 .l:!.d6 'i1Ve7 39 'i1Vc7! a5 40 :a6 1-0 Modern Chigorin Let's return to the position after 1 e4 e5 2 tbf3 tbc6 3 .llb5 a6 4 .lla4 tbf6 5 O-O .ll e7 6 :el b5 7 .ll b3 d6 8 c3 O-O 9 h3 tba5 IO .llc2 c5 l l d4 (D): ll. .. cxd4 Here we have what I call a Modem Chigorin Defence, in which Black skips ... 'i1Vc7. 12 cxd4 exd4!? Rejection of the strongpoint approach! Black shamelessly liquidates (i.e., surrenders) the cen tre. With the recognition that the weakness on d6 isn't really serious (sometimes the pawn can even go to d5), this radical policy has become an accepted one in just a few years. The alternative 1 2. .. .llb7! ? (D) hits the cen tre immediately so as to save time by compari son. Then 1 3 lbbd2 exd4 14 tbxd4 transposes to the main line. However, White can also play 1 3

RUY LOPEZ 131

d5, which returns us to relatively normal chan nels and challenges Black to make something out of foregoing ... "Viil c7. Instead he found him self in a familiar pattern in Morozevich-Pono mariov, Moscow 2001 : 1 3. .. .l:!.c8? (Black should prefer 1 3. .. lbc4 14 b3 lbb6 or 1 3. .. ..llc8 14 lbbd2 ..lld7) 14 b3 ! with problems similar to those seen in the note about l 3 ... ..llb7 in the Ivanchuk-Graf game above. Black's knight has no return path and even the b7-bishop can't yet get back to c8 ! Ponomariov understood these issues and went for tactics by 1 4. .. "Viil c7 1 5 ..lld3 tbxe4 ! ? 1 6 ..llxe4 f5, but they fell short follow ing 1 7 ..lld3 e4 1 8 ..llg5 ! ..ll f6 ( 1 8. .. .l:!.fe8 1 9 ..ll xe7 .l:!.xe7 2 0 b4 tbc4 2 1 ..llxc4 "Viil xc4 22 "Viil d2!) 19 ..llxf6 .ihf6 20 ..lle2 exf3 2 1 ..ll xf3 b4 22 tbd2 l:.ff8 23 a3 ! (threatening to win the knight) 23 ... "Viilb 6 24 axb4 "Viil xb4 25 l:.a4 "Viil c3 26 l:.e3 ! "Viilb 2 27 tbfl .l:!.c5 28 "Viil e l ! and White won the knight that Black marooned so early on. We now return to 12 ...exd4!? (D): With 12 ... exd4, Black ignores his weakness on d6 for the sake of activity, in the style of modem openings from the Sicilian to the King's Indian. In the following game we have an ex ample of good strategy by both players. Sorokin - Ramesh Sangli 2000 13 tbxd4 ..llb7 The same idea is expressed by 1 3. .. .l:!.e8 14 ..ll g5 ! ? ( 1 4 tbd2 ..ll b7 transposes to the main game) 14 ...h6 1 5 ..llh4 tbd5 ! ? 1 6 ..llxe7 tbxe7 17 tbd2 ..llb7 1 8 a4 "Viil b6 1 9 lb4b3 ( 1 9 tb2f3 lbc4) 1 9. ..tbac6 20 axb5 axb5 2 1 .l:!.xa8 .l:!.xa8 22 tbfl tbe5 1h-1h Leko-Morozevich, Wijk aan Zee 2002. 14 tbd2 .l:!.e8 15 b3 ..llf8 16 ..llb2 g6 (D) 17 "Viil f3 Black's dynamic possibilities were demon strated by an inhuman following 1 7 .l:!.e2?! ..llg7 1 8 "Viil e l .l:!.c8 1 9 .l:!.dl tbh5 ! (knights on the rim!) 20 ..llbl lbf4 2 1 .l:!.e3 "Viil f6 22 tb2f3 tbc6 23 Rh2 tbe5 24 g3?! tbd5 ! 25 exd5 tbxf3+ 26 tbxf3 .l:!.xe3 27 ..llxf6 .l:!.xel 28 tbxel ..llxf6 and Black had the bishop-pair and a clear advantage in Leko-Fritz 6, Frankfurt (rapid) 1999. 17 . ..llg7 18 .l:!.adl .l:!.c8 19 ..llbl (D) .. tbd7!? Unveiling the g7-bishop and eyeing e5. Other moves have been played including 1 9. ..b4 and 1 9. .. tbc6! 20 tbfl tbe5 2 1 "Viil e3 tbed7 22 "V/ii f4 d5 23 tbg3, when 23 ... tbxe4 (23 ... "Viil c7 24 e5 ! ? was played in J.Polgar-Milos, Buenos Aires 2000, a marginally sound sacrifice but Polgar

132 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

brought home the point) 24 'bxe4 dxe4 25 i.xe4 i.xe4 26 l:he4 'bc5 is equal. 20 'bfl (D)

20 .b4 20 .. .f5 ! is also interesting and probably equal, because White cannot exploit the a2-g8 diago nal. 21 'be3 The game has proceeded logically to this point and instead of the ambitious 2 1 ...iVg5? ! Black had 2 1 ...'bf6 ! with equality. This mod em-style system seems to be fully playable. It represents a dynamic treatment of even this most staid of openings. Keres Defence Another way to bolster e5 has received renewed attention from some of the world's top players. It was first promoted by Paul Keres: 11 ... Cbd.7!? (D) Moves like this make the Ruy Lopez one of the most fascinating openings in strategic terms. Black develops a piece backwards and cuts off his own c8-bishop, at the same time taking his eye off the vital d5-square ! But he is intent upon forcing a resolution of the central dark squares, so l l . ..CDd7 serves the double purpose of protecting e5 and clearing a square for the bishop on f6 after pawn exchanges. Black also recognizes that his queen might go to b6 in stead of c7 in some lines, and even .. .f5 might come into play. Let's look at two games: Damljanovic - Ponomariov Plovdiv Echt 2003 12 'bbd2 1 2 d5? ! releases the pressure just when Black's pieces are best situated to destroy the centre: 1 2. .. CDb6 1 3 g4? ! (trying to anticipate the .. .f5 break, which would probably lead to the loss of White's important d-pawn) 1 3. .. h5

14 CDh2 hxg4 1 5 hxg4 3'.g5 and Black already

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 133

15 'bxe5! 'bxe5 16 f4 'bg6 17 'bf3 3'.h4! The simple idea is to play ... 3'.g3 and force White into playing f5. Black is also ready to play .. .f5 himself. There were several games with 1 7 .. .f5 1 8 e5 dxe5 1 9 fxe5 3'.b7 before this one, but White finally got the better of the debate. 18 'bxh4 1 8 l::t fl 3'.g3 19 f5 'be5 gives Black the dark squares that he needs. 18  iVxh4 19 f5?! 19 l::t fl ! 3'.xh3 ! ? 20 gxh3 l1Vg3+ draws, al though Black might simply bring a rook to the e-file and see what develops. 19  'be5 Black is at least equal, in part because White's c2-bishop is so bad. 20 l:i.fl i.d7 21 3'.f4 l1Ve7 22 iVel f6 23 l1Vg3 l::t fe8 24 b3 a5 Black has secured the key e5-square and be gun to attack. Petrovic - N. Davies corr. 2003 12 dxc5 dxc5 13 'bbd2 ( D) White intends to play the customary se quence CDfl-e3-d5. These days, players aren't impressed by this single-minded attempt to get a knight to the outpost. 13  3'.b7! Black walked into it by playing 1 3. .. iVc7? 14 'bfl 'bb6 1 5 'be3 l::t d8 16 l1Ve2 3'.e6 1 7 'bd5 ! CDxd5 1 8 exd5 i.xd5 1 9 'bxe5 in the famous game Fischer-Keres, Curaao Ct 1 962. White has a terrific attack and is probably already winning. 14 'bfl 'bc4 15 'b3h2 1 5 b3 'bd6 centralizes the knight and pre vents 'be3. 15 .  'bf6 16 iVf3 l1Vc7 17 'bg3 White can get his pieces out by 1 7 'be3 'bxe3 1 8 3'.xe3. Then 1 8. .. l::t ad8 is at least equal for Black. . 'bd6 18 'bhfl 'bd7 19 'be3 g6 (D) At first sight we have a typical Ruy Lopez situation in which White has a kingside attack and Black is trying to create queenside or cen tral play. The problem for White is that Black's kingside position is almost impossible to get at. Thus Black has a significant advantage out of the opening, and wins quickly when White over reaches. 20 l1Ve2 c4 21 'bg4 h5 22 ctJh6+ @g7 23 ctJhf5+ gxf5 24 'bxh5+ @h8 25 exf5 iVc6 26 CDf4 CDf6 27 l1Vxe5 l::t g8 28 f3 l::t xg2+ 0-1 Breyer Defence

1 e4 e5 2 'bf3 'bc6 3 3'.b5 a6 4 3'.a4 CDf6 5 O-O

3'.e7 6 l::t el b5 7 3'.b3 d6 8 c3 O-O 9 h3 CDb8!?

(D)

As time went by, some players grew either tired of the Chigorin Defence and/or suspi cious of its merits. Attention turned to this rather amazing retreat, the product of early 20th-century player Gyula Breyer's imagina tion. 10 d4 White sometimes holds off on this move, hoping to exploit some subtle issues relating to tempi, but it really hasn't helped his cause.

134 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 135

13 tt:Jn Ponomariov - Gyimesi Moscow 2005 At this juncture White has played some fun damentally different ideas such as 1 3 b4, 1 3 b3 and 13 a4. In the last case, for example, 13 ... i.f8 can be answered by 14 i.d3 aiming at the queenside. In fact, White's main advantage in these lines is that if he can prevent any radical central action by Black, he can exert pressure on both wings. Generally White gains a limited edge if that happens, but nothing that allows him to exceed a normal percentage score; e.g.,

14. .. c6 15 b3 g6 1 6 l1Vc2 (often you'll see Black

break out successfully; e.g., 1 6 3'.b2 3'.g7 17 ii.fl l1Vc7 18 l::t a2 d5 ! 1 9 axb5 cxb5 20 exd5 ti:Jxd5 with the initiative, Tseshkovsky-Dorf man, Erevan Z 1 982) l 6 ... 3'.g7 17 3'.b2 ti:Jh5 1 8 ii.fl iVb6 1 9 b4 ti:Jf4 20 dxe5 tt:Jxe5 2 1 tt:Jxe5 dxe5 22 c4 with the kind of typical slight pres sure White often gets, Karpov-Beliavsky, Biel 1 992. But the absolute key for Black is not to allow an inflexible, passive structure, even if it is the oretically defensible. This happens in our main game, and in the following impressive contest in which White played 14 b4 (instead of 14 i.d3) 14. .. ti:Jb6 1 5 a5 ti:Jbd7 1 6 3'.b2 l::t b8 1 7 l::t bl h6 1 8 ii.al 3'.a8 1 9 l::t e3 ! g 6 20 iYe2 c 6 21 c4 3'.g7? (never allow White a quasi-permanent bind unless forced to; now was the time to play the typical central counterattack with 2 1 . ..exd4! 22 3'.xd4 bxc4! 23 ti:Jxc4 and then 23 ... d5 with equality, or Shirov's idea 23 ... c5) 22 dxe5 dxe5

23 c5 ti:Jh5 24 g3 l1Vc7 25 l::t

d3 l::t bd8 26 l::t dl ti:Jf8 27 ti:Jf! (D). Here's the standard Breyer problem: Black has no obvious targets and no positive plan. This was illustrated by 27 ... l::t xd3 28 l1Vxd3 ti:Jf6 29 ti:Je3 3'.b7 30 ltig2 iVb8 3 1 3'.b2 l1Vc7 32 3'.b3 ! l::t e7 33 iVd8 'iVxd8 34 l::t xd8 ti:J6d7 35 ti:Jh4! 'it'h7 36 ti:Jhf5 ! gxf5 37 ti:Jxf5 i.f6 38 ti:Jxe7 i.xe7 39 l::t e8 and White soon won in Shirov-Leko, Ljubljana 1 995.

13. ..

..ifS 14 ti:Jg3 g6 15 3'.g5!? At this point White has done extremely well at the highest levels with 15 b3 intending c4, when 1 5. .. 3'.g7 1 6 d5 or 1 5. ..c6 1 6 i.g5 ! has given Black fits. But Malcolm Pein and Andrew Martin have done a thorough analysis to show that 1 5. .. d5! works: 1 6 3'.g5 h6 17 3'.h4!? (D). In this position Judit Polgar destroyed Boris Spassky in the 8th game of their Budapest match in 1 993 following 17 ... dxe4 1 8 ti:Jxe4 g5 1 9 dxe5 ti:Jxe4 20 3'.xe4 i.xe4 2 1 l::t xe4 gxh4 22 l::t d4 l::t e7 23 e6 ! fxe6 24 ti:Je5. Pein and Martin tore into the line 1 7. ..g5 ! 1 8 ti:Jxg5 hxg5 1 9 3'.xg5 exd4! with huge complications ultimately favouring Black. Notice how the modern Breyer seems to do best when Black can successfully implement the 'blow it all to bits' strategy as opposed to the 'cleverly shift around' method of defence. That said, the latter can also be sat isfactory with very accurate play.

We've switched back to Keres-style play! 17 ...c6 is the positional option which has in mind an eventual ... d5, and may be preferable. In spite of hundreds of games by the chess elite, you' ll normally see the same set of basic struc tures and approaches. One wonders about a ...d5 break instead, as in the previous note.

136 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lS d5 c4 The point: Black gets a knight to c5. Other wise shutting in his own bishop and not having the ...c6 option would be the worst of both worlds.

19 b4 cxb3

[diagram]

29. ..

[diagram]

24 a5 ii.cs 25 3'.e3 ti:Jfd7 26 J:.ecl @h7

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 13 7

[diagram]

1 e4 e5 2 'bf3 'bc6 3 3'.b5 a6 4 i.a4 'bf6 5 O-O

3'.e7 6 l:!.el b5 7 3'.b3 d6 8 c3 O-O 9 h3 3'.b7 10 d4 l::t e8 (D) Zaitsev gets credit for developing this set up with 9 ...3'.b7 and 1 0. ..l:!.e8 into a complete system. The game can easily tum extremely tactical and because it gives lively play is a great favourite among today' s players on both sides of the board. Some of the attacking ideas associated with this variation have been among the most beautiful of modem chess. From a practical point of view, however, the fun and entertaining main lines cannot be worked out over the board and if your goal is opening mas tery then they simply must be memorized. I have primarily tried to indicate the general con tours of play, and for that purpose will present some dated but fantastic world championship games, along with a couple of more recent ex amples. 11 'bbd2 From Black's point of view, the pure Zaitsev can only be used when a draw is acceptable, be cause 1 1 CDg5 l::t f8 1 2 'bf3 repeats the position. Some degree of bluff is involved. Of course Black can deviate at that point and play another defence to the Lopez, such as 1 2. ..h6 intending to enter a very similar but less immediately ag gressive system by 1 3. .. l:!.e8 and 1 4. .. i.f8. That sequence is sometimes named after Smyslov. As for White, he can play 1 1 CDg5 l::t f8 1 2 f4, which originally was thought to deter Black from Zaitsev's move-order, but this is now con sidered fine for Black after 1 2. ..exf4, and enter prising players will most likely prefer l 2 ...exd4 1 3 cxd4 d5 14 e5 'be4!, in view of 1 5 'bxe4?! dxe4 1 6 l:!.xe4 'ba5, when Black will follow up by ... 'bxb3 and ...c5 with two bishops and ter rific pressure.

11. .. i.fS ( D)

White must now make an important decision between 1 2 a4, which keeps lines open, and 1 2

138 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

16 d5 (D)

16  ti:Jd7 The whole point of ... ti:Jb4 resides in this move. which both prepares ... ti:Je5 with ... c4 and ... ti:Jbd3 to follow, but also contemplates the risky .. .f5 to destroy White's centre. Aban doning the protection of Black's king is not without danger, of course. 17 l:.a3!

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 139

greedy and find his way through the 'only moves' : 23 ... 'bxe l ! 24 'bxe l 'bxd5 ! 25 'bxh6+ i.xh6 26 'ii xh6 l::t a l ! 27 l::t xg6+ fxg6 28 'i:Vxg6+ with a draw) 24 'bxh6+! 3'.xh6 25 'ii xh6 'ii xf2+ 26 'it'h2 'bxe l 27 CDh4! CDed3 (it' s hopeless at this point) 28 'bxg6 'i:Vxg3+ 29 'it'xg3 fxg6 30 'i:Vxg6+ @f8 3 1 'ii f6+ ltig8 32 3'.h6 1 -0. It's now customary for Black to bring a knight to d3 and White to swing his rook to g3 in this line; what counts are the specific tactics and one's skill in carrying them out. Contrary to the impression given by this game, there's a fair amount of room for original play in even these critical Zaitsev lines, and the odds of the aver age player or even a master reaching something this theoretical are extremely low. Which is to say that the Zaitsev is still a fun system, both in the tactical variations and in the positional con tinuations given above. 18 exf5 A more famous and exciting contest from the same match went 1 8 l::t ae3 'bf6 1 9 ctJh2 ! ? 'it'h8

20 b3 ! (White feels that the attack requires only

one more piece and wants the bishop on the long diagonal) 20 ... bxa4 (20 ...fxe4 21 'bxe4 'bfxd5 ! ? 22 llf3 ! CDf6 23 l::t xf6 gxf6 24 CDg4 is typically complicated) 21 bxa4 c4 22 3'.b2 fxe4

23 CDxe4 'bfxd5 24 l::t

g3 l::t e6! 25 CDg4! 'i:Ve8? (a beautiful line is 25 . . . CDf4? 26 'bxh6! l::t xh6 27 CDg5 'ii c7 28 'be6! 'bxe6 29 l::t xe6 l::t h4 30 l::t g4 llxg4 3 1 'i:Vxg4 CDd3 32 l::t h6+ ltig8 33 'i:Ve6+ 'ii f7 34 l::t h8+ ! ; best is 25 ... 'bd3 ! 26 i.xd3 cxd3 27 l::t xd3 'i:Va5, which is unclear) 26 'bxh6! c3

27 CDf5 ! cxb2 28 'i:Vg4 3'.c8 (28 ...

'bc3 loses to the pretty 29 CDf6 ! l::t xe 1 + 30 'it'h2; and 28 ...g6 29 'it'h2! is a similar theme, threatening 'i:Vh4+ and CDg5: 29 ... 'i:Vd7 30 ctJh4! 3'.c8 3 1 'bxg6+ llxg6 32 'i:Vxg6, winning) 29 'i:Vh4+ l::t h6 30 'bxh6 gxh6 31 'it'h2 ! 'i:Ve5 (3 1 . ..3'.g7 32 'bxd6 'i:Vxe l 33 'i:Vxh6+!) 32 CDg5 'ii f6 33 lle8 i.f5 34 'ii xh6+! 'i:Vxh6 35 CDf7+ 'it'h7 36 i.xf5+ 'i:Vg6 37 i.xg6+ 'it'g7 38 llxa8 3'.e7 39 l::t b8 a5 40 i.e4+ 'it'xf7 41 i.xd5+ 1 -0 Kasparov-Karpov, New York/Lyons Wch (20) 1 990. 18 . i.xdS!? 19 'be4 i.f7!? Still another game between these giants con tinued 19 ... CDf6 20 'bxf6+ 'ii xf6 2 1 i.d2 ! 'i:Vxb2 22 i.xb4 i.f7 ! 23 lle6! 'i:Vxb4! 24 llb3 ! 'i:Vxa4 25 i.c2 with an unholy mess. That game, Kas parov-Karpov, New York/Lyons Wch (4) 1 990, was eventually drawn. 20 axb5 d5 21 'bc3 l::t xel+ 22 'bxel d4 23 'ba2 Other involved lines begin with 23 'be4! ? axb5 24 f6 llxa3 25 bxa3 CDd5 26 fxg7 i.xg7 and 23 3'.e4 dxc3 (23 ... lla7 24 'be2 CDf6 25 i.f3 d3) 24 3'.xa8 'i:Vxa8 25 'i:Vxd7 'ii e4. .. 'bxa2 24 i.xa2 c4! 25 l::t xa6 'bc5! (D) 26 l::t xa8 'i:Vxa8 27 ii.bl d3 28 3'.e3 'i:Va5 29 b3! 'bxb3 30 'bxd3! cxd3 31 i.xd3 'bes 32 ii.fl 'i:Vc7 33 'i:Vg4 'it'h7

33. ..

h5 ! ? is answered by 34 'iVd4 with equal ity. 34 3'.c4 3'.xc4 The tempting continuation 34 ... 3'.e8? allows 35 3'.xh6! with the idea 35 ...@xh6 36 'i:Vh4+ i.h5 37 g4. 35 'i:Vxc4 'i:Ve5 36 'ii f7 3'.d6 37 g3 'i:Ve7 38 'i:Vg6+ 'it'h8 39 3'.d4 3'.e5! 40 3'.xc5 'i:Vxc5 41 'i:Ve8+ 'it'h7 42 'i:Vg6+ 'it'h8 43 'i:Ve8+ h-112 L. Dominguez - Morovic Havana 2002

12 d5 (D)

This changes the entire character of the game. Notice how, as in the Breyer Defence, Black retains the option of playing ...c6 to break up White's centre. Speaking in general terms, White will usually answer by dxc6, after which he has been fairly successful in keeping Black from achieving ...d5. The problem is that he must devote all his resources to this effort and allow other equalizing methods. Here are a couple of ways in which this dilemma plays out:

12. 

'be7

140 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

A more conventional approach is 1 2. .. 'bb8 1 3 lLlfl lt:\bd7 14 CD3h2 (DJ. l 4. .. lt:\c5 1 5 i.c2 c6 (Black is using a typical device from the Breyer Defence) 1 6 b4 CDcd7 1 7 dxc6 i.xc6 1 8 i.g5 (the fight to stop ... d5 begins) 1 8. ..h6 1 9 i.xf6 'bxf6 20 CDg4 ! 'bxg4 2 1 'ii' xg4 i.d7 22 iVf3 l::t c8 23 i.b3 i.e6 ! 24 i.xe6 (sadly, the moves thus far are all theory) 24 .. .fxe6 25 a4 'iUd7 26 axb5 axb5 27 l::t ed I 'ii' c6 28 l:.d3 l::t a8 29 l::t ad I l::t a7 30 CDg3 l::t f7 3 1 'ii' g4 l:.f4 32 l1Vg6 l::t f6 3 3 l1Vg4 l::t f4 with equal ity. Pelletier-Bacrot, Biel 2004. A perfectly bal anced game. 13 'bfl h6 14 CD3h2!? c6 15 'bg4 'bxg4 16 hxg4 cxd5 17 exd5 iVd7 18 'bg3 a5 19 a3 a4 20 3'.a2 J:.ac8 21 'be4 Here Black uncorked a beautiful exchange sacrifice:

21...l::t

c4! (DJ 22 i.xc4 bxc4 23 i.xh6! 'bxd5! 24 i.d2 tik.7 25 'bg3 l1Vc6 26 f3 'be6 27 iVe2 'bes l/2- lfi Black has full compensation and, remark ably, 28 l1Vxc4 fails to 28 ...d5 29 iVe2 i.a6 and . .. CDd3 with ... i.c5+ to follow. The Zaitsev is a wonderful opening whose results are determined by both positional and combinative skills. Much main-line theory (in the attacking lines) has been worked out and should be memorized if you're facing top-notch competition. On the other hand, both White and Black have alternatives at an early stage. M011er Defence

1 e4 e5 2 'bf3 lt:\c6 3 i.b5 a6 4 i.a4 'bf6 5 O-O

5 d3 is slow and there are several established

solutions. But in our context it allows Black to get his bishop in front of the pawn-chain with out punishment: 5 ...b5 6 i.b3 i.c5. As we said in the introduction to the Closed Ruy, there can follow 7 O-O (7 'bxe5 'bxe5 8 d4 i.xd4 ! 9 'iVxd4 d6 threatening ...c5 - compare 5 ... i.c5 6 'bxe5 below) 7 ...d6 with equality. The follow ing variation can be directly compared to our M0ller analysis: 8 a4 l::t b8! ? (8 ... i.b7) 9 axb5 axb5 10 c3 O-O. Now White can play 1 1 d4 i.b6, but he's a tempo down on a note to our main game. 5  b5 5 ... i.c5 is also played at this juncture, nor mally transposing; for instance, 6 'bxe5 'bxe5

7 d4 b5 8 i.b3 transposes to the note to White's

7th move below. 6 i.b3 i.c5 (DJ The M0ller Variation. If you think about it, this is a real test of the entire Ruy Lopez concept:

RUY LOPEZ 141

if Black manages to create a successful strong point defence by ...d6 with his bishop outside the pawn-chain, then he has the best of both worlds. The M0ller has enjoyed a great revival among the world' s best players over the past ten years or so. You can imagine how liberating it feels to live for once without that passive bishop on e7 ! But along with his advantages, Black is presented with a few challenges. Con cretely, White has the fork trick 7 ctJxe5 CLixe5 8 d4. Then, on a positional level, White's i.g5 can pin the f6-knight and it can't be unpinned by ... i.e7. It also turns out that Black' s queen side is difficult to protect, much as in the Closed variations but more awkwardly because the bishop gets in the way. Perhaps most impor tantly, Black has to be careful that, if his attack ing ambitions are frustrated, he isn't left with a forlorn bishop cut off from the action on b6. 7 a4! White can also play the critical variation 7 CLixe5 CLixe5 8 d4, forcing Black into 8 ... i.xd4 9 iVxd4 d6 (D). For years everyone assumed that this was a grave drawback to 6 ... i.c5. It gives White the two bishops and the greater share of the centre. It turns out, however, that Black's remaining pieces have great scope and are very well-placed to attack the key e4 point. First, ... c5-c4 is threatened, winning the bishop, and that threat gives Black time to develop his pieces aggres sively. Here are just a couple of lines: a) 10 c3 c5 (or 10 ... i.b7) 1 1 iVe3 O-O 12 ctJd2 l::t e8 1 3 f3 i.b7, as in Kholmov-Lomineishvili, Moscow 1 997, illustrates how Black can use his active pieces to take the initiative. Among other things he threatens ... c4 and ...d5. b) 1 0 f4 tLlc6 1 1 iVc3 i.b7 1 2 e5 (this posi tion arose a few times at the top levels until White became satisfied that he had no advan tage) 1 2. .. ctJe4 1 3 iVe3 ctJa5 14 ctJd2 ctJxb3 1 5 cxb3 ! ? ctJxd2 1 6 i.xd2 O-O 1 7 i.c3 iVM 1 8 l::t ael l::t fe8 1 9 iVf2 iVxf2+ 20 l::t xf2 dxe5 1h-1h Anand-Topalov, Linares 1 997. 7 ...l::t bS 8 c3 d6 9 d4 i.b6 We've arrived at the main line.

10 CLia3!

1 0 axb5 axb5 1 1 ctJa3 ! usually transposes.

10. ..O-O!?

Black gambits a pawn for activity and pres sure on the centre. In fact, there isn't a lot of choice. But the recommended order 1 0. ..exd4! might eliminate some later issues: 1 1 cxd4 ( 1 1 axb5 axb5 1 2 ctJxd4 ! ? is another method that probably isn't any better but deserves attention) l l ...O-O 1 2 axb5 axb5. 11 axb5 axb5 12 tLlxbS (D) For his pawn Black has pressure on both the e4- and d4-pawns; in particular, ... i.g4 will be a

142 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

14. ..

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 143

Anand - Shirov Groningen FIDE KO 1997 14 .Jle3 (D)

[diagram]
This is Black's standard idea, to threaten ... lt:Jxe4 without losing material after .Jld5, but it doesn't appear to work out. Also bad is

[diagram]

19. .

[diagram]

144 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

37 l:.xg7+ Rh8 38 .l:Ixb7 .Jlc3 39 .l:Id7 Rg8 40 l:.d8+ Rf7 41 .l:Ih8! .Jld4+ 42 Wfl 1-0 Even with White's mistakes you can see how his strategy challenges Black to find sufficient counterplay. The M0ller is a fascinating and unresolved variation. Open Variation I e4 e5 2 lt:Jf3 lt:Jc6 3 .Jlb5 a6 4 .Jla4 lt:Jf6 5 O-O lbxe4 (D) The starting position of the Open Variation of the Ruy Lopez. Now we're leaving the realm of Black's 1 st-3rd rank manoeuvring in favour of staking a full claim to the centre. Perhaps be cause of this assertive posture, the Open Ruy has been the playground for some of the sharp est tacticians in history. As always, you'll have to be careful about the move-orders, which we'll cover in the next few notes. For instance, the inverted moves 5 ...b5 6 .Jlb3 lt:Jxe4?! can run into 7 a4! (D). Instead, 7 d4 d5 transposes to the main line, and 7 l:.el d5 8 lt:Jc3 lt:Jxc3 9 dxc3 .Jle6 1 0 a4 b4 1 1 a5 ! ? is a recurring tactical idea: White threatens .Jla4 and then lt:Jxe5. This is some what unclear but difficult for Black. We've seen the power of a4 throughout the Ruy Lopez, and it especially applies to the Open Variation. After 7 a4, the play might go: a) 7 ... b4 8 .l:Iel d5 9 d3 lt:Jf6 10 a5 ! . b ) 7 .. . .Jlb7 8 .l:Iel lt:Ja5 9 .Jla2 and White has ideas of d3 or d4 and lt:Jg5. c) 7 ... l:.b8 8 axb5 axb5 9 .l:Iel d5 10 lt:Jc3 !, and now, for example, 10. .. lt:Jxc3 1 1 dxc3 .Jle6 1 2 .l:Ia6 d7 1 3 .l:Ixc6! xc6 1 4 lt:Jxe5 c5 ( 1 4. .. d6 1 5 .Jlf4) 1 5 lt:Jxf7 ! Rxf7 1 6 f3+ Re7 1 7 .Jlxd5 .l:Ib6 1 8 .Jlg5+ Rd7 1 9 .Jlxe6+ .l:Ixe6 20 f7+ and wins. 6 d4 6 .l:Ie 1 provides another reason why delaying ... b5 until after ... lt:Jxe4 is helpful: 6 ... lt:Jc5 7 lt:Jc3 .Jle7 and the a4-bishop is attacked. How ever, Black should steer clear of 7 ... lt:Jxa4 8 lt:Jxe5 lt:Jxe5?? 9 l:.xe5+ .Jle7 10 lt:Jd5. 6 ..b5 7 .Jlb3 d5 8 dxe5 .Jle6 (D) With these moves we have reached the prin cipal variation of the Open Ruy Lopez. Black announces that he is playing dynamically and will steer clear of those protracted positional struggles that we have seen above (often with no exchanges in the first 20 moves). Neverthe less, the Open Ruy has a great number of con sistent positional features, more so than the average attacking system. Already the funda mental question arises: tactics apart, what is each side playing for? In the positional phase,

RUY LOPEZ 145

[diagram]

22 b3 .l:Ife8 23 .l:Iel c4 24 g5 c7 ! with equal

[diagram]

146 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

19. ..

[diagram]

RUY LOPEZ 147

[diagram]

I 5 ...

[diagram]

19. ..

[diagram]

[diagram]
28 d2! (D) Black's bishop is awful.

148 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

28  .l:i.e8 29 lt:Jd4 .l:IfeS 30 f4! .l:Ie4 31 fS Rh8 32 'ifh6! "V/J/e7 33 lt:Jf3! "V/Jff8 34 "V/J/gS "V/J/g7 35 f6 'iff8 36 .l:Icl ! Once more to the queenside.

36...

h6 37 "V/J/d2 gS 38 .l:Ic7 .l:Ie2 39 "V/J/cl .l:I2e6 40 h4! .l:i.xf6 41 hxgS .l:Ig6 42 "V/J/f4 .Jle6 42 ... .l:i.e7 43 lt:Jh4! .l:Ige6 44 .l:Ixe7 "V/J/xe7 45 g6!. 43 lt:Jh4! .l:Ig7 44 "V/J/d4 Rh7 45 "V/J/d3+ 1-0 A beautiful game, and another dream posi tion for White. It's time to see how Black can make his re sources fully count. The themes in the notes complement the main game. Naiditsch - Korchnoi Zurich 2002 9 lt:Jbd2 lt:JcS 10 c3 .Jlg4 This standard move opens up the possibility of freeing Black's game by ...d4. 11 iic2 (D)

11 .. iie7 A fascinating set-up is 1 1 ...lt:Je6!? 12 .l:Iel .i.c5. because Black has made two moves with his light-squared bishop and then four with his !ting's knight. Nevertheless, this is the ultimate and consistent attempt to control the d4-square - all of Black's minor pieces are devoted to it! A critical continuation was seen in Kariakin Flear. Hastings 2002/3: 1 3 lt:Jfl ( 1 3 lt:Jb3 .Jla7 is also important; it will be hard for White to hold off ... d4 and/or ... c5 forever) 1 3. .. .Jlh5 ( 1 3. ..d4 looks perfect until you see 14 .Jle4!, when the tempo and pin on Black's knight turn out to give White a big advantage; both White and Black should be aware of this idea) 14 lt:Jg3 .Jlg6 15 h4 d4! (D). 1 6 .Jlg5 "V/J/d7 17 cxd4 lt:Jcxd4 1 8 lt:Jxd4 and here I think that 1 8. .. .Jlxd4! would have equal ized or better. The point is that Black will get his cherished ... c5 in. 12 .l:Iel O-O Korchnoi has also played 12 ... "V/J/d7 with vary ing success. The idea is not just to overprotect the d-pawn by ... .l:Id8, but also to have the c6- knight protected in case White plays .Jle4 in re ply to ...d4. Htibner-Korchnoi, Tilburg 1 986 went 13 h3 .Jlh5 14 lt:Jfl .l:Id8 15 lt:Jg3 .Jlg6 (ready for ...d4) 1 6 lt:Jd4 O-O 17 .Jlf5 ! lt:Je6 (this knight is pinned but it's also a superb block ader) 1 8 .Jlg4 lt:Jcxd4 1 9 cxd4 c5 (D). Here's the key break, not necessarily optimal because White will get an isolated pawn to work against and some weak squares on the queenside. Nevertheless, it's a good trade-off,

RUY LOPEZ 149

[diagram]

14. ..

[diagram]

[diagram]

150 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
20 a4 was suggested; watch out for the bish

ops!) 1 9. ..b4 20 .Jlg5 f6 2 1 cxb4 .Jlxb4 22 .Jle3 lt:Jc4?! (22 ...g6 and ... f5 would be strong) 23 .Jlf4 .Jld2 24 b3 lt:Jd6 25 .Jlxd6 .l:Ixd6 1h-1h Leko-Anand, Tilburg 1 998.

[diagram]

D)

18 .. cS This is a necessity before White plays .l:Ic 1 , and indeed it frees the d-pawn. 19 dxc5 d4 20 .Jlxd4! The problem is that White is now two pawns up!

. O-O

RUY LOPEZ 151

20 ... .Jlxc5 21 .Jlxc5 .l:Ixdl 22 .l:Iaxdl puts Black in great danger; e.g., 22 ...h5 ! 23 .l:Id5 ! .l:Ih6 24 .l:Iedl c8 25 f4 with the idea f5. 21 c6! .l:Id5! 22 .l:Icl .l:Ic8 Black will get one of his two pawns back. After that happens, bad bishop or not, White can still play for a win. 23 g3!?

23 f3 may be a tad more accurate in view of

[diagram]
25 .l:Ixc6 25 e4! is still good, but in that case 25 .. .f5 ! 26 e3 (26 exf6?? xe4) 26 ... .l:Ixcl 27 .l:Ixcl .l:Id7 at least forms a fairly solid blockade. 25 ... xc6 26 e4 We'll stop here. White tried to press his ad vantage for many moves and after mutual inac curacies the game was eventually drawn. You can see that the Open Variation has a large number of variations to choose from. More significantly, both sides have options on so many moves that very little has been defini tively worked out. This is an ideal system for the average player, both from a practical and educational point of view. Exchange Variation

1 e4 e5 2 lt:Jf3 lt:Jc6 3 .tbs a6 4 .Jlxc6 (D)

[diagram]

4. ..dxc6

Instead, 4 ... bxc6 captures towards centre, but as in many openings the capture away from the centre is better. Instead of freeing Black's queen and queen's bishop, 4 ...bxc6 slows Black's de velopment and puts no obstacles in the way of White's d4 (compare 5 d4 below). If Black could play an effective ...d5 at some point he might have some justification, but White will normally be able either to prevent that or to re spond with e5 to good effect. Play can continue

5 O-O (5 d4 is also good, forcing the surrender

of the centre - remember that the side that sur renders the centre needs quick development in order to compensate for that by means of piece play) 5 ...d6 6 d4 exd4 7 lt:Jxd4 .Jld7 8 lt:Jc3 lt:Jf6

Black is actually a tempo down on 1 e4 e5 2 lt:Jf3 lt:Jc6 3 .Jlb5 d6 4 O-O lt:Jf6 5 d4 exd4 6 lt:Jxd4 .Jld7 7 .Jlxc6 bxc6, a position that is

152 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

favourable to White anyway! Here's an exam ple without variations: 9 i.f4 i.e7 1 0 e5 dxe5 1 1 i.xe5 O-O 1 2 'i*'f3 c5 1 3 lbc6 i.xc6 1 4 'i*'xc6 (Black's c-pawns are a disaster, and White is about to establish a large lead in development) 14 ... 'ii' d7 15 'i*'xd7 ctJxd7 1 6 i.xc7 i.f6 1 7 i.a5 l:.ab8 18 b3 l:tfe8 1 9 l:tadl lbf8 20 lbd5 i.b2 2 1 :fe l :xel + 22 l:txel lbe6 23 lbc7 lbxc7 24 ii.xc7 l:tc8 25 l:tdl i.f6 26 i.f4 c4 27 g3 cxb3 28 cxb3 l:tc2 29 Ik l ! and White easily con verted his extra pawn into victory in Illescas Gueneau, French Cht 1 99 1 . We now return to 4 ... dxc6 (D):

5 O-O

The first basic idea of the Exchange Variation is that White has the superior pawn-structure, and that he will sooner or later exchange his d pawn for Black's e-pawn, establishing a 4:3 pawn-majority on the kingside. He hopes to win a simplified position by using that majority to create a passed pawn, whereas Black's 4:3 majority is 'crippled' and incapable of doing the same thing. Consequently, White will tend to win the vast majority of pure king-and-pawn endings. However, there's a lot more going on here. First of all, Black possesses the bishop-pair, which can be in and of itself compensation for a weakness. Then I think there's a rule of thumb in his favour: usually the earlier in the game that one side establishes an 'advantage in the long run' such as doubled, backward, or iso lated pawns, the less likely it is to last into the endgame, or cause harm if it does persist that far. In large part this is due to the fact that the opponent has more time to adjust to the prob lem and solve it directly or find counterplay. With that in mind, one can imagine that having more pieces on the board favours the side with the weaknesses. And that's where a hypotheti cal problem arises: it may not seem vital at first, but White has a lead in development. This means that he can sometimes control the dis position of forces and arrive at the kind of po sition in which Black will be compelled to exchange pieces. If the pawn-structure isn't changed thereby, White comes closer to the sort of endgame that he would prefer. In my ob servation, however, the 4:3 endgame advantage very seldom arises in games between strong players. In reality it is just as likely that Black's bishops and active play will effect some struc tural change along the way. However, barring favourable exchanges (and it takes a lot of them before a true endgame will come into view), White may still be able to use his lead in devel opment and in some cases his greater control of territory to build up his forces and break through in the centre before Black is ready for it. That seems to be the more common way in which White makes progress. Conversely, the varia tions in which Black successfully restrains White's central pawns or the ones in which he develops rapidly have proven the most effective in equalizing. This brings us to the difference between White's more modem move 5 O-O and the tradi tional 5 d4. The latter move has a certain logic, because White needs to disturb his opponent's game before Black can secure his position and find roles for his bishops. But after 5 d4 exd4 6 'i*'xd4 (6 lbxd4 c5 is easy for Black, because af ter the exchange of queens, the two bishops can

RUY LOPEZ 153

develop quickly in coordination with harassing White's king) 6 ... 'ii' xd4 7 ctJxd4 (D), the situa tion has changed. White's special advantage of having more pieces in play has disappeared. Given that cir cumstance, we're down to the effectiveness of the two bishops versus the potential advantages of White's pawn-structure. Let's see: 7 ... i.d7! (the idea is to get castled quickly, bringing the rook to the open d-file, and perhaps play ...c5 and ... i.c6; 7 ... c5 is a good alternative; on the other hand 7 ... i.d6!? commits Black to a par- ticular development; then 8 ctJc3 ctJe7 9 O-O O-O 1 0 f4 Ile8 1 1 lbb3 f6 1 2 f5 ! ? b6 1 3 i.f4 is the famous game Lasker-Capablanca, St Petersburg 1 9 14, in which Black was probably not worse but he had to defend accurately and lost) 8 i.e3 O-O-O 9 lbd2 (9 lbc3 i.b4) 9 ... lbe7 (9 ...c5 1 0 lbe2 b 6 sets up a structure that Black normally likes, because it is sound and makes room on c6 for a bishop or knight; for instance, 1 1 O-O-O lbe7 1 2 ctJc4 lbc6 with equality) 10 O-O-O lbg6 ( 1 0 .. .f6 1 1 f3 ctJg6 1 2 h4 h5 1 3 ctJc4 c5 1 4 ctJf5 i.e6 is solid and equal, if uninspiring, Miles Karpov, Biel 1 992) 1 1 h3 Ile8 1 2 .l:thel i.d6 1 3 lbe2 f5 !? 14 exf5 ctJh4 1 5 ctJc4? ( 1 5 g4 ctJg2 1 6 Ilgl lbxe3 1 7 fxe3 .l:txe3 is to Black's advan tage due to his bishops) 1 5. . . lbxg2 1 6 Ilgl lbxe3 17 fxe3 i.c5 with a big advantage for Black, Peterson-Alekhine, brebro 1 935. You can see how easy Black's play is after 5 d4 and why 5 O-O (D), to which we now return, is generally preferred. After 5 O-O Black can choose among a wide array of defences, but most of them offer White good prospects for advantage. We'll focus on three that hold their own, and follow a few games (with a number of imbedded excerpts) in order to get a close feel for the ideas. 5 i.d6 Milu - Vajda Bucharest 1995 This modest and logical development bol sters e5 and retains options for the knight and c8-bishop. It keeps the game interesting but is also non-forcing; thus it offers White more op portunities to create trouble for his opponent than the other two moves under consideration.

6 d4 (D)

White should develop as rapidly as possible. as explained above, and he also wants Black to play ...exd4 to establish his 4:3 kingside major ity. Black's bishops would find the time to de velop smoothly after 6 d3 ctJe7; for example. 7 i.e3 O-O 8 lbbd2 (8 c3 ! ?) 8 ...f6 9 a3 (probably White would be better off with 9 c3 or 9 l0c4. although in the latter case Black might cause the same kind of problems by 9 ... i.g4) 9 ... c5 l 0 lbc4 i.g4 l l b4? cxb4 1 2 lbxd6 cxd6 1 3 h3 ( 13 axb4 f5 ! and the f3-knight is in trouble) 1 3. .. i.xf3 14 'iVxf3 bxa3 1 5 .l:tfbl b5, Ungu reanu-Flear, Lenk 1 992. Black is a clear pawn ahead. 6 ... exd4 7 'iVxd4! 7 lbxd4 is slow: 7 ... lbe7 (7. .. 'iVh4!?) 8 i.e3 O-O intends ...f5, a double-edged move that is good in a position like this because it opens lines; e.g., 9 lbc3 f5 1 0 exf5 lbxf5 1 1 lbxf5 i.xf5 with free and easy development. You can see that White's kingside majority is no longer a relevant factor.

154 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

7 ... f6 (D) An unfortunate necessity versus e5 which puts White even further ahead in development. However, if Black gets just a few moves to con solidate by ... ti'Je7-g6 and ... i..e6, he'll control e5 and stand well positionally. We looked briefly at this position in Chap ter 2 when discussing the vanished centre. As explained there, static factors are temporarily more important than dynamic ones, although that might change at any moment. White would like to make inroads before Black can stabilize the position. Given time, the bishop-pair might begin to assert itself. White's other option is to eliminate one of the bishops, probably the one on d6; he can hardly stand worse in that case but the time it takes to achieve this will usually let Black equalize or come very close to doing so. 8 i.. e3 A flexible move that develops without com mitting the bl -knight. Alternatively: a) 8 e5 fxe5 9 ti'Jxe5 lets Black catch up in development again: 9 ... ti'Jf6 (or 9 ... 'iVf6 I O Ilel ti'Je7 with equality) IO Ilel O-O 1 1 i..g5 ( 1 1 'iVc4+ ti'Jd5 1 2 ti'Jc3 'iVf6!) l l ...'iVe8 1 2 ti'Jd2 c5 1 3 'iVc4+ i.. e6 with full equality, Ungure-Lane, Cappelle la Grande 1 995. Black's pawn-struc ture is the equal of White's. The moral for Black is to get on with his development and force the pace. b) The most common move by quite a mar gin is 8 ti'Jbd2. Black has two sound options, both with a mind to watching over e5 : bl) 8 ...ti'Jh6! ? 9 ti'Jc4 ti'Jf7 is a relatively old but noteworthy idea: I 0 b3? O-O 1 1 h3 b5 ! 1 2 ti'Jxd6 cxd6 1 3 i..f4 i.. b7! 1 4 Iladl c5 1 5 'iVd3 Ile8 1 6 .l:tfel Ile6 1 7 c4 'iVe7, Karaklajic-Gligo ric, Manila 1 975. Surrender of the centre for ac tivity ! b2) 8 ... i.. e6 9 b3 (not 9 ti'Jc4? losing a pawn after 9 . . . i..xh2+! I O 'it>xh2 'iVxd4 1 1 ti'Jxd4 i..xc4 - thus 8 ... i..e6 has a preventative func tion) 9 ... ti'Je7 IO i..b2 (10 ti'Jc4 i..b4! 1 1 ti'Je3 c5 1 2 'iVxd8+ .l:txd8 13 i.. b2 O-O and White hasn't achieved what he needed to in terms of either pawn-structure or neutralizing the black bish ops, Schiissler-Westerinen, Copenhagen 1 979)

I0 ...

O-O 1 1 .l:tadl (D). l I ...'iVe8 !? (a frequent theme: the queen will reinforce Black's bishops by ... 'iVf7 or run off to attack White's king; nevertheless, a good and probably superior alternative was l l . . . c5 ! fol lowed by ... 'iVe8) 1 2 e5?! (White should try 1 2 ti'Jc4! with good prospects; Black i s then under pressure to respond and e5 can wait until later) 1 2 .. .fxe5 1 3 ti'Jxe5 c5 1 4 'iVe4 i..d5. Here some thing has definitely gone wrong for White:

RUY LOPEZ 155

[diagram]

14 f5 'iVe5 ! or 1 4 e5 fxe5 1 5 f5 'iVe7 ! 1 6 fxg6

[diagram]

O-O?!

Once again it's better to keep same-coloured bishops on by 10. .. tt:.lg6 1 1 tt:.lc4 ilxc4 1 2 'iVxc4 'iVe7. Now we'll see how White can exploit the structural advantage that he has so carefully maintained: 1 1 tt:.\c4 ilb4 12 a3! 'iVxd4 13 tt:.lxd4 ilxc4 14 axb4 This pawn quashes potential queenside play by Black (not that the pawns were really going anywhere). Now that White has the position he wants, he's in no hurry. 14 .. tt:.lg6 15 f3! Ilad8 16 @f2 Ild7 17 .l:td2 .l:tfd8 18 .l:tadl tt:.le5 19 h4! (D) White begins to seize space; the f-pawn can wait for the right moment since its advance can weaken adjoining squares.

19. ..

..tf7 20 b3 b6 21 tt:.le2 Ilxd2 22 .l:txd2 l:txd2 23 ilxd2 Minor pieces are superior to rooks when you're trying to win these characteristic Ex change positions; knights are best of all.

But White was eventually going to advance his pawns with a winning game. 25 bxc5 bxcS 26 ile3 c4 27 b4! tt:.\c6 28 f4

(D)

28 ... 'it>e8 29 c3 'it>d7 30 tt:.lg3 tt:.ld8 31 g5 tt:.lb7 32 .Bd4 fxg5 33 hxg5 g6 34 'it>e3 tt:.ld6 35 f5! The advance is inexorable. 'it>f4 is on the cards next.

156 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

35 .gxfS 36 exfS i.dS 37 i.eS! i.f7 Also hopeless are 37 ... tt:.lb5 38 tt:.le4 and 37 ... tt:.\f7 38 'it>d4 ! . 3 8 'it>d4 'it>c6 39 i.xd6 'it>xd6 40 tt:.le4+ 'it>e7 1-0 A beautiful display of White's 'ideal' goal when playing 4 i.xc6. However, I think that this is the exception and not the rule, and that the most important lesson of these examples as a whole is that Black usually has the where withal either to change the pawn-structure or otherwise to create counterplay in return for his doubled c-pawns. As indicated above, the way that White usu ally gets the edge in practice is by exploiting his development and space to create some other type of advantage, even if it means straighten ing out Black's pawns. White can often succeed in doing this and give himself real chances; whether he can achieve enough to win the game is another matter. Also, some of Black's early options deserve attention. 5 ... i.g4 (D) This is the most radical move and the one that was originally thought to be the most seri ous problem with 5 O-O. Now 6 d4 loses a pawn, and slow moves allow, for example, ... 'iVf6 and ...O-O-O and/or ... i.c5. Thus White prefers to attack the black bishop right away. It would take us too far afield to examine the many tactical lines following 5 ... i.g4 and it's another one of those moves that takes a lot of study and memorization. I'm only going to quote a few games to draw an outline of the play.

6 h3 hS!

Volokitin - Akopian Sochi 2004 Really, this is forced if Black wants to equal ize. He can't give up the bishop-pair for noth ing. 7 d3 White needs to get some pieces out before he can contemplate capturing the bishop. You can easily work out the consequence of doing so; at the very least White will have to return the piece, since 7 hxg4? hxg4 8 tt:.lh2? 'iVh4 is aw ful. 7 ... 'iVf6 (D) 8 i.e3 Somehow the games keep petering out in this line although there are plenty of ideas: a) The first point is that, again, 8 hxg4? hxg4 wins Black's piece back with advantage, since the knight can't move without allowing ... 'iVh4.

RUY LOPEZ 157

b) 8 tt:.lbd2 has been the main line, but Black has done reasonably well. There are hundreds of games here; I'll just list a few excerpts after 8 ... tt:.le7: bl) 9 hxg4 isn't played because of 9 ... hxg4 1 0 g3 ! gxf3 1 1 'iVxf3 'iVe6 !? (or l l ...'iVh6 1 2 !Iel , when 1 2. . . 'iVh3, 1 2. . . tt:.lg6 and 1 2. . .c5 are all at least equal) 1 2 tt:.lc4 c5 1 3 i..e3 tt:.lc6 1 4 'iVf5 'iVxf5 1 5 exf5 f6 with equality, Deviatkin Fressinet, Internet 2004. b2) Some big names have been involved in games after 9 Ilel tt:.lg6 10 d4 ( 10 hxg4? hxg4 1 1 tt:.lh2? i..c5 !) 10. .. tt:.\f4 1 1 dxe5 ( 1 1 hxg4!? hxg4 1 2 g3 gxf3 1 3 'iVxf3 tt:.le6 1 4 dxe5 'iVh6 1 5 tt:.lb3 g5 ! 1 6 i..e3 'iVh3 ! 17 'iVg2 'iVh5 with equality, Macieja-Adams, Rethymnon ECC 2003; you see how crazy and specific this all is!) l 1 . ..'iVg6 12 tt:.lh4 i..xdl 1 3 tt:.lxg6 tt:.lxg6 1 4 !Ixdl .i:Id8 ( 1 4. .. O-O-O is also equal) 1 5 !Iel tt:.lxe5 1 6 tt:.lf3 tt:.lxf3+ 1 7 gxf3 i..b4 1h-1h Nisipeanu-Kasim dzhanov, Bundesliga 2005/6. b3) 9 tt:.lc4 (this is positionally the most in teresting move) 9 ... i..xf3 1 0 'iVxf3 'iVxf3 1 1 gxf3 tt:.lg6 1 2 i..e3 i..e7 ! (D). White has apparently lost his wished-for ad vantage in a possible pawn ending! But that's not very relevant, since the game won't get that far in most cases. Black can reorganize by ...f6 and ... tt:.\f8-e6, or plunge ahead with ...O-O-O followed by ... !Ihf8 and .. .f5, as suggested by Kindermann. White usually plays for either f4 or d4: 1 3 !Ifdl (or 1 3 @hl i..f6 14 a4 O-O-O 1 5 a5 tt:.lh4 with equality, Hort-Spassky, Reykjavik Ct ( l 6) 1 977) 1 3. ..O-O-O 14 @fl f6 ( 14 ... !Ihf8 !? intending .. .f5 is Kindermann' s idea) 1 5 @e2 tt:.\f8 1 6 f4 exf4 17 i..xf4 tt:.le6 and a draw was agreed in Kindermann-Dorfman, Jenbach 2003. Kindermann analyses 1 8 i..e3 g5 1 9 c3 !Ihf8 20 f3 f5 2 1 !lg 1 when 2 1 ...c5 looks equal. Plenty of ideas, but dubious results in terms of advan tages for either side. 8 ... i..xf3 9 'iVxf3 'iVxf3 10 gxf3 i..d6 11 tt:.ld2 tt:.le7 (D) This time Black just wants to play ...c5 and ... tt:.lc6. These kinds of positions are equal and don't say much for White' s winning chances after 5 ... i..g4. On the other hand that can change with one new discovery or reassessment. 12 .i:Ifdl Nothing much happened in this game either: 1 2 .i:Ifbl !? c5 ! 1 3 @fl a5 1 4 a4 tt:.lc6 1 5 c3 f6 1 6 @e2 b6 1 7 !lg 1 @f7 1 8 tt:.lc4 !Iad8 1 9 !Ig2 h4 20 !Iag l g5 with equality, de la Villa-Delchev, La Roda 2004. 12 c5 13 tt:.lc4 tt:.lc6 14 c3 @e7 15 @fl f6 16 a3 a5 17 a4 g6 18 @e2 @e6 19 !Igl !Ihg8 20 Ilg2 !Iad8 21 !Iagl @f7 112-1/2 Thus 5 ... i..g4 gives every indication of being a complete solution for Black. Here's one more method of play that looks perfectly fine for him: Hector - Beliavsky Copenhagen 2004 5 ... 'iVf6 (D) This is a simple way to defend e5 . Black prepares an early . . .O-O-O. Up to this point White hasn' t found any way to gain the upper hand. 6 d4!

158 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Versus the slow 6 d3, 6 ... .llg4 and 6 ... .llc5 are good aggressive moves. 6 ...exd4 7 .llg5 Or: a) 7 e5 'iVg6 gives Black nice scope for his bishops, as shown by 8 tt:.lxd4 .llh3 9 'iVf3 .llg4 IO 'iVg3 O-O-O. b) 7 'iVxd4 and now 7 ... .llg4 ! ? puts White on the spot; e.g., 8 'iVe5+!? 'iVxe5 9 tt:.lxe5 .lle6 with equality. Black can also play 7 ... 'iVxd4 8 tt:.lxd4 .lld7 or even 7 ... .lld7, yielding the stan dard type of equal position that we saw after 5 d4. c) 7 tt:.lxd4?! .lld7 8 .lle3 O-O-O gives Black everything he wants. 7 . 'iVd6 (D) 8 'iVxd4 8 tt:.lxd4 .lld7 9 tt:.lc3 .lle7 IO .llxe7 tt:.lxe7 1 1 tt:.lb3 is Magem-Morozevich, Pamplona 1 994/5. Easiest now is 1 1 ...'iVxd l 1 2 .l:taxdl b6 intend ing ... c5, denying the b3-knight good squares, followed by ...

O-O-O.

[diagram]
16 f4 'it>b8 17 tt:.lxe6? fxe6!

Black threatens ...e5.

18 e5 g5!

with a substantial advantage. At the time of writing, the ball's in White's court. Marshall Attack

1 e4 e5 2 tt:.\f3 tt:.lc6 3 .llb5 a6 4 .lla4 tt:.lf6 5 O-O

.ll e7 6 Ilel b5 7 .ll b3 O-O I'm going to emphasize and expand upon a point that I made in the Closed Lopez section about move-orders. 7 ...d6 is a way to circum vent the problems associated with White's 'Anti-Marshall' lines, which go 7 ... O-O 8 a4 and 7 ...O-O 8 h3 (see below). 7 ...d6 will usually lead to the normal Closed Lopez after 8 c3 O-O 9 h3, etc. After 7 ... d6, 8 a4 (D) is no longer very ef fective, in part because e5 is defended. Here Black has equalized easily following each of the moves 8 ... .lld7, 8 ...b4 and 8 ... .llb7; compare 7 ... O-O 8 a4. For those with more im mediate ambitions, there's 8 ... tt:.\a5 ! ? 9 .lla2 (9 axb5 tt:.lxb3 10 cxb3 .llb7 1 1 bxa6 .llxa6 gives plenty of compensation: two bishops, activity, and those awful b-pawns) 9 ...b4 I O c3 ! ? c5 1 1 d4 cxd4 1 2 cxd4 ( 1 2 cxb4 works out reasonably well for Black in the various complications fol lowing 1 2. .. tt:.lc6 { 1 2. .. tt:.lb7 ! ? } 1 3 b5 and now 1 3. .. tt:.lb4 1 4 .llxf7+ 'it>xf7 1 5 'iVb3+ tt:.lbd5 ! ? 1 6

RUY LOPEZ

exd5 axb5 or 13 ... axb5 14 axb5 .Be6 15 bxc6 .Bxa2) 1 2. .. O-O! 1 3 tt:.lbd2 "VJJ/ c7, which is equal according to Ivanchuk. We now return to 7 ...O-O (D): 8 c3 At this juncture, White has got good mileage out of two of the 'Anti-Marshall' variations: a) Kasparov has caused his opponents con siderable difficulties with 8 a4, threatening simply 9 axb5. At the moment Black's reme dies are holding up well, but this version of the Anti-Marshall is still a legitimate weapon and leaves plenty of play on the board. Here's a classic example between the former and cur rent World Champions, with notes at critical junctures: 8 ... .Bb7 (arguably the best defence)

9 d3 d6 10 tt:.lbd2 tt:.ld7 1 1 c3 tt:.lc5 1 2 axb5 axb5

[diagram]
"VJJ/

h7+ 'it>xf6 3 2 .Bg5+! 'it>xg5 3 3 "VJJ/ g7+ 'it>h5 34 .idl + .Bg4 35 .Bxg4+ 'it>h4 36 fxg3+ 'it>xg3 37 .Bf5+ 'it>f4 38 "VJJ/ h6+ 'it>g3 39 "VJJ/ g5#. Instead, the game continued 25 ... tt:.lbd7 26 .Bxh6 .Bxh4 27 Ilg4 .Be7 28 .Bg5 .Bxg5 29 tt:.lxg5 f5 (29 ...

"VJJ/

b2

30 Ilg3 Ile8 31 'it>h2!) 30 exf5 gxh5 31 Ilg3

tt:.lf6 32 tt:.le6+? (Kasparov falters in time trou ble - 3 2 tt:.le4+! wins; for example, 3 2. .. tt:.\g4 33 Ilxg4+ hxg4 34 "VJJ/ xg4+ @f7 35 "VJJ/ g6+ 'it>e7 36

"VJJ/

g7+ .l:tf7 37 f6+ 'it>e8 38 tt:.\xd6+! cxd6 39

"VJJ/

g8+ .l:tf8 40 .Bg6+ 'it>d8 41 "VJJ/ xf8+ 'it>c7 42

"VJJ/

e7+ tt:.ld7 43 f7) 32 ...@f7 33 Ilg7+ 'it>e8 34 tt:.lxc7+ 'it>d8 35 tt:.le6+ 'it>e8 36 tt:.lc7+ 'it>d8 37 tt:.le6+ 'it>e8 38 tt:.lc7+ 1h-1h Kasparov-Topalov, Linares 2004. b) The latest rage (and it again shows the re spect that players have for the Marshall Attack) is 8 h3, a move that leading grandmasters have turned to with some (but not overwhelming) success. Then 8 ...d6 9 c3 transposes into the Closed Ruy Lopez. And 8 ...d5, the Marshall idea, comes up a little short after 9 exd5 tt:.\xd5 10 tt:.lxe5 tt:.lxe5 1 1 Ilxe5. This gives White a better grip on the kingside than he gets in the Marshall Attack. Furthermore, White will fol low up with rapid development by tt:.lc3, surely an improvement over having a pawn on c3. For all that, White shouldn't feel overconfident: years ago, Blatny tried 1 1 ...tt:.lb6 followed by ... c5 and ... .Bd6; this deserves some attention. Of course, Black needn't gambit; he usually plays 8 ... .Bb7 9 d3 (D). After this modest protection of the e-pawn, White has several methods of arranging his pieces. For example, he can divorce himself

160 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

entirely from the Closed Ruy lines by lbc3, per haps to be followed by lbd5. He can play c3, in more or less traditional fashion (ctJd2-fl might follow). Or he has .Be3 followed by ctJd2, con templating d4. What has become the main line goes 9 ...d6 (even the active 9 ... .Bc5 has been played here, reacting to White' s slow develop ment, but Black's main alternative is 9 ...Ile8; e.g., 1 0 lbc3 .Bb4!? 1 1 ctJg5 .l:tf8 1 2 a3 .Bxc3 1 3 bxc3 lba5 1 4 .Ba2 c5 1 5 f4 exf4 1 6 e5 ctJd5 1 7 .Bxd5 'iVxg5 1 8 .Bxb7 1/z-1/z Kramnik-Leko, Brissago Wch (2) 2004) IO a3 (D).

The minute that Black defends his e-pawn, he is free to play ... lba5 and rid himself of White's active bishop. With 1 0 a3, White gives the bishop a square to drop back to. This con trasts with the customary set-up with c3 and .Bc2. Now Black has been playing 1 O ... lba5 (although world-class players are playing this way, I really wonder about the wisdom of set ting up a Chigorin structure with ...c5 and ced ing the d5-square; the logical 10. .. Ile8 is a good option, with the idea of ... .Bf8 and staying cen tralized; and there are a number of other sensi ble moves) 1 1 .Ba2 c5 1 2 ctJbd2 ( 1 2 lbc3 lbc6 1 3 ctJd5 lbxd5 1 4 .Bxd5 'iVc7 1 5 c3 ctJb8 1 6 .Bxb7 'iVxb7 has also led to equality; this isn't written in stone, of course) 12 ... lbc6 13 ctJfl .Bc8!? (Black plays the familiar rerouting move with his bishop even though there's no pawn on d5 - his idea is to play the also-familiar ... .Be6 and challenge White to exchange; early success often leads to repetition and I suspect that other moves will become more popular here) 1 4 c3 ( 1 4 ctJe3 .Be6 15 .Bd5 !, as in Sutovsky-Beliav sky, Gothenburg Echt 2005, is interesting and perhaps even favourable for White; for the mo ment these h3/d3 set-ups are still producing some original positions) 1 4. .. .Be6 1 5 .Bxe6 fxe6

It's amusing that in a very similar position from this h3/d3 variation, the move ... .Be6 is al most never answered by .Bxe6, whereas here the world's best players have done so repeat edly. As explained in the introductory chapters, there is no rule about when to double Black's pawns. Sometimes the lack of central mobility after ... fxe6 is debilitating; and other times the extra squares that are covered by the e6-pawn make it worth it for Black. From this point the game Topalov-Kasimdzhanov, San Luis W ch 2005 continued 1 6 b4!? (previously Kasparov had achieved nothing from 1 6 lbg3 ctJd7 1 7 .Be3 d5 1 8 exd5 exd5 1 9 a4 Ilb8 2 0 axb5 axb5 2 1 b3 .l:ta8 1/z-1/z Kasparov-Topalov, Linares 2005) 1 6. .. 'iVd7 ( 1 6. .. lbh5 1 7 ctJ l h2 ctJf4 1 8 .Bxf4 .l:txf4 1 9 'iVb3 'iVd7 20 a4! favoured White in Adams-Kasimdzhanov, Linares 2005) 1 7

RUY LOPEZ 161

[diagram]

D)

The starting position for the main lines of the Marshall Attack. Essentially, the idea for Black is to move pieces to the kingside and check mate, whereas White wants to prevent that and remain a pawn ahead! It's not quite that simple, of course. For example, Black will usually gain some advantage in the centre as well, so that even if White beats back the attack and remains a pawn ahead, the game will often be drawn. Black's initial attack is based upon exploiting the light-square weaknesses that White will have to create in order to fend off mate. And White's defence will often consist of counterat tacks that involve the sacrifice of material. At the very least he will try to open queenside lines with a4 and axb5, hoping for Ila6 or Ila7. Still, the action is mainly on the kingside. When I opened a book on the Marshall At tack and looked at the first paragraph of the first chapter, I learned that for the 'old main line' (which is still extremely popular), "the real

162 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

16. . WkhS

The position after 1 6 Wkfl came up again in a different world championship encounter be tween Anand and Svidler. Who knows what ei ther had in store for the other? The game con tinued 1 6. .. Wkxfl+ 1 7 'it>xfl .tf5 1 8 f3 h6 1 9 tbd2 ! ? (a new move, at least among top players; in general I am probably slighting correspon dence games, in which everything seems to have been played - at any rate, 1 9 l:te 1 is the older move) 1 9. .. .txe4 20 fxe4 (for the ex change, White has a pawn, the bishop-pair, and

RUY LOPEZ 163

a big centre) 20 ... tbc7! 21 'it>g2 c5 22 e5 !fi.e7 23 tbe4 cxd4 24 cxd4 a5 25 !fi.e3 a4 26 !fi.dl tbd5 27 !fi.f2 l:!.ac8 28 l:!.b 1 f6 29 exf6 !fi.xf6 30 tbd6 l:!.c6?! 3 1 lbxb5 l:!.b6 32 !fi.xa4 with a nice advantage, although naturally Black held on to draw in Anand-Svidler, San Luis Wch 2005. 11 tZ'Bd2 Ji.rs 18 f3! tZ'Bf6! 1 8. .. !fi.xe4? 1 9 fxe4 tbe3 20 Wkf3 tbg4 2 1 tbfl and White is cleaning up. 19 l:!.el l:!.ae8 20 l:!.xe8 l:!.xe8 21 a4! Wkg6!

(D)

22 axb5 22 tbe4 tbxe4 23 fxe4 !fi.xe4 24 !fi.xg5 ! was suggested, and this is perhaps why Anand ex changed queens in the game above. 22 . !fi.d3 23 Wkf2? Falling for an insidious trap. 23 Wkdl !fi.e2!

24 Wkc2 !fi.d3 25 Wkdl draws.

23. ..

l:!.e2 24 Wkxe2 This was Kramnik's point. At first it looks extremely promising for White. 24 . !fi.xe2 25 bxa6 ( D) . Wkd3!! White had probably calculated 25 ... !fi.b8 26 a7 !fi.xa7 27 l:!.xa7 with an excellent game. Or he missed the beautiful move in the next note. 26 'it>f2

26 a7 Wke3+ 27 'it>g2 !fi.xf3+! 28 tbxf3 Wke2+

29 'it>gl tbg4 ! ! 30 a8WV+ 'it>g7 31 Wkxc6 Wkf2+ 32 'it>hl Wkfl + 33 tbgl tbf2#. 26  !fi.xf3! 27 tbxf3 tbe4+ 28 'it>el tbxc3! This wins. 29 bxc3 Wkxc3+ 30 'it>f2 Wkxal 31 a7 h6! 32 h4 g4 0-1 Leko - Kasimdzhanov Linares 2005

12 d4 !fi.d6 13 l:!.el Wkh4 14 g3 Wkh3 15 !fi.e3

(D)

The position after 15 !fi.e3 is still a point of controversy after decades of research. Again, Black wants to use those unsubtle ideas ... i.g4, ...l:!.ae8-e6, and ...f5-f4. Here is some utterly in complete study material, finishing with some up-to-date happenings.

15. ..

!fi.g4 16 Wkd3 l:i.ae8 l 6 .. .f5 intends to blast open White's king side; it can transpose to other lines, although Black skips the move in our main game. In fact, I'm jumping over all kinds of move-order is sues as I go along. Here's one of hundreds of games: 17 f4! 'it>h8 ! ? (considered best by most analysts) 1 8 !fi.xd5 cxd5 19 tbd2 g5?! (consis tent, but the brute-force method comes up short, so other moves have to be looked at here) 20 Wkfl Wkh5 21 a4 bxa4 22 fxg5 f4 23 !fi.xf4 l:i.xf4 24 gxf4 l:i.f8 25 l:!.e5 ! !fi.xe5 26 dxe5 h6 27 Wkxa6

164 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

20. l:tfeS We're getting to something more contempo rary. Another recent test was 20 ... .th3 2 1 .tdl Wkf5 22 Wke2 g6?! (22 ... c5) 23 Wkf3 Wkd3 24 .tb3 l:txe3 (the usual exchange sacrifice, although sometimes White makes his first!) 25 l:txe3 Wkxd2 26 .txd5 cxd5 27 g4 Wkxb2 28 l:tael b4, lvanchuk-Grishchuk, Sochi 2005, and now 29 cxb4! Wkxd4 30 Wkxh3 Wkxb4 3 1 l:tdl is strong. Is White getting the better of things in this line? It's too early to tell. 21 .txd5 Wkxd5 22 h3 .trs 23 Wkg2 Wkxg2+ 24 'it>xg2 With an extra pawn, even facing the bishop pair, White has chances to win this position. He came very close but only drew. J. Polgar - Svidler Wijk aan Zee 2005 12 l:tel .td6 13 d3 Here we have the other main system, super ficially more modest for White but also full of poison.

13. .

Wkh4 14 g3 Wkh3 15 l:te4 (D)

15. ..

tbf6 15 ... g5? 1 6 .txg5 Wkf5 was the trick in the last game, but here the rook is protected. 16 l:th4 WVrs 11 tbd2! l:!.eS 1 7. .. Wkxd3?? 1 8 l:td4. 18 tbe4 tbxe4 19 l:txe4 l:txe4 20 dxe4 Wkxe4 21 .tc2 This doesn't look like much, but White has a certain initiative and Black's weak pawn on c6 is a bother.

21.. . Wke7 22 .tgS! f6!?

RUY LOPEZ 165

22 ... Wkc7 ! 23 Wkd3 g6 24 l:tdl .tf8 also fa vours White, but not by much. 23 .te3 .te6 24 Wkf3! (D)

24. .

Wkd7? 24 ... l:tcS ! is an improvement. Nevertheless, White would maintain her advantage after 25 l:te l (or 25 .te4 Wkd7 ! 26 l:td l .tg4 27 l:txd6 .txf3 28 .txh7+ 'it>xh7 29 l:txd7 l:te8, but Black still has to fight for a draw) 25 ... .te5 ! (avoiding the trappy 25 ... Wkf7 ! ? 26 .tc5 ! .te5 { 26 ... .txc5 27 l:txe6 ! } 27 Wke4 g6 28 f4 .tf5

29 Wkxf5 gxf5 30 .tb3 .tb8 3 1 l:te7 ! Wkxb3 32

axb3, when Black is terribly tied down) 26 .td4 Wkf7 27 Wke4 g6 28 .txe5 fxe5 29 Wkxe5 .txa2 30 h4 with initiative to White, according to Polgar. 25 l:tdl l:td8 26 .te4!? (D) Even better is 26 .tb6 ! .tg4 27 Wkd3 .txd l

28 Wkxh7+ 'it>f8 29 .txdl .tc7 30 .tc5+ .td6

3 1 .te3 ! c5 (to cut off .tb3+) 32 Wkh8+ 'it>f7 33 .th5+ 'it>e6 34 Wkh7, when Black can hardly de fend. 26 . .txa2? But it's already pretty bad in view of the lines 26 ... .tg4? 27 l:txd6 and 26 ... l:tcS ! ? 27 Wke2 l:td8 28 .tb6 l:te8 29 Wkd3, etc. 27 .tb6 .tb3 28 l:td4! c5 29 .txc5 Wke6 30 c4! 1-0 The forced finish would be 30. .. .txc4 3 1 .tb6! (3 1 l:txc4? ! .txg3 3 2 l:td4 .txh2+) 3 1 ...f5 (3 l ...l:tc8 32 l:txc4!) 32 l:txc4 fxe4 33 l:txe4 Wkd7 34 .txd8 Wkxd8 35 l:td4.

9 Ki ng's Gambit

I e4 e5 2 f4 (D) With the move 2 f4 we come to the King's Gambit, opening of the great romantics of the 1 9th century. It is associated with wild attacks and sacrifices of pieces, with each side focused firmly upon their opponent's king. In modem times, however, it has become commonplace to describe the King's Gambit as an opening that has taken on a simplifying character and leans towards the endgame. Neither of these descrip tions is very relevant to today's play, because most if not all of the great attacking lines have been neutralized and the early transition into endgames is a relatively unusual occurrence, given publicity by just a few older games involv ing well-known players. Although the King's Gambit has no fixed disposition, modem play ers interpret it primarily in a positional manner, with sudden outbreaks of irrationality. Why would White play 2 f4? For a few fun damental reasons: a) It tries to exchange a flank pawn for a central pawn, thereby giving White a central majority. This is no small achievement, as we see in numerous openings ranging from the Queen's Gambit to the Sicilian Defence. b) After either one of the moves ...exf4 or fxe5, White gains the open f-file. This dovetails nicely with quick development by means of the moves tbf3, .tc4 and O-O. In the best of worlds, White might even get d4 and .txf4 in, estab lishing the elementary picture of ideal piece placement. c) The traditionally weak f7-square (which is guarded only by the king) is a target both from a bishop on c4 and the rook on the newly opened f-file. Of course, Black has something to say about these grandiose plans. In the King's Gambit Declined with 2 ... .tc5 we see that the a7-gl di agonal has been ceded, making castling diffi cult. We shall look at that in detail, because it expresses some common ideas and illustrates the dynamic imbalance that the King's Gambit can still give rise to. Varied problems occur after the most fre quently played move 2 ...exf4, called the King's Gambit Accepted. It's interesting that when he accepts the pawn, Black's defences all seem to involve one or both of two moves: a) The advance ... g5. This protects the f4- pawn and claims a material advantage, with the additional benefit of blocking off the aforemen tioned f-file. The g-pawn can also advance fur ther to g4 (or be forced to advance), when it may win time by attacking a knight on f3 and has other possibilities including the common idea of ... f3, disturbing White's pawn-structure and introducing some tactical ideas if White opens lines by gxf3 and exposes his king. b) As might be expected, ...d5 is an ideal freeing move (as in almost all double e-pawn openings). In particular, after White plays exd5, this allows Black to place his knight on f6 with out being harassed by e5. It also frees the c8- bishop, gives the queen room, opens the often useful e-file, and gives Black a comfortable square for his king's bishop on d6, protecting the gambit pawn. That's quite a bit for one move, but naturally things don't go as smoothly as Black would have it either.

KING 'S GAMBIT 167

Now we'll look at two illustrative variations out of the many that have been thought up by both sides over the years. One is the main line of the King's Gambit Declined, the other the 'Modem Defence' to the King's Gambit Ac cepted. King's Gambit Declined

1 e4 e5 2 f4 i.cS (D)

If one wants to decline the King's Gambit, 2 ... i.c5 has to be the most logical way, taking over the critical g 1 -a7 diagonal and preventing White from castling. It certainly leads to com plicated and challenging play. A couple of other ways to forego acceptance are 2 ... tbc6 3 tbf3 f5 !? and 2 ... Wkh4+ 3 g3 Wke7, both plausible and requiring some preparation. Note that 2 ...tbf6?! 3 fxe5 tbxe4 4 tbf3 leaves Black's knight stranded in the middle of the board, as well as securing a central majority. In one game Black made the best of a bad situation by 4 ... tbg5 ! 5 d4 (5 c3 tbxf3+ 6 Wkxf3; 5 i.c4 ?? tbxf3+ 6 Wkxf3 Wkh4+ and ... Wkxc4) 5 ... tbxf3+ 6 Wkxf3 Wkh4+ 7 Wkf2 (to protect d4) 7 ... Wkxf2+ 8 @xf2 d6, when 9 exd6 ! i.xd6 1 0 tbc3 c6 (ver sus tZ'Bb5) 1 1 tbe4 i.c7 1 2 .td3 would have se cured White a small but persistent edge. 3 tZ'Bf3 Almost always played. For one thing, Black was threatening 3 ... .txgl 4 l:txgl Wkh4+ 5 g3 Wkxh2, and 3 fxe5?? Wkh4+ is a blunder of major proportions. 3 ... d6 This time White was threatening tbxe5, but 3 ... tbc6? doesn't protect the pawn due to 4 fxe5 tbxe5?? 5 tbxe5 WVh4+ 6 g3 Wkxe4+ 7 Wke2 Wkxhl 8 tbg6+ tbe7 9 tbxh8 and White will win. After 3 ...d6, White has two basic options, 4 tbc3 and 4 c3: Piece-Play 4 tbc3 tbf6 4 ... tbc6?! is an inaccurate move-order as it allows 5 i.b5 ! , when Black's centre is under pressure. 5 i.c4 White doesn't get mated after 5 fxe5 dxe5 6 tbxe5?! Wkd4! 7 tbd3 i.b6, but Black has a bind and very quick development for the pawn; e.g.,

[diagram]
.txe2 1 2 'it>xe2 O-O. 5  tbc6 6 d3 .tg4 (

D)

White still can't castle! But Black has to watch out too. For instance, an unfavourable pawn-structure follows 6 ... O-O? 7 f5 ! with the idea .tg5 or in some cases g4-g5. However, after the main continuation 6 ... .tg4, 7 f5?! is a mistake because 7 ... tbh5 ! threatens ... tbd4, and there is hardly a good way to re spond. White has at least two other candidates. I'll try to present the main ideas without even dreaming of covering the complicated theory associated with this position. 7 h3 Chigorin - Pillsbury Hastings I 895 A note on 7 tba4 follows the game.

168 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

7 ... .txf3 8 Wkxf3 tbd4 Actually, 8 ... exf4 9 .txf4 tbd4 seems fine, but I'm not trying to rewrite theory.

9 Wkg3 (D)

This is an infamous sacrifice. Pillsbury had previously declared the move unsound! Since this classic game has been critiqued many times, ru just add a note or two relevant to the open ing:

9.

tbxc2+! ? The alternative 9 .. .O-O! ? i s totally unclear: 10 fxe5 ( 1 0 <bd l exf4 1 1 .txf4 tbh5 1 2 Wkg5 tbxf4 1 3 Wkxf4 c6, and with White's king in the centre one would rather play Black) l 0. .. dxe5 1 1 <bd l ( 1 1 .tb3 Wkd6 1 2 1:!.fl c6 1 3 .tg5 tbd7

14 O-O-O a5 gives Black the attack, according to

Renet) l l ...Wkd6 1 2 1:!.fl c6 1 3 a4; perhaps dy namic equality is the fairest assessment in this situation. 10 <bdl tbxal It seems to me that l 0. .. tbh5 1 1 Wkf3 tbxal

12 Wkxh5 Wkd7 intending ...O-O-O, or simply

12 ...O-O may cast doubt upon the whole idea. It probably isn't so easy.

11 Wkxg7 (D)

.. <bd7! l 1 . . .l:tf8 1 2 fxe5 dxe5 1 3 j_g5 j_e7 1 4 l:!.fl looks like a winning attack in view of the long line 14 ... Wkd4 1 5 .txf6 O-O-O 16 Wkg4+ ( 1 6 .txe7? Wkxc4) 1 6. . . <bb8 1 7 .txe7 Wkxc4 1 8 'it>c l !, which I'll truncate at this point. 12 fxeS dxeS 13 l:tfl! .te7 14 Wkxf7?! According to the analysts, 14 .tg5 ! was win ning. That's enough for the opening, so I'll just let you enjoy the rest of this titanic struggle un perturbed: 14 . <bc8 1S .tgS l:!.f8 16 Wke6+ <bb8 17 .th6 l:!.e8 18 WVxeS tbd7 19 WkhS tbb6 20 .tdS a6 21 <bd2 tbxdS 22 tbxdS l:!.g8 23 g4 .tb4+ 24 tbxb4 Wkd4 2S tbc2 tbxc2 26 <bxc2 l:!.g6 27 .td2 l:!.d6 28 l:!.f3 Wka4+ 29 <bcl Wkxa2 30 .tc3 l:!.c6 31 Wkxh7 bS 32 Wke7 Wkb3 33 <bd2 as 34 l:!.fS <bb7 3S l:!.cS l:!.aa6 36 gS files 37 WVxcS l:!.c6 38 WkdS Wka4 39 g6 b4 40 g7 bxc3+ 41 bxc3 Wkal 42 g8Wk Wkxc3+ 43 <be2 Wkc2+ 44 <bf3 Wkdl+ 4S <bg3 Wkgl+ 46 <bh4 Wkf2+ 47 <bhS Wkf3+ 48 Wkg4 Wkf6 49 WkgfS Wkh6+ SO <bg4 Wkg7+ Sl WkgS 1-0 Eliminating the bishop by 7 tba4 is also very complicated. Generally Black retreats his bishop to b6 but there seems to be another pos sible formation: 7 ...O-O 8 tbxc5 dxc5 (D). Here's a structure that you'll see in the Giuoco Piano and the Vienna Game as well. Black has good control of the centre; his dou bled c-pawns secure d4 and open up the d-file. Black can even get rid of White's c4-bishop in

KING 'S GAMBIT 169

[diagram]

Black' s scheme reminds one of the Modern Defence in which the bishops precede the knights in attacking the same e4/d4/f4 centre ( 1 e4 g6 2 d4 i.g7 3 tbc3 d6 4 f4 c6 5 tbf3 .tg4, etc.). 7 i.e3 tbc6 (or 7 ... d5 ! ? 8 e5 tbe7 intending ... tbf5, a fascinating position with double-edged chances; Black's pieces will be well-placed but the b6-bishop could end up stuck) 8 i.b5 tbge7 9 tbc3 f5 1 0 h3 ( 1 0 e5? dxe5 1 1 fxe5 O-O and the e5-pawn hangs) 1 0. .. i.xf3 1 1 'i!Vxf3 fxe4 1 2 'i!Vxe4 d5. Black has achieved the central dissolution that he was aiming for and the fight is just starting. This is all analysis. 5 fxe5

5 d4 exd4 6 cxd4 i.b6 7 e5 (7 i.d3 i.g4;

Black has to work fast to compromise White's centre or it will dominate the position) 7 ...dxe5 8 fxe5 tbd5 9 i.c4 i.e6 (or 9 ... tbc6!?) with equality; White's space is balanced by Black's outpost. 5 .. dxe5 (D) 6 d4 6 tbxe5 'i!Ve7 ! ? 7 d4 i.d6 recovers the pawn and allows Black to work against an isolated e pawn in return for the bishop-pair: 8 i.c4 i.xe5 9 dxe5 'i!Vxe5 1 0 O-O tbc6 is equal (Black threat ens ... 'i!Vc5+). 6 ..exd4 7 cxd4 i.b4+ 8 i.d2 i.xd2+ 9 lbbxd2 O-O 10 i.d3 White has maintained his centre up to this point, but it gets attacked right away: 10 ... tbc6 1 1 d5 tZ'Bb4 12 Ji.bl 1 2 i.e2 l:te8 1 3 a3 tba6 leaves e4 weak, and Black can be happy with his position. 12 ... c6 13 a3 tZ'ibxdS!? 14 exdS l:te8+ 15 'it>fl tbxd5 . with an exciting and unclear attack. King's Gambit Accepted

[diagram]
Black takes up the challenge and plays a move that has been studied for over 1 50 years.

1 70 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

At this point we have an important alterna tive, as well as our usual move-order discus sion. It begins with the move 2 ...d5 ! (or ' ? ' if, as Black, you would like to get to the Kieseritzky Gambit below) 3 exd5, and now 3 ... e4 (D) is the Falkbeer Counter-Gambit. Black's idea in the Falkbeer is to cramp White's development. White's extra pawn on d5 is not impressively-placed anyway. The prob lem is that the powerful pawn on e4 has trouble staying there after 4 d3 li:Jf6 5 dxe4 lt:Jxe4 6 li:Jf3, the old main line going 6 ... i.c5 7 Wke2 i.f5 8 li:Jc3 Wke7 9 i.e3 ! , when Black has never found a route to complete equality. The main idea is 9 ... i.xe3 10 Wkxe3 lt:Jxc3 1 1 Wkxe7+ <:J;;xe7 1 2 bxc3 i.xc2 1 3 <:J;;d2. This position has been ana lysed for some years and seems to favour White. But after 3 exd5, Black can also play 3 ... exf4! 4 li:Jf3 li:Jf6, when we have transposed into the Modem Line that Black may be hoping for (it is the variation analysed in this section). So 2 ...d5 might be reasonable after all. Notice that this order avoids 1 e4 e5 2 f4 exf4 3 i.c4 in the next note. 3 li:Jf3 There must be at least a thousand master games with 3 i.c4 (D), the Bishop's Gambit. It has been subject to lengthy analyses for well over a century. The old main line was 3 ...Wkh4+ 4 <:J;;fl, which offers White intriguing attacking chances beginning with 5 li:Jf3, and Black also enjoyed some brilliant attacks on White's vulnerable king. But 3 ... lt:Jf6 is a big problem for White: a) 4 e5 d5 ! is our familiar device in e-pawn openings. Then 5 i.b5+ i.d7 ! 6 exf6 i.xb5 7 lt:Jc3 i.a6 keeps White from castling and em ploys the two bishops effectively; for example,

8 d3 Wkxf6 9 li:Jxd5 Wke6+ 1 0 Wke2 <:J;;d7 ! and ev

erything is covered: l l li:Jxf4 Wkxe2+ 1 2 lt:Jgxe2 lt:Jc6. Black has some advantage because for one thing he can reorganize by ...b6 and ...i.b7 with powerful bishops. b) 4 lt:Jc3 c6!. In this position White has tried nearly every move, but after ...d5, he loses a key tempo. Later, when White plays d4 and captures with a piece on f4, he is left with a seri ous internal weakness on e3. You can check the theory (critically, please! ), but I don't believe that White ever gets full equality.

3. ..d5

The 'modem' way of treating the King's Gambit. But in fact, most contemporary players use 3 ...g5 (D), the venerable Kieseritzky De fence, to try to refute the King's Gambit. Everything gets very tactical and we'll pri marily concern ourselves with 3 ... d5, but I'll mention two noteworthy continuations after

KING 'S GAMBIT 1 71

[diagram]

We see this sort of position in several open ings. With Black's development and control of

1 72 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

8 O-O

8 e2+ .Be6! 9 tt::l g5 O-O!. Black sacrifices a pawn, but look at his terrific development after 1 0 tt::l xe6 fxe6 1 1 i.xc6 bxc6 1 2 O-O ( 1 2 xe6+ 'it>h8 1 3 O-O .l:te8 14 h3 b6 with an attack)

I 2 ...

[diagram]

D)

11 tt::l c4 i.c7 12 i.d2 If White is reduced to this, he's in trouble. 12 d5 13 tt::l a3 tt::l e4 Black stands better. The weaknesses on the e-file are hurting White. The 'Modem Defence' to the King's Gambit looks appealing for Black. Of course, there's al ways more to the story. It would be nice if White could figure out a way to bypass such technicalities and return to gambit play in the romantic spirit. 1 0 I ntroduction to the Semi-Open Games The Semi-Open Games are a disparate group of openings with few characteristics in common except that they immediately unbalance the play. Another unifying factor is that they all prepare to counter in some manner White's plan to cre ate a classic pawn-centre with 2 d4. It has been said that each of the openings under the 'Semi Open Games' rubric has to 'give something up' in order to fulfil its mission. The French De fence ( 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5), for example, blocks in the c8-bishop. The Caro-Kann Defence ( 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5) takes c6 away from Black's knight. The Alekhine Defence ( 1 e4 tt::l f6) loses a tempo to 2 e5 and fails to contest the centre. The Pirc Defence ( 1 e4 d6 2 d4 tt::l f6) gives White an ideal centre, and the Sicilian Defence (1 e4 c5) doesn't open lines along which Black's pieces can develop. None of this applies to l ... e5, so one could ar gue that in some sense that is the 'best' defence to 1 e4. But l ...e5 makes its own concession in that Black's e-pawn becomes an unprotected target of attack. Furthermore, if we look at the other Semi-Open Games listed above, all of them except one attack White's centre pawn at e4, as can be seen from 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5, 1 e4 c6

2 d4 d5, 1 e4 tt::l

f6, 1 e4 d5 and 1 e4 d6 2 d4 tt::l f6. In the case of the Alekhine ( l e4 tt::l f6) and the Scandinavian ( 1 e4 d5), the fact that White will effectively gain a tempo by 2 e5 and 2 exd5, re spectively, gives the counterattack an ambigu ous character, but Black nevertheless creates an imbalance that he fails to bring about by play ing 1 .. .e5. The Sicilian Defence goes its own way, as usual, neither developing nor attacking. What an irony that it's the favourite move of the best players in the world! Since the chapter introductions cover the ba sics strategies (and the games much more so), I won't repeat what's said there. Still, it might be interesting to make a few general comparisons between apparently similar openings before turning to the practical material. First, it should be clear that the Caro-Kann would be a better defence than the French if the disadvantages mentioned above were their only problem. Af ter all, bringing a bishop out freely as Black does in the Caro-Kann contrasts dramatically with Black' s imprisoned bishop on c8 in the French. It overshadows any other developmen tal problem. In the Caro-Kann, limiting the op tions of the b8-knight (i.e., preventing it from occupying c6) doesn't seem that severe a pen alty. In the abstract, a hypothetical knight might be best off on c6; but in this particular opening that piece will generally be happy on d7, con trolling e5 and defending f6 in key situations. And in the main line with ... i.f5 the knight doesn't even temporarily block Black's light squared bishop from developing. Of course, the availability of c6 for a knight in the French De fence shouldn' t be underestimated, not only be cause a knight there attacks d4 and e5, but because d7 is left free for a bishop or for a knight retreating to d7 after White plays e5 (a major sequence in the French). So the trade-offs between the two openings aren't completely one-sided, but if forced to compare, you feel that Black gets the better bargain by playing the Caro-Kann. However, what evens the scales is the respective central situations of the two open ings. Regardless of whether you play ...dxe4 (as in the main lines of the Caro-Kann) or maintain your pawn on d5 (as is the case in most varia tions of the French), it' s unlikely that you'll be able to attack White' s d4-pawn by means of ...e5 ; White can put a knight on f3, a bishop on f4, a queen or rook on the e-file, etc. So the re maining way to attack the centre and free one's pieces is ... c5. Black plays that move in most variations of the French Defence, truly threat ening to liquidate White' s centre. But in the

1 74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Caro-Kann Defence, playing ...c5 would cost Black a full tempo (i.e. ...c6-c5). For that rea son, the Caro-Kann defender will generally delay or forego ...c5 and count upon the re straining influence of his pawn on c6. That is the right decision ( ...c5 on an early move is usu ally impractical anyway); nevertheless, it' s al most always better to break up the opponent' s centre than to surrender the centre yourself. In the Caro-Kann, Black does gain counterplay against White' s centre along the open d-file, but that is relatively easy to fend off. So both open ings have their appealing and unappealing sides. The Alekhine Defence makes a funny con trast with the Pirc Defence. In the Pirc, Black plays ... d6 first, to restrain White's centre, and then ... tt::l f6 to attack it. In the Alekhine, Black reverses this order, playing ... tt::l f6 first, losing a tempo, and then within a few moves after e5 he plays ... d6. It's as though Black had allowed White to play e5 successfully against the Pirc, an advance that is Black's top priority to prevent! Thus one's first instinct is that the Pirc is a supe rior opening. It may or may not be, but the flaw in this argument can be stated more or less as follows: in the Pirc, White often shouldn 't play e5 because Black will either capture once and then retreat the knight, or retreat without cap ture, in both cases undermining the centre by ...c5 or if appropriate ...f6. In the case of the Alekhine, Black has got White to commit his pawn to e5 from where he is already in a position to undermine it. So in a way, he has achieved the Pirc player's dream! Well, of course it's not at all clear whether Black can undermine White' s e-pawn Pirc-style. But the point is that h e has an extended centre to attack whereas in the Pirc Black is waiting for that opportunity. Again, there are advantages and disadvantages to each approach. Most strong players would probably worry more about their space disadvantage were they to play one of these openings. Black's side of the Scandinavian variation 1 e4 d5 2 exd5 iVxd5 with 3 tt::l c3 iVa5 might be compared with the Centre Game for White af ter 1 e4 e5 2 d4 exd4 3 iVxd4 tt::l c6 4 'iYa4. White has the extra move e4 in, but as with most reversed openings you have to decide whether that move is good or bad. The e4- pawn can be a target down an open file, fol lowing, for instance, . . . tt::l f6, ... i.c5 (or ...g6 and ... i.g7), ... O-O and ... .l:te8. On the other hand, the e4-pawn does guard d5 in classical fashion. Perhaps this one's a toss-up as well. One can make this kind of comparison be tween any number of positions in opening the ory, and it's a useful exercise to do so. The reader might want to think about other funda mental properties of Semi-Open Games and how they offer advantages or disadvantages. You will find that every defence has a balance between negatives and positives whose sum can't be too different from that of other open ings. Otherwise, some defences wouldn't be played at all, and others would find no willing opponents ! 1 1 Sici lian Defence l e4 c5 (D) The Sicilian Defence has been the most popular opening in top-level chess for the past several decades and continues to be so today, accounting for about 1 7% of all contests be tween grandmasters, and an astonishing 25% of the games in a database of Informators. Since young players and aspiring masters show such enthusiasm for the Sicilian, it's hard to see those figures diminishing much. What's so special about this opening? First of all, 1 .. .c5 effectively prevents 2 d4, the pri mary goal of a defence to 1 e4. To be more spe cific, 2 d4 cxd4 3 'iVxd4 loses a tempo and already risks disadvantage after 3 . . . tt::l c6. If, in stead, White plays 3 c3 and sacrifices a pawn (the Morra Gambit), we have many years of experience and analysis to show that Black at the very least should have no problems equal izing and almost certainly should gain an ad vantage with accurate play. Of course other openings also discourage d4 or prepare to meet it effectively, so we have to look for more rea sons to choose specifically the Sicilian De fence. Since the vast majority of games are contested in the Open Sicilian, i.e. 2 tt::l f3 and 3 d4, let's see what we can learn from the result ing positions. We need a concrete example to think about, so let's start with the most popular Sicilian Defence played by masters, the Naj dorf Variation: 2 tt::l f3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 tt::l f6 5 tt::l c3 a6

(D)

What's going on? Can Black really get away with this 4th pawn move, when it's not even a centre pawn? Let's make some more sample moves: 6 i.gS e6 7 f4 i.e7 8 iVf3 'iYc7 9 O-O-O tt::l bd7 10 i.d3 bS 11 l':thel (

D)

White has all seven pieces developed, Black just four, having made six pawn moves thus far. Furthermore, Black has only one piece beyond the second rank; White has five. And of course

1 76 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White commands more space. Before comment ing upon all this, let's compare it with the Sozin Variation ofthe Najdorf. After 1 e4 c5 2 tt::l f3 d6

3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l

xd4 tt::l f6 5 tt::l c3 a6, White contin ues 6 i.c4 e6 7 i.b3 i.e7 8 O-O b5 9 i.e3. In that case, White has five pieces out to Black' s two. A traditional Scheveningen/Najdorf line goes 6 i.e3 e6 7 i.e2 i.e7 8 O-O (D). In this case, White has five pieces out to Black's two, and out of seven moves Black has played five with pawns. Just to drive the point home, Black some times plays an even more extreme version of these ideas, namely, 1 e4 c5 2 tt::l f3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 a6 5 tt::l c3 d6 6 i.e3 b5, which adds up to six straight pawn moves and not even a piece out! You should notice another negative aspect of every one of these lines, as if they need it: Black's centre pawns on e6 and d6 are in passive positions blocking his own pieces, as third-rank pawns are known to do. Thus his pieces have few prospects of being as active as White's. As we shall see, the same thing is true of most other Sicilian systems. Back to our question: why then would any one, much less the world's elite, play the Sicil ian Defence? Well, Black has an open c-file. But wait! White has an open d-file attacking a weak pawn on d6. That should be even more effective. How about Black's minority attack with the pawn advance ...b5? OK, at least that's a real plus (unfortunately at the cost of more time taken away from development); but if he wants to, White has the time to stop that move by playing a4. In many cases this reduces Black to developing by ...b6 and ... i.b7, thereby put ting another pawn on the third rank. Any experienced player knows that Black stands reasonably well in these positions. Again, can we say why? The real key to the Open Sicil ian is that Black has a central majority. A cen tral majority is a basic positional advantage that should never be underestimated and can com pensate for other problems in the position. If we consider the centre with ... d6 and ...e6, Black's d- and e-pawns protect against incursions by white pieces, thus giving Black time to catch up in development. Next, every central majority threatens to advance and this one is no differ ent: once Black's pieces begin to get developed, the move ... d5 will expand the scope of some of them (for example, a bishop on e7, queen on c7 and a rook on d8 or e8), and create good posts for others (e.g., a knight on e4 or d5). Because White has to be constantly on the lookout for this move (as well as ...e5 followed by ...d5 on the next move) he has to devote forces to its pre vention. That brings us to another important ad vantage for Black in almost all Open Sicilians: White's e-pawn is a target. It can be attacked by a knight on f6, a bishop on b7, and perhaps an other knight on c5. White can defend his e-pawn with his light-squared bishop, but where should he put it? If the bishop goes to d3, it is blocked by its own pawn, and if it goes to g2 or f3, then the bishop will also be passively defending. In fact, in both of these positions Black may at some point be able to play ...e5 and fix the e pawn, preventing that bishop from getting out. What does this all translate to? White's light squared bishop is by definition a bad bishop, be cause his centre pawn is on a light square. I once heard the great Larsen say that after 3 d4 cxd4 White was positionally lost! Tongue-in-cheek or not, he was undoubtedly referring to Black's central majority, and the diversion of White's re sources to the defence of his e-pawn. What can White do in the face of these problems? He generally doesn't want to wait around for an ending without changing the pawn-structure, lest Black's central majority and queenside minority attack become too in fluential in that stage of play. In order to make progress, White has to exploit his space advan tage (he almost always controls four ranks to Black's three, with the other disputed). Hence

SICILIAN DEFENCE 1 77

you will see that many encounters feature White' s advance e5, activating his bishop and other pieces to gain serious and sometimes un stoppable attacking chances. A potential prob lem in that case is that the e5-pawn will become weak, so this decision has to be undertaken cau tiously. He can also turn to the advance f4-f5, hoping to force ...e5; sometimes, however, that cedes the e5-square to Black' s pieces - as al ways, proper timing is the key. Another attack ing option at White's disposal is g4-g5, perhaps in conjunction with h4, risking kingside expo sure in order to drive back Black's pieces. That has been an increasingly popular and successful strategy over the last decade. Finally, in addition to all those ideas, White can try to take direct ad vantage of Black's slow development and re fined pawn-play to sacrifice material and blow open the enemy position. His knights on c3 and d4 may be restricted by Black's pawns, but those same knights are habitually sacrificed on the squares d5, f5, b5 and e6. A completely different structure arises when Black has a pawn on d6 and one on e5. That would seem worse than the ...d6/ ...e6 systems, because he gives up the d5-square to White's pieces (and the f5-square can be handy for a knight). Let's see the best-known early version of this structure: 1 e4 c5 2 tt::l f3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 tt::l f6 5 tt::l c3 a6 6 i.e2 (6 i.e3 can also be answered by 6 ...e5, but that's another story) 6 ... e5 7 tt::l b3 i.e7 8 O-O O-O 9 i.e3. Both sides have played natural-looking moves and now Black illustrates a basic idea: 9 . . . i.e6 (D). This standard move contains the notion of playing ...d5 soon, totally freeing Black's game. White has plenty of options, but one is to oc cupy that square immediately. Then after 10 tt::l d5 i.xd5 ! ? (10. .. tt::l xe4? 1 1 i.b6 and 12 lbc7) 1 1 exd5, White has two bishops but has lost his outpost. More importantly, Black now has a mobile central pawn-mass. One encounter pro ceeded 1 1 ...tt::l bd7 12 c4 a5 1 3 tt::l d2 tt::l e8 14 f3 i.g5 15 i.f2 f5 and Black's 4:3 kingside major ity (a variant of the one we see in so many open ings) establishes itself. Black appears to have achieved a game with equal chances. Note that White' s bishop on e2 is still bad. Obviously one of the most complicated openings in chess can't be boiled down to a couple of generalities, but such themes will appear along with a multi tude of others that directly or indirectly stem from the basic properties of the opening. Before moving on to concrete variations, let me refer again to the very abbreviated descrip tion that I gave in the introductory chapters re garding the evolution of the Sicilian Defence. I'll expand upon it in certain particulars, but the point is the same. In the second half of the 19th century, players met the Sicilian with 2 tt::l c3 more than any individual variation (2 f4 was also a big favourite). When White played a line of the Open Sicilian (i.e., 2 tt::l f3 and 3 d4), Black responded primarily with the Pin Varia tion (2 tt::l f3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 tt::l f6 5 tt::l c3 i.b4) or the similar Four Knights Variation (2 tt::l f3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 tt::l f6 5 tt::l c3 tt::l c6), as suming that White let him get that far. Notice that both of those variations have the primary goal of rapid development, and bear little resem blance to the modem set-ups ...d6/ .. .e6/ ...a6 or ...d6/ ...e5, with pieces generally constrained to the second and third ranks. A few players ex perimented with such systems, such as Louis Paulsen. Among top players, he had to be the most devoted Sicilian player of his time and his games included everything from the Schev eningen to ... the Paulsen! The latter variation is truly hypermodem: 1 e4 c5 2 tt::l f3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 a6. In the first part of the 20th century, leading players began to investigate more Sicilian De fences with limited success, and in particular we see more Open Sicilians, including the Dragon Variation and to a limited extent the Schev eningen Variation. But the Sicilian only began to be truly accepted as a leading defence in the

1 78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1 930s, and it took off in the 1 940s. The popu larity of 1 . . .c5 hasn't stopped growing since, turning ever more modern as it evolved. V aria tions featuring fast development for Black are now proportionally rare.

1 e4 c5 2 tt::l

f3 (D)

By bringing out his knight White contests d4, but he also prevents ...e5, a move that might come in handy for Black. 2 tt::l f3 intro duces White's Open Sicilian variations, those in which he plays 3 d4, and after Black's re sponse 3 .. . cxd4, recaptures with 4 tt::l xd4. These variations constitute about 90% of master games with 1 ...c5. I shall group them according to Black's second move in so far as it is useful to do so. Introduction to Systems with 2 . . . d6

1 e4 c5 2 tt::l

[diagram]

5 d4 gives White some useful space, or he can

play 5 c4, although neither course guarantees an advantage) 5 c4 (D). The idea is to set up a Maroczy Bind with out White's light-squared bishop, which in the original Maroczy Bind (see the Accelerated Fianchetto Sicilian) tends to be a bad piece

SICILIAN DEFENCE 1 79

imprisoned behind its own centre pawns. Cas tling kingside, d4 and b3 are all in the mix with a number of tricky move-orders. Needless to say, Black can generate counterplay in the cen tre either by targeting d4 with ...g6 and ... .i.g7, or by playing ... tt::l c6, ... tt::l f6 and ... e6. He can also play ...a6 and aim for ... b5, much as in the Accelerated Fianchetto lines. The very absence of White' s light-squared bishop will make this easier to achieve. a2) 3 ... tt::l d7 4 d4 cxd4 5 'iVxd4 leaves White better developed and well centralized. The moves tt::l c3 and .i.g5 can follow. Black has dif ficulty getting developed without allowing a fa vourable e5 at some point, so he usually plays ...e5 and brings his pieces out via ... tt::l f6 and ... .i.e7, probably followed by ... tt::l c5. This is very 'Najdorf-like' , absolutely legitimate, and not easy to talk about without specific exam ples. a3) 3 ... tt::l c6 4 O-O (4 d4 cxd4 5 'iVxd4 trans poses to 2 ... d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 'iVxd4 tt::l c6 5 ilb5, thus giving that intriguing system added signif icance; we'll look at it immediately below via the latter order) 4 ... .i.d7 5 .l:tel tt::l f6 6 c3 a6 7 .ifl .i.g4 8 d3 and White plans tt::l bd2 and h3. In general Black is equal as long as he is able to respond to d4 aggressively. b) White can always play a move such as 3 .i.c4. Ordinarily anything of this nature can be met by ... tt::l c6, ... g6 and ... .i.g7. Then, because of the bishop's position, ...e6, ...tt::l ge7 with ... d5 in short order will gain space and time; ...a6 is also a useful move. However, Black may not like that structure and can set up by 3 ... tt::l f6 4 d3 ( 4 e5 dxe5 5 tt::l xe5 is the sort of thing that wor - ries less experienced players but after 5 ...e6 it transpires that Black controls the d4-square. and without being able to play d4 White has lit tle chance of making progress; Black simply castles and exchanges off the forward knight) 4 ...e6 with the idea of ... .i.e7, ...

O-O, ...

tt::l c6 and perhaps ... d5 at a later stage. From White's point of view the idea is to go for plain develop ment by d3, O-O and perhaps a3 to hide the bishop away on a2. Other ideas are a combina tion of tt::l c3 and .i.g5, fighting for control of d5. As a whole, White will have difficulty making progress. c) A tricky alternative is 3 c3 tt::l f6 ! (now that White's knight cannot go to c3 to protect the e pawn) 4 .i.e2 ! ? (or 4 .i.d3) 4 ... g6 (4 ... tt::l xe4?? 5 'iVa4+) 5 O-O .i.g7 and with accurate play Black will find himself free from trouble. All of these Jines have their own theory that can be researched in books and databases. 3 .. cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 A fascinating and inviting variation is 4 'ii' xd4 tt::l c6 (this knight will be pinned, minimizing White's loss of time; alternatively, Black can guarantee the win of a tempo against White s queen by playing 4 ... a6, when White also 'gains a move to play 5 c4 if he wants to - this is a sort of Maroczy Bind position that we shall be dis cussing in various contexts) 5 .i.b5 i.d7 (to re new the threat on the queen; after 5 ... 'ii' a5+ 6 tt::l c3 'iVxb5 7 tt::l xb5 tt::l xd4 8 tt::l fxd4 'it>d8 9 c4 or 9 ile3, White has space and some development edge, whereas Black has no weaknesses and the bishop-pair - theory assesses this position fa vourably for White, perhaps optimistically so) 6 ilxc6 ilxc6 (6 ... bxc6 7 c4 is interesting) 7 tt::l c3 tt::l f6 8 .i.g5 e6 9 O-O-O .i.e7 J O l':thel O-O

180 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

A thought-provoking situation has arisen, pit ting White' s knights, space, and superior devel opment against Black' s bishop-pair and central majority. The general rule with knights is that their owner needs to hurry to achieve an attack or gain outposts before his opponent consoli dates. Otherwise there will come a counterat tack on the queenside (in this situation by ...b5) and/or in the centre (by ...d5 or ...e5). Theory isn't particularly extensive on these lines and they afford a lot of scope for creativity. One ex ample that panned out well for Black was 1 1 @bl h6 1 2 i.h4 :es (Black must always be wary of some variant of the trick 1 2. .. iVa5 1 3 iVd2 :acS?! 1 4 tt::l d5 ! iVdS 1 5 tt::l xe7+ 'iYxe7 1 6 tt:Jd4 with space and a simple advantage, be cause l 6 ... g5? 1 7 i.xg5 hxg5 l S 'iVxg5+ is kill ing) 1 3 i.g3 (this is probably attempting to avoid the standard idea 1 3 iVd2 tt::l xe4 14 tt::l xe4 i.xh4 1 5 tt::l xd6 when Black can play 1 5. ..:rs or l 5 ... i.xf3 1 6 gxf3 :rs; but here we have a good example of the unexplored nature of this varia tion; White could just play 1 3 iVd3 ! ?, when, for instance, 1 3. .. d5 1 4 i.xf6 i.xf6 1 5 e5 i.e7 1 6 lbd4 :cs 1 7 f4 i s promising; also possible i s 1 3 h3 !? with the idea g4, as was actually played in one game) 1 3. .. d5 ! 1 4 e5 (compare the last note - here White's bishop on g3 is just bad) 1 4. .. lbe4 1 5 tt::l xe4 dxe4 1 6 iVxdS :exdS 1 7 tt::l d4 (D ). 1 7. .. i.eS ! (two bishops will be worth more than a pawn, even in this relatively simplified position) l S c3 ( I S :xe4 i.c6 1 9 :eel i.xg2) l S ... :acS l 9 'it>c2 b5 ! 20 :xe4 b4 21 :e3 a5 22 tt::l e2 i.c6 23 f3 :xdl 24 'it>xdl i.c5 25 :d3 i.b5 26 :d2 i.e3 27 .l:td6 bxc3 2S tt::l xc3 (2S bxc3 i.c4 29 a4 :bS) 2S ... i.fl and Black wins his pawn back with his bishops still on a ram page, Svidler-Kasparov, Linares 1 999. 4  tt::l f6 (D) 5 lbc3 Notice that now the move 5 i.b5+ simply helps Black to bring his pieces out by 5 ... i.d7, especially since White has forfeited the idea of c4. The alternative 5 f3 ! ? has been played infre quently and yet without disappearing over the years. White's idea is to avoid blocking his c pawn by 5 tt::l c3 and thus be able to play c4, be fore or after i.b5+. Black's principled response to this plan is 5 ...e5 ! (D). This is our first example of the ...d6/. ..e5 structure. If Black makes conventional devel oping moves he can be tied down by c4 again; that's not the end of the world but not what most players want. Here are two instructive variations: a) 6 tt::l b3 (not 6 tt::l f5?! d5 !) 6 ... i.e6 (aiming for ...d5) 7 c4 a5 S i.e3 a4 9 tt::l 3d2 iVa5 1 0 i.e2

SICILIAN DEFENCE 181

ii.. e7 1 1 O-O tt::l c6 1 2 tt::l a3 O-O, Rublevsky Ki.Georgiev, Yugoslav Cht (Budva) 1 996. Both sides have plenty of things to do. b) 6 ii..b5+ tt::l bd7 7 tt::l f5 d5 ! 8 exd5 a6! 9 ii..xd7+ li'xd7 (9 ... ii..xd7 10 tt::l e3 ii.. c5 1 1 tt::l c3 O-O 1 2 O-O ii..f5 with active play, Malakhov Nisipeanu, Holon jr Ech 1 995) 10 tt::l e3 b5 1 1 tt::l c3 ii..b7 1 2 O-O b4 1 3 tt::l e4 tt::l xd5 and Black has more than his share of the centre. We now return to 5 tt::l c3 (D): After 5 tt::l c3, we have finally arrived at a great dividing point in Sicilian Defence theory, and will proceed to the main variations with 2 ... d6. Dragon Variation

1 e4 c5 2 tt::l

f3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt::l xd4 tt::l f6 5 tt::l c3 g6 (D) The Sicilian Dragon is one of the oldest forms of the Open Sicilian. Black gets his pieces out, especially the long-ranging bishop on g7. and can castle early without creating any pawn weaknesses. His next moves are traditionally ... ii.. g7, ...

O-O, ...

[diagram]

182 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the most frequently played system, the Yugo slav Attack, the players castle on opposite sides of the board and it's interesting to see the prior ity that White's pawns take in the attack (g4, h4-h5, f4-f5, etc.). This can be compared to Black' s queenside pawns, which often stay at home until his attack is complete. Finally, before leaving the subject of pawn-structure, there' s the simplest factor o f all: the g6-pawn offers a target for attack, in particular by h4-h5. In other Sicilian Defence variations, White may achieve an attacking advance such as g4-g5 (or a posi tional one like a4-a5) but there' s no specific pawn target. As usual, these various structural issues tend to balance out; if they didn't, no one would play the Dragon! I won't indulge in any more generalities, considering that the Dragon quickly breaks up into numerous variations that superficially have little in common with each other. It' s better to glean the ideas from the play itself. Classical Dragon

[diagram]

7 .. .O-O (D)

8 tt:Jb3 This strange-looking move is almost always played in the Classical Dragon, in part out of necessity. First and foremost it prevents ...d5 (Black's most important freeing advance), which is difficult to stop otherwise. It also cov ers the a5-square (often used by Black's queen or knight) and supports the advance a4-a5 .

SICILIAN DEFENCE 183

[diagram]

184 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

(D):

9  .te6 Black develops simply, with an eye on c4 but not abandoning the idea of ...d5. a) Another idea is 9 ... b6 10 f4 .tb7 1 1 .tf3 tba5 ! . This illustrates a common and important idea: if White doubles Black's a-pawns via tbxa5, Black will exert unpleasant pressure down the b-file. Remember that, as discussed in the introductory chapters, doubled rook's pawns are usually not a problem until the endgame. b) 9 ...a6 is a popular choice; for instance, 1 0 f4 b5 1 1 .tf3 b4 1 2 tt:Jd5 ( 1 2 tba4! has ideas of e5 that are hard to stop; then access to c5 and b6 could prove critical) 1 2. .. tbxd5 1 3 exd5 tba5. This position has done well for Black. One ex ample is 14 bl ? ! tbc4 1 5 'iVe2 'iVc7 ! 1 6 'lt>hl .tf5 1 7 g4 .td7 18 f5? tbe5 ! 19 'iVe4 .tb5 20 .te2 .txe2 2 1 'iVxe2 fc8 22 f2 a5 ! with the idea of ...a4, Zapata-Miles, Thessaloniki OL

1984. Compare Black's pieces with White's.

10 'it>hl (D) White makes a somewhat slow move, but a major tactical and positional theme is that White's immediate 1 0 f4 opens up his king to attack along the g l-a7 diagonal and allows 10 ...b5 ! 1 1 ..txb5 ? ! ( 1 1 a3 a5 ! ; 1 1 'iVd3 .tc4 is equal) 1 1 ...tbxe4 1 2 .txc6 ( 1 2 tbxe4 'iVb6+ 1 3 'lt>hl 'iVxb5) 1 2. ..6+ 1 3 'lt>hl 'iVxc6 -14 tt:Ja5 tbxc3 1 5 tt:Jxc6 tbxdl 1 6 tbxe7+ 'lt>h8 1 7 axdl ..txb2 and White's queenside weaknesses will cause him some trouble, although it's close to equal. ... tt:Jas Another established plan is 1 0. .. 'iVc8 1 1 f4 d8, hoping for ...d5: 1 2 ..tf3 ..tc4 ( 1 2. ..a5 1 3 tbd5 ! ) 1 3 f2 ! e6?! 1 4 d2 ! 'iVc7 1 5 'iVel h6 1 6 .th4 d7 1 7 ad 1 e5 1 8 ..txf6 ! ..txf6 1 9 .tg4 ! exf4? ! (but Black saw the alternative 19 ... dd8 20 .te2!, when White wins the d5-square and has the upper hand) 20 ..txd7 ! 'iVxd7 2 1 xd6 'iVe7 22 d7 'ie5 23 tbd2! ..te6 24 tbf3, con solidating his material, Karpov-Miles, Bad Lauterberg 1 977. When Karpov was an e-pawn player, he was one of the greatest interpreters of ..te2 systems against the Sicilian.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 185

1 1 f4 c8!? (D) Another typical tactical idea is l l ...tbc4! 1 2 f5 ! ? lbxb2 1 3 'icl ..tc4 14 'ixb2 ..txe2 1 5 tbxe2 tbxe4 1 6 f6 tbxf6 with three pawns for the piece and prospects against White's weak ened queenside. 12 rs The surprising thrust 1 2 e5 ! is a tactical theme to watch out for when a knight is on a5. Since 12 ... dxe5?? loses a piece after 1 3 'ixd8 and tbxa5, Black has to calculate in advance whether he can afford to play 1 2. .. lbxb3 (not 1 2. .. tbe8? 1 3 tbxa5 'iVxa5 14 ilxe7 dxe5 1 5 i.xf8 ii..xf8, when Black has some compensa tion for the exchange but not enough) 1 3 axb3 ( 1 3 exf6 exf6; this kind of position isn't al ways satisfactory for Black, although here it is) l 3 ... dxe5 14 fxe5 tt:Jd5 (14. .. tbd7 15 xa7 'iVb6 16 a4) 15 xa7 tbxc3 1 6 'iVxd8 fxd8 1 7 bxc3 ii..xe5 1 8 c4 with ilf3 to come and a small advantage. 12 ... ii..c4 13 i.d3 bS ( D) Here we have a picture of both sides consis tently following their plans in what seems like an idealized form. 14 'id2 b4 At this point 15 tbe2 leads to a balanced po sition with intriguing opportunities. Instead White blundered with 15 tbdl ?? tbxe4! 1 6 ..txe4 i n Onoprienko-Karr, Paris 1 996, and now 1 6. .. ..txfl ! would have given White al most nothing for the exchange. Yugoslav Attack

[diagram]
g6 6 ..te3 This is the usual move-order to introduce the Yugoslav Attack. 6 .....tg7 (D) Not 6 ... tbg4?? 7 ii..b5+, when White wins material since 7 ... ..td7 loses a piece after 8 'iVxg4.

7 f3 (D)

186 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

O-O

[diagram]
10 f4 f6. Then everything is fine for Black un

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 187

[diagram]

188 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

10 O-O-O

[diagram]

15 g4 (seemingly small variations in move

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 189

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

25 c3 bxc3 26 l:.c2 l:.b4 27 .llh6 .llxb3 ! 28 axb3

[diagram]

(D):

11 h4 This is the most principled move for the at tacker: waste no time and go for the kill! These days h4-h5 is normally played without the

190 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

support of g4 if ... h5 hasn't been played, since the g-pawn advance costs a crucial tempo and weakens f3. But against 10 ... l:.c8 instead of l O ... 'iVa5 there is a great body of theory about both approaches. White has other related op tions after 10 .. . 'iVa5, notably 1 1 @b l , but also 1 1 .tb3 with 1 2 .tg5 and l:.hel in mind.

11...Cl'ieS 12 .tb3 l:.fc8 13 @bl

This patient move introduces a plan com bining defence with attack. The more aggres sive 1 3 h5 Cl'Bxh5 gives Black a free view down the long diagonal. Then we have more stan dard themes, such as in this encounter from the old days: 14 @bl (this looks similar to 1 3 @b 1, but falls into the usual exchange sacri fice) 14 ... l:.xc3 ! ? 1 5 'iVxc3 ( 1 5 bxc3 l:.c8 1 6 .th6 Cl'Bc4 1 7 .txc4 l:.xc4 with a positionally winning game for Black) 1 5. .. 'iVxc3 16 bxc3 l:.c8 17 @b2 ( 1 7 .tg5 !?; 1 7 Cl'Be2 .tb5) l 7 . . .a5

18 a3 ClJf6 19 .tf4 Cl'Be8 ! ? (19. ..b5) 20 .tg5 a4

2 1 .ta2 Cl'Bc6 with equality, Spassky-Stein, Russia-Ukraine (Uzhgorod) 1967.

13.  

Cl'Bc4 14 .txc4 l:.xc4 IS Cl'Bb3 'iVc7 ( D) 16 .td4 Here is the kind of centralized defence that we haven't seen yet: @bl , ClJb3 and .td4; these moves secure White's king and prevent all those .. .l:.xc3 sacrifices, at least for now. 16 h5 allows the predictable 1 6. .. l:.xc3! 1 7 'iVxc3 'iVxc3 1 8 bxc3 Cl'Bxh5 and even with the queens off Black has more than enough play, with moves like ... a5-a4, ... .te6 and ... l:.c8 to come.

16. 

.te6 17 hS aS Black in response charges forward with his pawns, also not the main strategy that we have seen him employ.

18 a4 bS! ! (D)

Apparently first used in over-the-board GM practice in this game. Black insists upon open ing lines with the maximum speed.

19 Cl'ixbS 'iVb8 20 Cl'Bc3

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 191

30 exf7+ @rs 31 c3 Best but depressing is 3 1 c3 xc3 32 bxc3 l:.xe4 33 Ra2 l:.e2. 31 ... l:.xb3 32 exd5 l:.ab4! 33 l:.d2 el+ 34 @a2 cl 0-1 A cute finish would be 35 e2 l:.a3+ ! . Soltis Variation

[diagram]
10 O-O-O l:.c8 11 .tb3 tbeS 12 h4 hS ( D)

This is the Soltis Variation, the most fre quently played line of the Yugoslav Attack. Black simply stops White's pawn advance and dares him to break down Black's own defences before getting overrun on the queenside. The typical Dragon themes that we showed in the first game still apply, so we'll discuss a few ad ditional ideas as we go along. Remember that this is a non-technical inquiry that undertakes to instruct by example.

13 Wbl

[diagram]

192 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lLixe4! 2 1 lLixe4 ! .Bxe4 22 hxg7 .l:i.xc2! 23 gxf8'i:V+ @xf8 24 @al .l:i.xd2 25 lLixd2 .Bd5 26 lLibl .Be6, Pieretti-Perilli, corr. 1 985. Probably Black's pawns should outweigh all those pieces! 15 ... b5 16 .Bh6 Short but tension-filled was 1 6 e5 ! ? dxe5 17 .Bg5 .l:i.c7 1 8 .Bxf6 exf6 19 g4 'i:Ve8 20 gxh5 .Be6 21 .l:i.dgl b4 22 lLie4 f5 23 h6 fxe4 24 hxg7 @xg7 25 h5 .Bxa2+ ! 26 @xa2 'i:Va4+ 27 @bl .l:i.d8 28 'i:Vxd8 'i:Vxc2+ 29 @al 'i:Va4+ 1h-1h Li berzon-Miles, Haifa OL 1976. 16 . . 'i:Va5 17 .Bxg7 @xg7 18 lLif4 .l:i.fc8 19 lLicd5 'i:Vxd2 20 .l:i.xd2 lLixd5 21 lLixd5 @rs The game is equal. To wrap up the Dragon section, we'll ex plore two games, each one featuring a move by White's dark-squared bishop. Short - Fleck Bundesliga 198617 13 .Bh6 (D) For years this natural continuation was con sidered the real test of 12 ...h5, and it arguably did more for the Soltis Variation than anything else because of the great games it produced. The conventional wisdom is that Black, if well prepared, has nothing to fear.

13. .. l2Jc4

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 193

Yugoslav Attack. I should note that, along with the idea of being able to sidestep .Bxc4 after ... l2Jc4, there is a similar idea connected with the move ... l2Jg4. As a response to f4 (or even as the second move of the sacrificial device ... .Bxg4), ... l2Jg4 will not gain a crucial tempo on the dark-squared bishop because it has gone to g5. At present 13 .Bg5 is considered the main line of the Soltis 1 2 h4 h5 variation and the themes are useful to study. 13 . .l:i.cS! The move that salvaged Black's cause in the Soltis Variation. It is useful in several ways: a) It protects the 4th rank against advances by f4 and e5. b) It opens up the possibility of a sacrifice on g5 to eliminate the crucially-important bishop. c) The rook helps to defend b5, sometimes as a preliminary to ...b5. d) Black prepares to double rooks on the c file. White has several options and there are count less games from this position connected with intricate analysis by many strong masters. At this point if Black plays 1 3. .. l2Jc4, White can take advantage of the absence of his bishop from e3 to play 14 'i:Ve2. Then 14 ... l2Ja5 15 @bl a6? illustrates how one slight error in these lines can land you in terrible trouble: 16 g4! e5

1 7 gxh5 ! ! exd4 1 8 lLid5 lLixb3 19 h6 ! ! .Bb5 20 h2 d3 2 1 cxb3 lLixd5 22 hxg7 .l:i.c2 23 .Bxd8 .l:i.xd8 24 .l:i.d2 1 -0 Nunn-Mestel, London 1 986. I like these old games; they seem so inno cent and refreshing !

14 g4 hxg4 15 f4!

1 5 h5 appears to let Black get through on the queenside before White can do the same on the other wing, but it's a close call and could change with one new move. The play can de generate into a primitive slugfest; for example: 1 5. .. lLixh5 1 6 lLid5 .l:i.e8 ( 1 6. .. .l:i.xd5 ! 17 .Bxd5 'i:Vb6 is another course) 17 f4 lLic4 1 8 'i:Vf2!? b5 1 9 f5 a5 20 'i:Vh4 .l:txd5 ! 21 exd5 lLixb2 ! 22 fxg6 fxg6 23 lLic6 'i:Vb6 24 .l:i.del a4 25 .Be3? 'i:Vc7 26 'i:Vg5 axb3 27 axb3 l2Jd3+! 28 cxd3 .Bxc6 29 @dl .l:i.a8 30 .Bf4 e5 ! 31 'i:Vxg6 .Bxd5 32 .l:i.xh5 .Bf3+ 33 @d2 .l:i.a2+ 34 @e3 exf4+ 35 @xf4 'i:Vf7+ 36 'i:Vxf7+ @xf7 37 .l:i.f5+ .Bf6 38 .l:i.c l @g6 0- 1 Kravtsov-Soloviov, St Petersburg

1999. Fun stuff.

15  lLic4 16 'i:Ve2 (D) A popular move at the time of writing, but 1 6 'i:Vd3 has hundreds o f games and truckloads of analysis to its credit.

16. . 'i:VcS

1 6. ..ltJaS ! ? 17 e5 lLixb3+ 1 8 lLixb3 .l:i.xc3 1 9 bxc3 .Bc6 ! i s a wild line that appears to be

1 94 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]
a6 (DJ Whereas the Dragon Variation may have the most appeal to the average player, the Naj dorf Sicilian has been the favourite opening of

SICILIAN DEFENCE 1 95

top-level players for many years now. Part of this was certainly the influence of World Cham pions Fischer and Kasparov, consistent devotees of the variation. There is also the inherent com plexity and diversity of the Najdorf concepts and themes, to some extent in contrast to the relatively straightforward ideas of the Sicilian Dragon. White has a large variety of absolutely independent systems available for choosing, and Black can respond with varying basic structures. The Najdorf has an especially fluid character: again in contrast to the Dragon, we see more central breaks to go along with flank attacks, and in most variations the centre ulti mately plays as large a role as the attacking for mations on either side of the board. What is that magical little move 5 ...a6 all about? First of all, flexibility, which is perhaps the most valuable asset in modem openings. As the move 4 ... a6 does in the Paulsen Sicilian ( 1 e4 c 5 2 lL'Bf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lL'Bxd4 a6), so Black's 5 ...a6 in the Najdorf makes an implicit challenge to his opponent. White has played five unexceptionable moves (e4, lL'Bf3, d4, lL'Bxd4 and lL'Bc3), which essentially tell Black nothing about what he is up to. But now it is time for White to commit one of his bishops, which by defining the play will allow Black to respond accordingly. The development of White's light squared bishop is particularly meaningful in that regard. If it goes to e2, then Black might play ... e5, which would not be highly recom mended in the Dragon or Taimanov Sicilians, for instance. If White's bishop ends up on c4, Black can block the bishop by ...e6, and so forth. Similarly, a dark-squared bishop on e3 or g5 will require different strategies from Black. For all that, 5 ...a6 is fundamentally slow and simply invites White to go on an offensive. Thus the Najdorf is a risky system in which the slightest inaccuracy can spell disaster. But as Kasparov says, 'High risks mean high rewards', adding that with the Najdorf, Black will usually get a chance to seize the initiative at some point. But he cautions that any generalizations about strategy need to be supported by thor ough homework. We shall investigate 6 .Bg5, 6 .Bc4, 6 .Be2 and 6 .Be3. The continuation 6 f4 is rare these days. One idea that demonstrates a basic Sicilian theme is 6 ...e5 7 lL'Bf3 lL'ibd7 8 a4 (versus ...b5) 8 ... .Be7 9 .Bd3 O-O 1 0 O-O (D). Now with 10 ... exf4!? Black strives to control the e5-square in return for d5. This is the quint essential Sicilian strategy, since it provides an outpost on e5 at the same time that it opens up the e-file and the h8-al diagonal i.n support of that square. But White gets something from the deal too: he gains the key d4-square (usually for a knight), gets an open f-file, and may be able to put pressure on d6 more effectively because of a bishop that occupies f4. These trade-offs have to be constantly evaluated when Black considers whether to play - and White considers whether to allow - the capture ...exf4. Of course Black has other moves which we won't elaborate upon here, notably 10 ... 'i:Vc7 and 1 0. .. lbc5. Af ter 1 0. .. exf4, White plays 1 1 @hl ! (after 1 1 .Bxf4 Black takes the pawn and lives to tell the tale: 1 1...'i:Vb6+ 1 2 @h l 'i:Vxb2) 1 1 ...lL'Be5 12 .Bxf4 'i:Vc7 1 3 'i:Vd2 .Be6 14 lL'Bd4 .l:i.fe8 !? and now: a) 15 lL'Bf5 !? could be answered by 15 ... .Bxf5 16 exf5 d5 ! with active play in return for the bishop-pair; nevertheless, this line is unclear.

15. ..

.Bf8 16 .Bg5 lL'ifd7 is also possible, but then

17 a5 ! (to keep a knight out ofb6) 17. .. f6 18 .Bf4

.l:i.ac8 19 lL'Be3 ! gets a knight to d5 with some ad vantage. The odyssey of the knight from f3 to d5 in four moves brings to mind lL'ibd2-fl-e3-d5 in the Closed Ruy Lopez. It also shows that giving up d4 to a centralized piece can have more than the obvious consequences. b) 15 .Bxe5 dxe5 16 lL'Bxe6 fxe6 (D). We see this structure in several Sicilian lines, and also in other openings where the move

196 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.Bxe6 or ... .Bxe3 occurs, or even l2Jg5 and lLixe6. Black' s pawns protect the key central squares d5 and d4, as well as f5 and f4. In such positions the key questions are whether the pawns can be attacked (they are unsupported by other pawns) and who has the better pieces. Mainly because of the relative strengths of the bishops, I prefer Black. Of course this is just one example, not a verdict! The i.g5 Attack 6 .Bg5 White's predominant choice for years was this direct attacking line, and it is still the choice of many experts. White wants to play f4 fol lowed by pawn-breaks like e5 or f5 if allowed. Since Black usually prevents those, White's main set-up begins with 'i:Vf3 and O-O-O. We shall see the associated themes as we go along. In the meantime Black plays ...e6 followed by what are the most typical Najdorf moves ... l2Jbd7, ... 'i:Vc7, ...b5 and ....Bb7, usually but not always with an early ... .Be7. Again, the standard set-ups will ap pear with examples. 6 ... e6 7 f4 (D) This is the most direct attacking scheme that you will see in the Najdorf and has led to crazy sacrificial brilliancies for both sides for years. Three games will follow, and since the variations are so tactical and diverse, I shall lean towards recent examples and stay at least within shooting distance of current theory. Again, only specific study of concrete varia tions will let you truly master 6 .Bg5, whether White or Black. It should be said, however, that if you can pick up some of the ideas that repeat themselves you will have a good head- start. There are of course many ways in which the play can develop. Most of them have White ei ther attacking on the kingside or in the centre. In both cases he will resort to piece sacrifices whenever they are useful or necessary, because the pawns alone won't generally be enough to break down Black's position. Black has some interesting counterattacking ideas on the king side, but will usually proceed with a basic plan of development followed by central and queenside attacks. Or he can leap into action by playing the so-called Poisoned Pawn Variation and grabbing material. I'll outline these possi bilities in a few games. Sulskis - Pelletier Warsaw Ech 2005 7  .te7 8 'i:Vf3 'i:Vc7 9 O-O-O lLibd7 10 g4 Or: a) After 1 0 'i:Vg3 Black has a key defensive manoeuvre that comes up again and again: 10 ...h6 1 1 .Bh4 g5 ! (D). 12 fxg5 lLih5 ( 1 2. .. .l:i.g8 has also equalized, quickly recovering the pawn) 1 3 'i:Ve3 'i:Vc5 ! (this attacks g5 for the third time) 14 @b 1 ( 1 4 'i:Vd2 .Bxg5 15 .Bxg5 'i:Vxg5 1 6 .Be2 lLihf6 17 lLif3 'i:Vxd2+ 18 .l:i.xd2 @e7 is equal) 14. ..hxg5 15 .Bf2 l2Je5. Here is the main point of ...g5: Black counts upon this knight to hold everything to gether. Kengis-Vitolins, Jurmala 1983 continued 1 6 'i:Vd2 'i:Vc7 17 lLif3 b5 ! 1 8 .Be3 ( 1 8 lLixg5 gives Black good queenside play after l 8 ... b4 19 lLia4 .Bb7 20 lLib6 .l:i.b8) 1 8. ..g4 19 lLixe5 dxe5 20 .Bd3 lLif4 21 'i:Vf2 .Bb7 with equality.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 197

[diagram]

198 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

13. ..exfS

1 3. ..b4! ? may be better but this is more illu- minating. 14 lL'idS b7!? A typical line given by Kosten is 14. ..c5 1 5 exf5 .Bb7 1 6 f6 ! gxf6 1 7 lL'Bxf6+! .Bxf6 1 8 xb7 .l:i.c8 1 9 .Bd3 .Bg7 2 0 .l:i.hel + with an un clear attack. 15 c3! 1 5 exf5? lL'Bb6 exchanges White's key piece.

15. ..

[diagram]
19. ..

[diagram]

7. ..

[diagram]

10. ..

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 199

played and analysed extensively by Thomas Luther. I'll just follow a recent game: 16 . . . l2Jc5 17 .Bh4! .l:i.g8 18 .Bxh7 ! .l:i.h8 19 'fifxg7 .l:i.xh7

20 'fifxf6! .l:i.xh4 2 1 'fifxf7 .l:i.h8 22 .l:i.e5 ! .l:i.f8 !? 23 'fifg7 .l:i.a7? (23 ...b3 !? is better) 24 .l:i.xc5 'fifb6 (24. . . .l:i.xf4 25 .l:i.c4! .l:i.xc4? 26 'fifg8+) 25 'fife5 ! and White had enough attack to convert to a winning position in B.Vuckovic-Tadic, Herceg Novi 2005. Of course you needn't study specif ics to play the Najdorf, just rely upon general ideas. Right. 12 lLidS!? (D) Again! There have been a lot of games be tween leading grandmasters with other moves, but this move is the scariest for Black.

12. .

[diagram]

1 e4 c5 2 lLif3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ltJxd4 lLif6 5 lLJc.J

a6 6 .Bg5 e6 7 f4 'fifb6 (D) This is an astonishing move that those raised with classical chess principles would simply re ject as a typical beginner's mistake. Black goes running after a pawn when he is undeveloped and already under attack. What's worse. he does so with the queen, which you're not sup posed to bring out too early because it will lose time. 8 'fifd2 'fif xb2 9 .l:i.bl Sometimes White plays 9 lLib3 instead, but we'll stick with the overwhelming favourite. 9 .. 'fifa3 (D) Now it's White's move and he has perfect at tacking squares for his pieces; in addition, after White castles he will very likely put his rook on an open f-file after the normal advances e5 or

200 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

S!CIUAN DEFENCE 201

[diagram]

16. ..hS

[diagram]

202 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

OL 2004. The new generation is still finding new ideas in this mess! 18 l::t f3! 'fixa2 19 l::t fb3 'fia4! The variations are almost infinite; for exam ple, 1 9 .. .fxe4 20 'fic3 (intending l::t al) 20. .. ..itd8 ! may hold on, although that is shaky. 20 lLid6+ ..ltxd6 21 'fixd6 Threatening l::t b7.

21...'fia5+

This position had already been played! In Fernandez Siles-Gamundi Salamanca, Albacete 2004, Black misplaced his queen and lost quickly by 2 1 . ..'fie4? 22 l::t b7 'fih4+ 23 g3 'fid8 24 'fixe5 l::t h6 25 'ii g7 1 -0. 22 @fl @f7?! This attempt to evacuate the king loses. 22 ... l::t a7 ! is Kosten's suggestion, using sec ond-rank defence. This move is the key to many lines. 23 l::t b7+! @g6 24 'fie7! Improving upon yet another game, where the inferior 24 l::t c7? had been played. .. ..ltxb7 25 'fixe6+ @g5 26 'fie7+ @g6 27 'ii d6+ @g5 28 h4+ @f4 29 '>t>f2! 1-0 Black is helpless in the face of 30 g3+ or 30 l::t b4+. I'm sure that all this back-and-forth activity will persist for years to come. The theoretical result is probably a draw, but the practical out come depends heavily upon one's preparation. Najdorf Sozin Attack

[diagram]
a6 6 ..ltc4 (D) The name 'Sozin' is connected with ..ltc4 in both the Najdorf and the Classical lines, so I'll designate 6 ..ltc4 as the Najdorf Sozin. Although this direct bishop development has never been as popular as 6 ..ltg5, and in these days not as popular as 6 ..lte3, it is still used successfully by loyal adherents. The play after 6 ..ltc4 divides into a set of positional and primarily tactical lines, so I'll treat it that way. It's probably fair to say that the slower lines tend to end up in equal ity or even in Black's favour because of his long-term advantages, but the more numerous dynamic lines are much harder to assess, with beautiful tactics seemingly the rule rather than the exception. Black almost always plays ...e6 (usually 6 ... e6) in order to restrict the scope of the c4- bishop. After that White has to be careful about the move ...d5 or ... lbxe4 followed by a ... d5 fork, so he will retreat his bishop to b3. That's the basic position from which strategies are formed, as we shall see. 6 .e6 / 6 ... lbxe4? walks into 7 'fih5 ! wiili multiple threats, when the best that Black can do is 7 ...d5 ! 8 ..ltxd5 lLid6. Then, however, White plays 9 O-O and Black has trouble getting his pieces out, since ...e6 is met by a capture on that square and ...g6 by 'fie5. Players often wonder why Black doesn't simply attack the bishop right away with the useful move 6 ...b5. One problem is that the b pawn advance is committal; since ...e6 will doubtless be played anyway, Black may not want White to know on what basis he will set up his attack. Velimirovic-Mrdja, Yugoslavia 1 984 went 7 ..ltb3 (7 ..itd5 ! ? is also very interesting

SICILIAN DEFENCE 203

because 7 ... lbxd5 8 exd5 yields a structure that is almost always favourable to White, so Black might try 7 ... 'g.a7 ! ?, and if 8 ..lte3, then 8 ... 'g.c7 ! ?) 7 ... ..ltb7 (7 ...e6 transposes to a main line) 8 ..lte3 !? (or 8 'fie2; or 8 O-O b4 9 lLid5 lLixe4? 1 0 'g.el lbc5 1 1 ..ltg5 ! - White has too many pieces out) 8 ...lbbd7 9 f4 lLic5 1 0 O-O! ( 1 0 e5 dxe5 1 1 fxe5 lbxb3 1 2 axb3 ..ltxg2 !). White's 10th move introduces a type of e-pawn sacrifice that has dozens of variants and forms. Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't. The positional basis c ists of a lead in development, the opening of White's e-file, and Black's difficul ties in proceeding with his own development. This particular game continued 1 0. .. lbfxe4 1 1 lbxe4 ..ltxe4 ( l l .. . lbxe4 1 2 f5) 1 2 f5 ! (stopping both ...e6 and ... g6) 12 ... lbxb3 1 3 axb3 'ii d7 14 'iig4! ..itd5 ( 1 4. ..d5 15 c4) 1 5 'g.f2 g6 1 6 c4! (it seems that in almost every game with this kind of attack White needs to open up another front) 1 6. .. bxc4 1 7 bxc4 gxf5 1 8 lLixf5 ..ltb7 1 9 ..ltd4 e5 20 ..ltb6 f6 2 1 'g.dl d5 22 cxd5 'fif7 23 l::t c2 'ii g6 24 'fia4+ @f7 25 'ii d7+ @g8 26 'g.d3 1 -0. 7 ..itb3 (D) The starting position for most variations. If White plays f4-f5 and Black responds with ...e5, the argument revolves around occupation of the d5-square. Should White succeed in exploiting it as a pure outpost, he will probably stand better. When Black can prevent a piece from establishing itself there or gain compensating advantages, his natural Sicilian attack on the queenside will usually come into play. The variations that top players such as Fischer en tered into (he played both sides of 6 ..ltc4) were primarily positional and revolved around these factors. As in many Najdorf variations, if White plays f4 and e5 (instead of f5) the game will often tum very tactical, and White may have to shift his strategy to piece sacrifices before his ad vanced central pawn falls. Those lines are very position-specific and exciting. Alternatively, White sometimes foregoes f4 altogether and simply brings his pieces out. This has become a very popular strategy, although it contradicts what for years was the conventional wisdom, i.e. that the b3-bishop ran into a brick wall at e6 and that it took pawn advances to remedy that. We'll follow various games from this posi tion. I'll show a lot of tactical ideas which are fairly universal in their character and apply elsewhere, but there will also be some purely unique and creative combining for your enjoy ment. Dynamic attacking play is what has al ways drawn the average player to the Najdorf Sozin. Morozevich - Agrest St Petersburg Z 1993 7 . ..lte7 8 f4 Other common continuations are 8 O-O and 8 ..lte3. 8 ..b5!? This natural move allows a typical tactical se quence although Black is used to such things in the Najdorf. His main alternative is 8 ... O-O, when

9 O-O is usual; a fairly obscure continuation is 9

f5 !? exf5 (9 ...e5 1 0 lbde2 and White will have an easier time of controlling d5 with Black hav ing castled and he not having done so) 10 exf5 d5 1 I O-O lbc6 1 2 @hl ! with a quite interesting isolated d-pawn position. White doesn't have the usual restraint on Black's centre, but his ad vanced pawn interferes with Black's customary IQP activity. 9 e5! dxe5 10 fxe5 lLifd7 1 1 ..ltxe6!? (D) This thematic sacrifice pervades the 6 ..ltc4 lines, and also occurs in the Classical Sicilian and even in the English Attack (usually via g4- g5, ..lth3 and ..ltxe6). When it works, it is the ul timate triumph of the bishop over its nemesis on e6. In this situation, objectively, maybe White should prefer 1 1 'ii g4 with the idea l 1 ...'iVc7 I 2

204 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

'i'Jxg7 'i'Jxe5+ 1 3 'i'Jxe5 lbxe5 14 ..ltf4 and White enjoys a pleasant advantage. 11  . lbxe5! We get to see two of the major themes of the ..ltc4 Najdorf: destruction of Black's centre by ..ltxe6 and of White's by ... lbxe5. White obtains an overwhelming attack after 1 l .. .fxe6?? 1 2 lbxe6 'i'Ja5 ( 1 2. .. 'i'Jb6 1 3 lbd5 !) 1 3 lLixg7+ @f8 ( 1 3. ..@d8 1 4 lbe6+ '>t>e8 1 5 'i'Jh5#) 14 O-O+ lLif6 (14. ..@xg7 1 5 'i'Jg4+) 15 exf6 ..ltc5+ 16 @hl , and Black is getting slaughtered. 12 ..ltxc8 1 2 ..itd5 ! ? is another idea. 12 ... 'i'Jxc8 13 lLid5 ..ltc5! Black gets busy defending his dark-square weaknesses. White was threatening lLib6 and 'i'Je2, with secondary ideas of ..ltf4 and O-O. 14 b4!? ..lta7 After 14 ... ..ltxd4 1 5 'i'Jxd4 lbbc6 1 6 'i'Jc5, Black is tied up and White can develop by ..itf4 or ..ltb2 with ideas of castling on either side of the board. 15 ..ltf4 'i'Jd7 15 ... 'i'Jc4 1 6 lLif5 ! 'i'Je4+ 1 7 'i'Je2 is nicely symmetric. If Black plays 1 7. .. 'i'Jxd5, 1 8 .i:i.d 1 wins, but 1 7. ..'i'Jxf5 1 8 g4! drives the queen away from protecting e5. 16 ..ltxe5 'i'Jxd5 17 ..ltxg7 'i'Jxg2 18 'i'Je2+ 'i'Jxe2+ 19 @xe2 ..ltxd4 Probably 1 9 ... l:i.g8 20 lLif5 lLic6 improves for Black. 20 ..ltxd4 l:i.g8 21 a4 lbc6 22 ..ltc5 Although this position is probably within Black's drawing range, White's bishop proved decisively superior to Black's knight in the long run. Reutsky - Shtyrenkov Noiabrsk 2003 7 ... lbbd7 This development has been popular for some years, especially after Kasparov used it versus Short in their world championship match. The knight temporarily prevents e5, but generally it goes to c5 next, from which post it can protect e6 against f4-f5 and eliminate the b3-bishop when Black chooses to do so. White is chal lenged to find a way to attack Black's solid structure.

8 f4 lbc5 (D)

9 'i'Jf3 White can return to traditional positional play by 9 f5 ..lte7 1 0 'i'Jf3 ! ( 1 0 fxe6 was played in many games following Short's example, but then White turned to this developing move, which reserves the idea of exchange on e6, and also prepares g4-g5) 1 0. .. O-O 1 1 ..lte3 (otherwise it's hard to develop) l l . ..e5 1 2 lLide2 lLixb3 1 3 axb3 b5 1 4 g4 (we see the difference between the early days of ..ltc4 with f4-f5 and today's version! The advance of the g-pawn changes the entire dynamic of the position) 14. .. b4 (Black certainly can't wait around for g5 and lbd5) 1 5 lba4 ..ltb7 1 6 lbg3 'ilc7 !? (the aggressive 1 6. ..d5 has also been played, when the battle begins be tween White's rapid development and Black's central play) 1 7 O-O-O .i:i.ac8 1 8 .i:i.d2 d5 ! (White was again ready for g5 followed by f6 and a kingside attack) 19 g5 d4?! (19. .. lbxe4! 20 lbxe4 dxe4 21 'i'Jg2! f6 22 .i:i.hdl is difficult to assess but White has notions of lbb6-d5) 20 gxf6 dxe3 21 'i'Jxe3 ..ltxf6 22 lLih5 (D).

SICILIAN DEFENCE 205

22 ... 'ilie7 23 l:i.g l (23 l:i.d7 ..ltg5 !) 23 ... l:i.c7 (everything seems to be holding together, but now comes the overloading move) 24 lbc5 ! with a nice attack based upon either lbd7 or lbxb7 and .i:i.d5, Vega-Lopez Gomez, corr. 1 995. 9 .. ..lte7 10 O-O O-O 11 ..lte3 'ilic7 12 .i:i.ael l::t eS 13 g4 b5 14 g5 lLifd7 15 f5 No subtlety here: White goes for the kill but Black gets the wonder square e5. Again posi tional factors determine the tactical possibilities. 15 ... lbe5 16 'ilih5 g6 17 'ilih4 ..itfS Or l 7 ... lbxb3 1 8 cxb3 b4. Now White can try 1 8 fxe6! ? and lbd5. lS fxg6 hxg6 19 ..itd5!? ..ltb7 20 ..ltxb7 'ilixb7

21 b4 lbcd7 22 .i:i.f2 .i:i.acS 23 lbce2 (D)

23. ..

lbc4? Black will get punished for moving this key defender; it's almost impossible to break down such an ideally-placed piece when it's supported by a bishop and another knight. He would stand very well with either 23 ... ..ltg7 or 23 ... lbb6. 24 .i:i.xf7! ..ltg7 Black had probably missed 24 .. .@xf7 25 'ilih7+ ..ltg7 26 .i:i.fl + @e7 27 lbxe6 ! ! (instead of 27 'ilixg7+? @d8) 27 ... @xe6 28 'ilixg7 with mating threats and a quick win. 25 l:i.xg7+! @xg7 26 'ilih6+ @gs 27 'ilixg6+ @hS 2S lbxe6 lbde5 29 ..itd4 'ilih7 30 li'f6+ @gs 31 ..ltxe5 lbxe5 32 lD2d4 'ilif7 33 .i:i.fl 1-0 Resignation seems premature but there fol lows 33 ... 'ilixf6 34 l:i.xf6 ! threatening g6-g7 and Black can't do much about it. Finally, we get to Black's main move: 7 ..b5 (D) Here are three games with two fundamen tally different strategies. s f4 Kristjansson - Tukmakov Reykjavik 1972 This is the traditional pawn attack. White wants to play for f5 and force a response that gives him control of d5. Options that emphasize piece attack are given in the next game. S ... ..ltb7 9 f5 e5 10 lbde2 ..lte7 Playing 1 0. .. lbbd7 first may be the most pre cise order; for instance, 1 1 ..ltg5 ..lte7 1 2 lbg3 .i:i.c8 ! (Black tries to counter White's appropria tion of d5 with queenside action) 1 3 O-O ( 1 3 ..ltxf6 ! ? lbxf6 1 4 O-O { 1 4 lbh5 } 1 4. .. h5 ! threat ens to win the e-pawn after ...h4) 1 3. ..h5 ! (D). A fantastic move that directly stops White's only real threat, which was to bring the knight to h5 in order to eliminate another defender of d5. Now White went rapidly downhill: 14 h4? b4 1 5 ..ltxf6 ..ltxf6 ( 1 5. .. lbxf6 is also good) 1 6

206 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lbd5 ..ltxh4 1 7 lbxh5 'itig5 (the contest is al ready over!) 1 8 f6 g6?! ( 1 8. .. filh5 ! 1 9 l:H5 ..itf2+ ! wins right away due to 20 l::t xf2 'ii h6) 1 9 lbg7+ '>t>d8 20 l::t f3 ..ltg3 2 1 'ii d3 ..ith2+ 22 '>t>fl lbc5 23 l::t h3 l::t h4 24 'ii f3 lbxb3 25 axb3 l::t xh3 26 'ii xh3 ..ltxd5 27 exd5 'ii xf6+ 28 @e 1 'ii f4 0- 1 R.Byme-Fischer, Sousse IZ 1 967. A game that went a long way toward discrediting 8 f4. 11 lbg3! This move improves upon 1 1 ..ltg5, which as we just saw only assists Black's attack.

[diagram]
The same idea, but without ..ltg5 in, maybe Black is asking for too much. Instead, 1 1 . .. lbbd7 is natural and probably best. 12 'ii f3?! White could take over d5 directly by 1 2 ..itd5 ! lbxd5 1 3 lbxd5 h4 14 lbh5.

12. .. lbbd7 13 ..ltg5?

Losing the thread. He should have developed by 1 3 O-O. 13 . h4 14 ..ltxf6 lLixf6 15 lbge2 b4 16 lbd5 lbxd5 17 exd5 (D) In general White won't get much advantage if he has to capture on d5 with a pawn instead of a piece. Here he stands considerably worse. 17 .. 'iib6 18 a3 a5 19 axb4 axb4 20 l::t xa8+ ..ltxa8 21 'ii f2 'ii a5! 22 O-O ..ltxd5 23 c4 ..ltc6 24 l::t el h3 25 g3 l::t h5 26 lbd4? Better, but still depressing, would be 26 .ltd 1 l::t g5 27 lbc 1 ..itd7 ! . 26 ...exd4 0-1 Christiansen - Wojtkiewicz USA Ch (San Diego) 2006 8 'ii f3 (D) Originally no one liked this idea but over the years it has assumed the mantel of 'Main Line'. 8 'ii f3 is less weakening and develops the pieces more quickly than 8 f4. 8 ... 'ii c7 8 ... 'iib6 9 ..lte3 'ii b7 is the other conven- tional defence, slow but perhaps playable. 9 ..ltg5 lbbd7 10 O-O-O White's moves are very natural but rarely used until recently. This was probably due to Fischer's example; he consistently employed the idea of f4-f5 to break down Black's e6/f7 structure. The logic was that the e6-pawn ren dered White's b3-bishop ineffectual, so it had to be eliminated. However, that strategy simply didn't succeed versus accurate play, so White finally turned to a different concept. Pieces can precede pawns in an attack as long as the two ul timately cooperate. The great Tai always seemed to bring his pieces out to active squares before organizing pawn-breaks, if indeed his opponent survived up to that point.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 207

10   i.e7 11 e5! (D) The introduction to a fantastic pawn sacri fice. Before White's idea had always been 't\Yg3. 11 .. i.b7 12 't\Yg3! lbxe5 1 2. ..dxe5 1 3 i.xe6 fxe6 14 lbxe6 'tlc6 1 5 lbxg7+ @f7 has also been tried. 13 i.xe6! fxe6 1 3. ..O-O would bail out. As always, it's very hard to assess things. One line might be 14 i.xf6 ..ltxf6 1 5 lbd5 'tid8 1 6 lLixf6+ 't\Yxf6 17 i.f5. 14 f4! The attack peters out after 14 lbxe6 'tid7 ! 1 5 lbxg7+ @f7. 14 . lbg6?! 14 ... lbc4 is the main test, when 1 5 lbxe6 't\Ya5 ! ? l 6 lbxg7 + @f7 1 7 .i:i.he 1 needs help from a combination of computers and imagination. 15 lbxe6 'tid7 16 .i:i.hel! @f7 17 f5! (D) White has just a pawn for his piece, but Black can only watch as his position collapses.

17. ..

lLifS 18 ..itxf6! ..itxf6 19 l:i.xd6 'tlc8 Or 1 9. .. 'tle8 20 lbxf8 'tixf8 2 1 l:i.d7+ @g8 and one nice win is 22 lbe4 ! h6 (22. .. i.xe4 23 'tlb3+) 23 lbxf6+ 't\Yxf6 24 .i:i.ee7 ! 't\Yg5+ 25 't\Yxg5 hxg5 26 l:i.xg7+ @f8 27 .i:i.df7+ @e8 28 .i:i.xb7, etc. 20 lbg5+! @g8 (D) 20 ... i.xg5+ 2 1 'tlxg5 is resignable. 21 .i:i.xf6 gxf6 22 lbge4+ Or 22 l:i.e7 ! lbg6 23 lbe6 and l:i.g7# follows. 22  lbg6 23 fxg6 1-0 A similar and wild example of putting devel opment first is seen in the following game: Michalek - Fedorchuk Plzen 2003 8 ..ltg5 i.e7 9 't\Yf3 't\Yc7 10 O-O-O Now we have the same position as in the Christiansen game, but with a bishop on e7 in stead of a knight on d7. 10 ... b4!? 11 e5! (D)

208 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

11  ..ltb7?! a) Typical tactics follow l l ...bxc3? 1 2 exf6 ! .It b 7 1 3 lllxe6 ! fxe6 14 li'h5+ g6 1 5 li'h3 ! cxb2+ 1 6 @xb2 and Black is getting killed. b) But sacrificing an exchange by 1 l ...dxe5 ! is also typical. For instance, 1 2 li'xa8 ( 1 2 ..ltxf6 might improve) 1 2. ..exd4 1 3 l:.xd4! bxc3 1 4 l:.c4 cxb2+ 1 5 @bl ..ltc5 1 6 ..ltf4 e5 1 7 l:i.el ( 1 7 ..lta4+ may be better) 1 7. . .O-O 1 8 l:.xe5 ..ltb7 1 9 l:i.exc5 li'xf4! 20 l:.xf4 ..ltxa8 2 1 f3 ll'lbd7 22 l:.c7 ll'lb6 and White has only a minimal advan tage. 12 exd6 ..ltxd6 13 li'h3 O-O 1 3. .. bxc3 14 lll xe6 fxe6?! 1 5 li'xe6+ li'e7 1 6 l:.xd6 ! .

14 ..itxf6 bxc3 15 li'g4 (D) 15 . ..ltf4+ Or 1 5. .. g6 1 6 ll'lxe6. 16 @bl ..lth6 17 lllxe6! Unleashing a devastating series of tactics. 17 fxe6 18 li'xe6+ @h8 19 ..lte5 li'a5 20 ..ltxc3 li'c5 21 ..itd4 li'c6 22 li'e7 l:.e8 Just as bad are 22 ... l:.c8 23 ..ltxg7+ ..ltxg7 24 l:.d8+ and 22 ... ll'ld7 23 l:.he 1 ! . 23 ..ltxg7+! ..ltxg7 24 .i:i.d8 ll'ld7 25 li'xe8+ lll f8 26 li'f7! 1-0 Classical 6 i.e2 System

1 e4 c5 2 ll'lf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ll'lxd4 ll'lf6 5 lll

c3 a6 6 ..lte2 (D) As various systems have come in and out of fashion, this solid and unpretentious develop ment has always been there as a sensible alterna tive to the heavily theoretical attacking sys tems. The last world-class player to play it consistently with great success was Karpov, yet practically every major player has been on one or both sides of it. Kasparov played it at least four times versus major players with an idea that will be seen below. White's concept is sim ple, at least at first sight. He wants to develop and get castled without exposing his pieces to the tempo-gaining attacks that 6 ..ltg5, 6 ..ltc4 and 6 ..lte3 are often hit with. 6 ..lte2 also covers the g4-square against an invading knight and thus prepares to put a bishop on e3. While 6 ..lte2 is almost always associated with f4, the advance g4 has increasingly been used in con junction with it in order to drive away the f6- knight and prevent ... d5 before undertaking more aggressive action. The negative side of ..lte2 is fairly obvious: it is passive and creates no threats. Nor does the bishop protect the critical e-pawn, which indi cates that it will most likely end up on f3 or d3 at some point. Consequently, White's bishop will often take two moves to get to a relatively passive square. 6 ...e5 (D) Although Black can play 6 ...e6 and trans pose into another variation, this is the original 'point' of 5 ... a6. On the move before, 5 ... e5 would have been met by 6 ..ltb5+, creating some awkwardness on the light squares; for example, 6 ... ..ltd7 7 ..ltxd7+ li'xd7 8 ll'lf5, after which the knight will head for e3 in many situations, al ready with a complete grip on d5. None of this can occur once ...a6 is in. The move 6 ... e5 sets up one of the archetypal Sicilian structures. Black's idea will be to threaten ... d5 as soon as possible and force White to react in a way that is otherwise unfavourable. The analogous idea

SICIUAN DEFENCE 209

[diagram]

210 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

this and normal lines is that White is able to an swer 8 ...exf4 with 9 ..itxf4 in one move, as op posed to having to play ..lte3 first) and now: a) It's increasingly popular to push the g pawn in all Sicilian variations but here's an older example: 9 g4! ? h6 (9 ...exf4 1 0 g5 ! lLifd7 1 1 ..ltxf4 lbc6 1 2 'ii d2 ..lte7 1 3 O-O-O lbce5 14 lbd4 with a big advantage; White is already set up for lLif5) 10 g5 hxg5 1 1 fxg5 lLifd7 (D). 1 2 ..ltg4! l:i.h4 1 3 ..ltxe6 fxe6 14 ..lte3 ..lte7 1 5 'fif3 lbc6 1 6 'ii g 3 .i:i.h8 1 7 'ii g4. Black i s tied down, and h4-h5 can follow, D.Gurevich-Bala shov, USSR 1 974. b) 9 O-O lbbd7 1 0 f5 ..ltc4 1 1 a4 ! (prevent ing ... b5, and planning a5 in order to restrict Black's queenside) 1 1 .....lte7 1 2 ..lte3 O-O 1 3 a5 b5 14 axb6 lbxb6 (fine, but now Black has an isolated a-pawn in one of those exceptional po sitions where he has insufficient counterplay down the b-file) 1 5 @hl .i:i.fc8 1 6 ..ltxb6! 'fixb6 1 7 ..ltxc4 l:i.xc4 1 8 'fie2 .i:i.b4 1 9 l:i.a2 (White's manoeuvre has given him control of d5 and a useful open a-file; note that this rook protects b2) 1 9. ..h6 ( 1 9. .. 'fib7 20 .i:i.el ) 20 .i:i.fal ..itf8 21 l:i.a4! (21 l:i.xa6?! l:i.xa6 22 l:i.xa6 'iib7 { hitting e4} 23 lba5 'fic7 is equal) 2 1 ...l:i.c8 22 l:i.xb4 'fixb4 23 'fixa6. White is a clear pawn ahead, Karpov-Bronstein, Moscow 1 97 1 . A model treatment. We now return to 7 ... ..lte7 (D):

8 O-O

Again 8 g4 has been played, as well as 8 ..lte3 ..lte6 9 lbd5. But Black will have plenty of counterplay if White rushes to exchange his dark-squared bishop for the sake of controlling d5: 8 ..ltg5 ..lte6 9 ..ltxf6 ! ? ..ltxf6 1 0 'ii d3 lbc6 1 1 lbd5 ..ltg5 1 2 O-O lbe7 !, when the pieces are coming off while Black retains his two bishops and an advantage, Amason-Kasparov, Dort mund jr Wch 1 980. 8 ...

O-O

[diagram]

It's very hard to break down a structure like Black's when there's a pawn on d5 and when Black is able to use his strongpoint on e5 as a stepping stone. In this game, White drifts and Black takes over the initiative: 1 8 ..ltgl ..ltg5 1 9 lbd2 lbf6 20 lLifl g6 2 1 l:i.d4?! l:i.e7 2 2 c4 l:i.ae8 23 b4, Hulak-Portisch, Indonesia 1 983, and now

S!CIUAN DEFENCE 211

the thematic 23 ... lbed7 ! controls all the key squares. 9 ..lte3 9 @hl has been played by Kasparov on oc casion. It's a move that White will want to make anyway, and then wait to see how Black is com mitting his pieces, but that may not be too help ful: a) 9 ...b6 ! ? (this is the accepted solution, avoiding 9 ... b5 1 0 a4 !) 1 0 ..lte3 ..ltb7 1 1 f3 b5 ! 1 2 a4 b4 1 3 lbd5 lbxd5 1 4 exd5 lbd7 1 5 c3 bxc3 16 bxc3 ..ltg5 ! 1 7 ..ltgl 'ilic7 1 8 c4 a5 1 9 lbd2 f5 1h-1h Anand-Gelfand, Dos Hermanas 1 997. Black has secured the c5 outpost and he already has his kingside majority. b) 9 ... lbc6 1 0 f3 ..lte6 is also fine; for exam ple, 1 1 lLid5 a5 1 2 ..lte3 a4 1 3 lbc l ..ltxd5 ! ? 14 exd5 lbd4! (D). This pawn sacrifice turns Black's f6-bishop into a powerful piece while White's on e2 re mains passive: 1 5 ..ltxd4 exd4 1 6 'ilixd4 'ilia5 1 7 .i:i.dl lbd7 1 8 l::t bl .i:i.fe8 with plenty of play for the pawn, which may very well have to be re turned anyway, Adams-Kariakin, Wijk aan Zee 2006. 9 ...'ilic7 9 ... ..lte6 1 0 'ilid2 lLibd7 1 1 a4 l::t c8 ( l l ...lLib6 generated active play following 1 2 a5 lbc4 1 3 .txc4 ..ltxc4 1 4 .i:i.fdl l::t c8 1 5 lLicl d5 ! 1 6 ..ltb6 { 1 6 exd5 ..ltb4! } 1 6. .. 'ilie8 1 7 exd5 ..ltb4 1 8 d6 'iVd7 1 9 lbd3 'ilixd6 20 lbxb4 'ilixb4 21 lbe4 'ilixd2 22 lbxf6+ gxf6 23 .i:i.xd2 ..lte6, with equal ity, in Leko-Shirov, Dortmund (2) 2002) 1 2 a5 'ilic7 1 3 .i:i.fdl .i:i.fd8 14 'iliel 'ilic6 1 5 ..itf3 ..ltc4 1 6 lLic l ! (heading for b4; Karpov typically con centrates his pieces on the weak point) 1 6. ..h6 1 7 lLil a2 lbc5 1 8 lbb4 'ilie8 1 9 g3 ! l:i.c7 20 ..ltg2 .i:i.dc8 21 b3 ..lte6 22 lbcd5 lbxd5 23 lbxd5 ..ltxd5 24 .i:i.xd5. White has control of d5 and the two bishops, Karpov-Nunn, Amsterdam 1 985.

10 a4 ..lte6 11 a5 lbbd7 12 lbd5 lbxd5!?

Black is trying to save the bishop-pair. 13 exd5 ..itf5 14 c4 ..ltg6 15 .i:i.cl lbc5?! White has the advantage in any case, but 15 ... f5 1 6 c5 ! ? (or 1 6 f4) 1 6. . .f4 1 7 cxd6 'ilixd6 1 8 ..ltc5 lbxc5 l 9 lbxc5 ..ltf7 ! 20 ..itf3 .i:i.fb8 ! and ...b5 doesn't look too bad. 16 lbxc5 dxc5 17 b4! (

D)

Geller's opening strategy has resulted in a textbook position.

17. ..

.i:i.acS The idea is 1 7. .. cxb4 1 8 ..ltb6 with c5 next. 18 'ilib3 ..itd6 19 .i:i.fdl White can also secure two passed pawns by 1 9 bxc5 ..ltxc5 20 ..ltxc5 'ilixc5 2 1 'ilixb7 'ilixa5 22 'ilib2 ! .

19. ..

'ilie7 20 bxc5 ..ltxc5 21 ..ltxc5 l::t xc5 22 l::t al ! .i:i.d8 23 l:i.a4 ..trs 24 l:i.b4 ..ltcs (

D)

212 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

25 b6! d6 25 ...xa5 26 d6 1Wd7 27 ii.f3 leaves Black short of reasonable moves. 26 1Wb4 1Wc7 27 xd6 1Wxd6 28 bl 1Wc7 29 1Wa4! ii.d7 30 1Wa3 xa5 31 xb7! 1Wxb7 32 1Wxa5 g6 33 h3 White is getting ready to push the passed pawns. . 1Whl+ 34 '1t>h2 ii.rs 35 1Wc3 1We4 36 ii.f3 1Wd4 37 1Wxd4 exd4 38 g4 ii.cs 39 c5 a5

40 c6 'lt>f8 41 d6 1-0

The game might finish with 4 l ...'lt>e8 42 ii.di ii.a6 43 g5 ilb5 44 c7 ii.d7 45 ii.a4, etc. Geller was one of the great 6 ii.e2 players, and of course Fischer was the premier Najdorf player of his time. English Attack

[diagram]
a6 6 ii.e3 (D) This move in conjunction with 7 f3 is known as the English Attack, which can be used against systems with or without ... lbc6. Here we look at Najdorf variations, primarily those that use ...e6 and skip ... lbc6 in favour of moves like ...b5, ... ii.b7, ... ii.e7 and ... 'ii c7. This is a hot line in contemporary chess and full of analysis going 20 moves or more, so my coverage will be lim ited. Nevertheless, the English Attack lines are full of interesting and original positional ideas that express a new way of playing the Sicilian Defence for both sides. These positional con siderations make it a good topic of study. The move-order 6 f3 with 7 ii.e3 is a way of transposing to the main English Attack without allowing ... lbg4. However, Black does have the move 6 ... 1Wh6! ? preventing 7 ii.e3 due to 7 ... 1Wxb2. This has the same idea as ... 1Wh6 in the Classical Sicilian, namely, to force the knight back to b3 even at the cost of a tempo ( ... 1Wh6-c7). Then if the knight returns to its 'best' square d4, it's Black who has gained the tempo. But with the knight remaining on b3 it's not so easy for Black; e.g., 7 lbb3 e6 8 g4! ? (8 1We2 intending ii.e3 is also played; perhaps 8 a4 is also good, since a5 can't be prevented) 8 ... lbc6 (Judit Polgar has played both 8 . . . 1Wc7 9 ii.e3 b5 and 8 ...tt:Jfd7; these both look like better ways to go) 9 'ii e2 1Wc7 I O ii.e3 b5 l l O-O-O with advantage. In view of White's many options against 6 ... 1Wb6, it looks as though 6 f3 is safe enough and avoids the ... lbg4 lines men tioned in the next note. 6 e6 Or: a) 6 ... tt:Jg4 7 ilg5 h6 8 ii.h4 g5 9 ilg3 ilg7 (D) has been the subject of many grandmaster games, notably Kasparov's. The idea is to take White's dark-squared bishop away from its most effective diagonal and use the e5-square productively. Still, Black has weakened his kingside and the variation seems to have fallen out of favour, so we won't be looking into it here. b) 6 ...e5 is the typical Najdorf solution that we saw under 6 ii.e2 e5. A unique idea is 7 lbf3 ! ? ii.e7 8 ii.c4, which resembles 6 ii.e2 e5 except for three things: 1 ) White generally would like to play ilg5 in lines with lbf3, so as to weaken Black's con trol of d5. But here White has already moved

SICILIAN DEFENCE 213

[diagram]

[diagram]
Little-played alternatives are usually reveal ing, and here we have a couple of ideas to con sider: a) 7 ... lbbd7?! is the most natural continua tion for Najdorf players but they should under stand that it gets in the way when White pursues his normal English Attack: 8 g4! (D). Black would have liked to play ... b5 and ... lbfd7-b6 (compare the main line below for an 'explanation' of this bizarre idea). Unfortu nately, 7 ... lbbd7 means that he doesn't have

[diagram]

214 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

D)

is an important yet funny line. Now Black has no space, no pieces out after 1 2 moves, and his a-pawn is isolated ! This posi tion is a tribute to the central pawn-majority and the ...d6/ ...e6 structure. It also provides evidence for a recurrent idea: that an isolated a-pawn on

SICILIAN DEFENCE 215

an open file normally isn't a serious problem until the ending. 1 2. .. ii.e7 and now: b l ) 1 3 ii.e2 O-O 14 O-O ii.b7 1 5 Ilfal lbd7 1 6 lbb3 (really stacking up on the queenside in order to win that a-pawn; White finally wins it but all his forces are so diverted by that task that he leaves the rest of the board open) 1 6. .. l:rb8 !? 1 7 ii.a 7 l:rc8 18 tt:Ja5 ii.a8 1 9 ii.xa6 lbe5 ! 20 ii.e2 f5 ! with obvious compensation for Black, Anand-Kasparov, Kopavogur (rapid) 2000. b2) Anand tried to improve with 1 3 g5 ver sus Topalov in Wijk aan Zee 2004, when Dear ing suggests 1 3. .. ii.b7 ( 1 3. ..O-O 14 h4! was played, when h5 followed by g6 is a problem) 14 ii.e2 d5 1 5 e5 ltJd7 1 6 f4 lbb6 1 7 l:ra2 lbc4. Black appears to stand reasonably well. c) 1 0 O-O-O ltJ8d7 1 1 Yi'f2 ( 1 1 lbcxb5 !? axb5 12 lbxb5 is a wild sacrifice that is currently un der a cloud) l 1 ...ii.b7 1 2 ii.d3 l:rc8 1 3 'lt>bl ?! ( 1 3 lbce2 is the main line, when Black can de lay castling to get something going in the centre by 1 3. .. d5, 1 3. .. "Yi'c7 1 4 'lt>bl d5, or Kasparov's 1 3. .. lbc5) 1 3. .. l:rxc3 ! (another instance of the positional exchange sacrifice ... l:rxc3; it is played in other Sicilians, notably the Dragon) 1 4 bxc3 (D). Black's compensation is obvious with moves like ... lba4, ... Yi'a5 or ... "Yi'c7, ... tt:Je5, etc., in the air. What's worse, White can't undertake any thing useful, since as so often his rooks will be fairly useless until an ending, which probably isn't going to happen! 1 4. .. Yi'c7 (or 14 ... lba4!) 1 5 lbe2 ii.e7 1 6 g5 O-O 1 7 h4 lba4 and Black's attack was too powerful (even . . . d5 followed) in Movsesian-Kasparov, Sarajevo 2000. 9 Yi'd2 (D) From this point we'll follow a relatively re cent game. Anand - Kasimdzhanov Leon (rapid) 2005 9  tt:Jbd7 10 O-O-O ii.b7 11 h4 b4 12 lba4 Yi'a5 (D) After this comes a long sequence of theoreti cal moves. 1 2. ..d5 ! ? is a fascinating but very risky alternative.

13 b3 ltJcS 14 a3 l:rc8 15 Yi'xb4

15 axb4 lbxb3+ 1 6 lbxb3 "Yi'xa4 is the Main, Main Line! The games and analysis are fasci nating, but extend beyond 30 moves at points and are decided by details that don't have much to do with chess understanding. So I'll go with something cleaner: 15 .. Yi'c7 16 'lt>bl tt:Jfd7 17 lbb2 d5 18 Yi'd2 dxe4 1 8. .. tt:Je5 !? has also been played.

19 f4 lbf6 (D)

216 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

20 ii.e2! Credit this ' !' to Anand. He also mentions 20 l:tgl . Dearing has analysed 20 ii.h3 lbd5 21 M ! out to a wonderful position, although my ana lytical engines produce absurd-looking things like 2 1 ...ii.d6!? 22 bxc5 1Wxc5 with the idea 23 c4 xa3 24 lbc2 3 25 lbal lbc3+, leading to a repetition.  ltJdS 21 lbc4 tt:Jd7?! Anand claims a small advantage for White after 2 1 ...ile7 22 g5, and leaves 2 1 ...d8 with out comment. The opening is well past, so let's just visually enjoy the rest. 22 gS! tt:Jxe3 23 1Wxe3 ii.dS 24 hfl ii.cs 2S 'ji'c3? hxgS 26 ltJfS! ii.xc4? 27 lbxg7+ @e7 28 xc4 hg8 29 hxgS e3 30 rs ltJeS 31 fxe6 l:txg7 32 d7+! lbxd7 33 1Wxg7 1-0 I ntroduction to Systems with 2 . . . e6

[diagram]
lbf3 e6 (D) This advance of the e-pawn caught the atten tion of many early practitioners of the Sicilian Defence. Black threatens to challenge, if not take over, the centre by playing ...d5 next or within a few moves. The game as a whole takes on a different character with 2 ...e6 as opposed to 2 ...d6 or 2 ... lbc6. Naturally, it can transpose to the same lines and structures if an early ...d6 follows; but if not, Black has new options with respect to his development and overall strategy. One noteworthy difference with 2 ...e6 is that White has no ii.b5 option, as he does after 2 ... lbc6 and 2 ... d6. A few years back that might not have meant much, but ilb5 systems are in creasingly popular, and 2 tt:Jf3 lbc6 3 ii.b5 has even driven top-level grandmasters to change their preferred variations or at least their move orders. Another benefit has to do with the f8- bishop, which after 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:Jxd4 is now free to go to various positions such as c5 and M; both carry the prospect of more confronta tional chess than, say, 2 ...d6 offers. We also see a lot of early queen moves; for example, to c7 and b6 without first playing ...d6. Needless to say, 2 ...e6 comes with some negatives. On a smaller scale, Black has less flexibility in meeting the moves 3 c3 and 3 d3. It should be added that these moves pose no serious threat; however, Black may not get to choose the variation with which he is most comfortable (see below). And ... e6 does weaken the d6-square, which is a drawback in a num ber of lines, especially those in which Black delays ...d6. Moves such as lbb5 and ii.f4 can be problems, and in general White's move e5 can have more force in many positions since it can't be captured by a pawn. Oddly enough, the fact that 2 ...e6 cuts off the path of the c8-bishop isn't of great consequence. Normally that bishop will attempt to go to b7 or if necessary take its place on d7, and these are the usual squares in other Sicilian variations as well. Taken as a whole, 2 ...e6 is neither better nor worse than the alternatives, as can be seen from its percentage scores in various lines. 3 d4 The alternatives are not threatening but both sides might want to look into 3 c3 and 3 d3. These moves are good study material in any case because the positions are of a standard nature:

SICILIAN DEFENCE 21 7

a) After 3 c3, Black has to decide which anti-c3 method to choose. It's important to know something about the move-orders, especially when compared to 1 e4 c5 2 c3, which is cov ered in the Alapin section of this chapter. A big difference is that after 2 c3, Black can play 2 ... d5 3 exd5 Yi'xd5 4 d4 tt'Bf6 5 tt'Bf3 ilg4, a move that is no longer available when he plays 2 tt'Bf3 e6 3 c3 d5 4 exd5 Yi'xd5 5 d4. Further more, in the main lines after 2 c3 tt'Bf6 3 e5 tt'Bd5

4 d4 cxd4 5 cxd4, Black retains the option of

...d6 without ... e6. That isn't true after 2 tt'Bf3 e6

3 c3 tt'Bf6 4 e5 tt'Bd5. Thus Black needs to oper

[diagram]

2003. If White plays 8 ii.b3 instead, Black has

8 ...dxe5 9 tt'Bxe5 (9 dxe5 Yi'xd 1 + 1 0 ii.xd 1 tt'Ba6 ! and ... tt'Bc5 or ... tt'Bb4, another case in which de laying the development of the queen's knight is beneficial) 9 ... tt'Bc6 1 0 tt'Bxc6 bxc6 (D). Here we have a standard position from sev eral openings, with the backward c-pawn ver sus the isolated queen's pawn. Even if White were better developed than he is here, Black would have enough play by combining pressure down the b- and ct-files. In this position he can also liquidate the weaknesses and gain activity; for example, 1 1 O-O ii.e7 1 2 tt'Bc3 O-O 1 3 ii.c2 ii.a6 14 el c5 1 5 dxc5 Yi'xd l 1 6 xdl ii.xc5, Blatny-Shaked, Kona 1 998. a2) The other obvious response to 3 c3 is 3 ... d5, when 4 exd5 can lead to two unrelated set-ups: a2 1 ) Upon 4 ... Yi'xd5, we might get 5 d4 tt'Bf6 6 ii.d3 (6 ii.e2 tt'Bc6 7 ii.e3 cxd4 8 cxd4 ii.e7 9 tt'Bc3 Yi'd6 transposes to one of the lines stem ming from 2 c3; it is considered harmless) 6 ... tt'Bc6 7 ii.e3 cxd4 8 cxd4 ii.e7 9 tt'Bc3 Yi'd6 with analogous ideas to lines versus 2 c3; again, refer to the Alapin section. Of course there are options on every move. a22) Black can also play 4 ... exd5 5 d4 tt'Bc6, when an isolated queen's pawn position can easily follow: a22 l ) 6 ilb5 ii.d6 7 dxc5 ii.xc5 8 O-O tt'ige7 9 tt'ibd2 O-O 10 tt'Bb3 ii.d6 (D). We've transposed to the French Defence variation 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 tt'Bd2 c5 4 exd5 exd5 5 ilb5+ tt'Bc6 6 tt'igf3 ii.d6 7 dxc5 ii.xc5 8 tt'Bb3 ii.d6 9 O-O tt'Be7, except that White might not want to play 1 0 c3 in that case; that is, in the Si cilian 2 ...e6 3 c3 version he has committed to making that move before he might want to. This is a rather sophisticated thing to worry about for all but very experienced players; neverthe less, it makes the position easier for Black to play than it usually would be, and might give less-advanced players a feel for the consider ations that go into top-level opening play. At any rate, all the themes of isolated queen's pawns apply to the diagrammed position; for

218 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

In some ways White's rook is misplaced on el because it doesn't support the pawn-break f4 and is generally not useful against the Botvin nik structure, which consists of ... c5, ...d6 and

SICILIAN DEFENCE 219

... eS. Of course if the rook returns to fl , White is actually a tempo down on a King's Indian Defence position! Therefore White may well tum to the idea of queenside attack by a3 and b4 with an interesting struggle ahead. Let's return to 2 lbf3 e6 3 d4: 3 ...cxd4 4 lbxd4 (D) After 4 lbxd4, Black has a number of op tions, from which I shall choose two basic strat egies: the Sicilian Four Knights Variation, and the Paulsenffaimanov complex. Sicilian Four Knights

4. .

tt:Jf6 5 tt:Jc3 Not S eS? 'Yi'a5+ and 6 ... 'Yi'xeS.

5. ..

lbc6 (D) The Four Knights is a perfect example of a Sicilian line that emphasizes development over structure. That is true of only a couple of Sicilian variations, mostly old-fashioned and out of fa vour, so it is instructive to see how the players' considerations differ from those in the conven tional lines. The Four Knights itself is still play able but I should warn you that it probably falls short of equality after 6 lbxc6 bxc6 7 eS lbd5 8 lbe4, a highly tactical line that has been thor oughly tested in recent years. It makes sense that a variation that targets the weak d6-square would be a good weapon against this opening. However, we'll follow another variation that produces games with fundamental conflicts be tween positional and tactical ideas. Buchenthal - Rosen German Cht 197819 6 lbdb5 ii.b4 (D) At this point 6 ...d6 7 ii.f4 eS 8 ii.gs trans poses into the Sveshnikov Variation, which is more commonly arrived at via 1 e4 cS 2 lbf3 lbc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:Jxd4 lbf6 S lbc3 eS 6 ltJdbS d6 7 ii.gs. With the first move-order, both sides have made an extra move due to . . . e6-eS and ilf4-gS. The Sveshnikov contains all kinds of positional and tactical themes, but I felt it less instructive over a broad range of strengths than other variations of the Sicilian, so have not dis cussed it in depth in this book. 7 tt:Jd6+ 7 ilf4 leads to crazy tactics and lengthy the ory after 7 ...lbxe4 8 'Yi'f3 ! d5 9 lbc7+ 'lt>f8 1 0 O-O-O ii.xc3 1 1 bxc3 gS, which ultimately yields equal play according to the books and comput ers. By contrast, a notoriously dull line for both sides is 7 a3 ii.xc3+ 8 tt:Jxc3 dS 9 exdS exdS 10

220 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

D)

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
Also possible is simply 1 3. ..b6, with equal ity. 14 ii.a3+ @e8 15 iVcl a6! ? 16 c4 iVh5 17 f4?! 17 iVf4 looks better, with a highly unclear situation.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 221

17. ..

[diagram]

222 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

that this state of affairs also applies to the Tai manov Variation and to a lesser extent, every Sicilian line with pawns on a6 and e6. The modest difference in the case with ...d6 and ...e6 in is that the e6-pawn is easier to attack. After 4 ... a6, White's first decision is whether to: a) put a pawn on c4 and emulate the Mar oczy Bind; b) play for normal development by 5 lbc3; or c) wait to decide by playing 5 .Bd3. Playing Maroczy-Style

5 c4 lDf6 6 lbc3 .Bb4!? (D)

[diagram]

9 O-O e5 ! frees the c8-bishop and wins an

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 223

1 7 .l:.bl ?! .Be6 ! 18 .l:.xb7 O-O-O with ... .l:.d4 next.

17..

.Be6 Up to here we have theory. If Black is happy with this position then 5 c4 doesn't pose a prob lem for him. Otherwise Black should consider a positional approach, such as 6 ... 'V//l c7. The point is that you have to be ready for concrete lines but also understand positions like the one after

9 O-O e5.

Conventional Development 5 lDc3 'V//l c7 (D) 6 .Bd3 The most popular of several continuations, at least in club-level chess. a) I'll present just one example of 6 g3. Black could then transpose into a Taimanov or other Sicilian by 6 ... lbc6 or 6 ...d6, but he has a unique and effective move in 6 ... .Bb4 ! : 7 lDe2 lbf6 8 .Bg2 .Be7 (it's as if Black played ... .Be7 and White had his knight transferred to e2 with out using any time) 9 O-O O-O 10 h3 d6 (D). This position should be equal, since Black has his normal queenside expansion themes and White can't do much on the long diagonal. Generally White will tum his attention king side: 1 1 .Be3 lbc6 1 2 g4 (the beginning of an ambitious advance) 1 2. ..b5 1 3 f4 lbd7 14 lbg3 .l:.e8 15 'Vill d2 .Bb7 1 6 lDce2 (this is a sign that White doesn't know how to continue with his kingside attack and indeed there doesn't seem to be a good plan in that area of the board) 1 6. .. .l:.ad8 l 7 lDd4 lDxd4 18 .Bxd4 e5 ! (the standard manoeuvre) and now: al) Take a look at 19 .Be3 exf4 20 ii.xf4 lbe5 21 lDf5 .Bf6. We've seen this ideal set-up for Black before; ... lbc4 or ... lbg6 will come next. If White had any chance of equalling the effect of Black's domination of e5 and his threats to the e-pawn, he would have to have some pieces ready to come to d5, which is not realistic at the moment. a2) 19 .Bc3 d5 ! (the standard freeing move; White's position is falling apart) 20 @h l (20 .Ba5 .Bc5+ 21 @h2 .Bb6 22 .Bxb6 lDxb6) 20 ...dxe4 21 .Ba5 (21 fxe5 b4 with the idea 22 .Bxb4 e3) 2 1 ...lDb6! 22 'Vill c3 'Villxc3 23 bxc3 exf4 24 lbxe4 .Bxe4 25 .Bxe4 .Bc5 26 .Bd3 g5 27 .l:.ael .l:.c8 and Black is winning, Fontaine Svidler, French Cht 2003. b) 6 f4 b5 (the early fianchetto is a trade mark of the Paulsen; 6 ... lbc6 is another option in Taimanov-style) 7 .Bd3 .Bb7 8 'Vill e2 lbc6 9 lbxc6 'Villxc6 10 .Bd2 (the beginning of a medio cre plan; more interesting is 10 a3 .Bc5 1 1 .Be3 or 10 O-O .Bc5+ 1 1 '.th l lDe7 1 2 e5 ! ?) 10 ....Bc5

224 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

12. ..

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 225

[diagram]

17. ..

[diagram]

O-O,

[diagram]

226 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

plausible idea is ... .ii. .g7, ... tDe7 and ...d5; but if he can't get ...d5 in, Black can settle for ...d6, ... tDbc6, etc., when he has done reasonably well. That's not all. Are you ready for the outra geous 5 ... d5? In the few tests of this move thus far, no one seems to have come close to refuting it. Most games have gone 6 exd5 'iVxd5 7 O-O tDf6 (7 ....ii. .d7 ! ? in some sense gains a tempo, because now 8 tDc3?? allows 8 ... 'iVxd4 and there's no check; of course you may not want your bishop on d7) 8 tDc3 and now 8 ... 'iVd8, but Black could also play 8 ... 'iVd6 (D): Then Black has another of those 4:3 kingside pawn-majorities that we talk about in so many openings, including the French Defence Tar rasch line that this resembles so strongly. Com pare that variation: 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 tDd2 c5 4 exd5 'iVxd5 5 tDgf3 cxd4 6 .ii. .c4 'iVd6 7 O-O tDf6 8 tDb3 tDc6 9 tDbxd4 tDxd4 10 tDxd4. It would be a confirmation of the Paulsen's remarkable flexibility if Black could actually get away with (and equalize following) 5 ...d5. My feeling is that one of these many 5th move alternatives might be more rewarding than 5 ... tDf6, which allows White to set up a common and generally effective formation.

[diagram]
8 b3 .ii.

b.7 9 'iVe2 tDbd7 10 tDc3 g6! (duelling fianchettoes are common in this line, and the one on g7 hits the loose d4-square; perhaps White is a little better but that has to be demonstrated) 1 1 ilb2 .ii. .g7 1 2 l:.adl O-O 1 3 f4 e5 ! 1 4 fxe5 tDxe5 1 5 ii.bl l:.e8 and Black won his e5-square in Seitaj-Gheorghiu, Thessaloniki OL 1984. For his part, White's got a wonderful d-file to use, so he might claim equality. Then again, there's that awful bishop on bl which needs attention, so maybe Black has the better of it after all.

8.. .ii.

.b7 (D) This is a normal position, from which we'll follow a model game. P. Popovic - Pikula Banja Koviljaca 2002

9 f4 .ii.

.e7 10 'iVe2 This set-up introduces a strategy with which White has won many games. ... O-O 1 1 .ii. .d2 tDbd7? A fundamental mistake. l 1 ...tDc6 is much better, although still not problem-free.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 22 7

12 l:.ael (D) This is a great piece-formation for White. It's not that the attack is so powerful yet, but that Black hasn't a shred of queenside or central counterplay. 12 .. g6 Played to prevent a breakthrough by e5; it looks necessary. 13 f5! Now you can see why that knight was better off going to c6.

[diagram]
1 3. . .gxf5 1 4 exf5 e5 1 5 lDc2 l:.e8 1 6 lbb4 ! b5 l 7 lDbd5 doesn't look so bad at first, but af ter inevitable exchanges on d5 Black will be positionally lost. A good position to study; White will subsequently get space and two bishops, a deadly combination. 14 lbb3 'it>h8 15 fxg6 hxg6? (D) But 1 5. ..fxg6 1 6 .Bh6 is pretty bad. 16 l:.f3! White doubles, triples, occupies the outpost, and wins. 16 ... 'it>g7 17 l:.efl lDh7 18 'iVf2 'iVe8 19 lDd5! .Bxd5 20 cxd5 .Bg5 21 .Bc3 .Bd8 22 'iVe2! b5 Otherwise White simply takes the a-pawn and attacks on the queenside too. 23 lDaS lbg5 24 l:.g3 l:.h8 25 lDc6 .Bb6+ 26 'it>hl l:.h5? But Black won't like 26 ...f6 27 .Bd2! or 26 ... lbh7 27 .Bd2 lDb8 28 lDxb8 l:.xb8 29 l:.h3. 27 'iVxh5! gxh5 28 l:.xg5+ @rs 29 l:.xh5 'it>g8 30 l:.g5+ 'it>f8 31 .Bd2 f6 32 l:.g3 'it>f7 33 .Be2! 'iVh8 34 l:.h3 'iVg7 35 .Bh6 'iVh7 36 .Bh5+ 'it>g8 37 .Bg4 tt:Jrs 38 .Bxf8 'iVxe4 39 .Be6+ 'it>xf8 40 l:.xf6+ 'it>g7 41 l:.f7+ 'it>g6 42 lDe7+ 'it>g5 1-0 White stood much better all the way. This is a good piece-formation to remember. Taimanov Variation

1 e4 c5 2 lDf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lDxd4 lbc6 (D)

By deploying the knight to c6, Black breaks with the noncommittal Paulsen approach. He decides early upon the position of the queen's knight rather than keeping open the option of ... lDd7. He also allows White to play lDb5. In return, he has developed a piece, and his c6- knight limits White's options (for instance, the anti-Paulsen move 5 .Bd3 simply loses a piece here). We'll briefly examine White's three ma jor lines: 5 c4, 5 lDb5 and 5 lDc3.

5 g3 allows the freeing advance 5 ...

d5. Then 6 .Bg2 can be met by 6 ... .Bc5 ! 7 lDb3 .Bb6 8 exd5 exd5, a convincing pawn sacrifice for Black; for

228 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

example, 9 .Bxd5 (9 lDc3 lDge7 10 lbxd5 lbxd5 1 1 'iVxd5 'iVxd5 12 .Bxd5 lbb4) 9 ... 'iVe7+ 1 0 'iVe2 'iVxe2+ 1 1 @xe2 lbb4. Instead, the some what dull 6 ...dxe4! ? has been used in practice, achieving equality. 'Maroczy Lite'

5 c4 (D)

This advance is somewhat rare but leads to material that is potentially useful. White tries to set up a sort of Maroczy Bind. This is slow in the face of the rapid development that 2 ...e6 and 4 ... lbc6 makes possible, yet both sides must play accurately. 5 .. lDf6 5 ... 'iVh4 ! ? 6 lbb5 ! ? (6 lbc3 .Bb4) 6 ... 'iVxe4+ 7 .Be2 'iVe5 could get wild and woolly; if Black can get away with an extravagant move like 5 ... 'iVh4, it shows that the loss of time involved with 5 c4 is meaningful. 6 lDc3 .Bb4 7 lbxc6 White exchanges this so as to play .Bd3 and protect the e-pawn (we discussed this in the Paulsen section). It's important to see that Black is not committed to setting up a prepared forma tion with, say, ... 'iVc7 and ... a6. The Taimanov move ... lbc6 goes well with quick development. For instance, White can't simply make Maroczy Bind moves such as 7 f3?! O-O 8 .Be3, because 8 ...d5 ! ( D) is precisely the type of pawn-break that Black wants to make, and White needs to prevent, in any Sicilian Defence. Sometimes students are so intent upon set ting up some restricted Sicilian position with ...d6 and ...e6 that they forget about the basics. You don't see this kind of freeing move very often in the Sicilian because, behind the scenes, White makes his moves so that there is a spe cific drawback to ... d5, such as a multiple cap ture or e5. He is normally successful in doing this, and that' s why you seldom see an effective early ...d5 in any well-played Sicilian, including the Najdorf, Rauzer, Scheveningen, Dragon or for that matter Taimanov. This is obvious to a player accustomed to the Sicilian, but perhaps not to a newcomer who sees many games with ...d6 and ...e6 and assumes that Black just pre fers to play with less active pieces. In the dia grammed position White can't even maintain equality, as a short analysis will show you. Returning to 7 lbxc6 (D), Black has two re captures. 7 .. bxc6 Muzychuk - Gershon Dresden 2003

SICILIAN DEFENCE 229

[diagram]

9 O-O .Bc5

[diagram]

10. ..

[diagram]

19. ..h3! 20 .Bg3 dxc5 21 bxc5 .Bxc5 22 'ii'

[diagram]

230 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

9 .. ..Be7 10 .Bxf6 .Bxf6 l l 'Llc4 O-O! 12 xd6 c8! . White has invested a lot of time and the bishop-pair to win one pawn. There have been quite a few games from this position demon strating full compensation for the pawn. Black has very active pieces and White's are subject to attack. Also, Black may play ...a6 followed by ... tt'ld4 and dominate the board from that square. One illustration: 1 3 c3 l:.d8 1 4 c7 .Be7 1 5 xc8 l:.axc8 (Black's initiative persists even without queens) 1 6 'Llba3 ctJd4 ! 1 7 cxd4 .Bb4+ 1 8 'it>e2 .Bxc4+ 19 'Llxc4 l:.xc4 20 'it>f3 l:.cxd4 2 1 .Be2 l:.8d6! and Black eventually won an opposite-coloured bishop ending in Borisek-Navara, Balatonlelle 2003. 6 ... 'Llf6 7 'Lllc3 a6 8 'Lla3 (D)

SICILIAN DEFENCE 231

[diagram]

12 f4 (D)

[diagram]

131 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
20 e5 ctJfe4 21 ltJxd5.

18 h4! This is a different story, because ...g5 is pre vented. 18 ..ctJh7 19 'ifh2 A good move, and the natural 1 9 g5 also looks promising; e.g., 1 9. .. hxg5 20 hxg5 e5 21 ctJd5 i..xd5 22 cxd5 'ifb7 23 l:!.xc8 l:!.xc8 24 i..g4.

19. .ltJc5 (D)

20 'ifh3! Now 20 g5 can be answered by 20 ...f5 ! ? 21 i..h5 ltJxe4 22 ltJxe4 i..xe4 23 i..xe8 l:!.xe8 and Black possesses the terrible a8-h l diagonal. The text-move prevents ...f5. .. i..f6 20 ...g5?1 is met by 21 hxg5 hxg5 22 l:!.c2! and l:!.h2. 21 ltJabl g6 22 l:!.c2 i..g7 23 l:!.cd2 i..f8 24 g5 h5 25 i..f2 i..c6 26 ltJa3! (D) Terrific ! The knight heads towards its right ful square on d4. White has shown admirable patience throughout this manoeuvring stage. 26 ltJd7 27 ltJc2 ltJc5 28 ctJd4 i..b7 29 f5! Finally! White transforms his space advan tage into concrete gains.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 133

29. ..exfS 30 exf5 ll'le4 31 fxg6 fxg6 32 ll'lxe4

[diagram]

36. .

[diagram]

O-O, ...

[diagram]

15. ..

l:!.acS We're roughly at what might be considered the main line; at any rate, several high-level games have gone this way. Black should be

[diagram]

134 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

How about White? Taking the ... .itd8-c7, ... l:tg8, ...g5 idea first, White will first play 'lt>hl and .ltgl to guard h2, and then .itfl for potential second-rank defence by the queen. With that formation you can see that in our main game those first moves of the plan, ... .itd8-c7, can be difficult to implement. Furthermore, White's knight on a3 may not be badly placed to meet Black's strategy. With the queen on b8, for in stance, the moves l:tbl and b4 will discourage ... d5, when Black has to watch out for the move c5, followed in some cases by lllc4. Alterna tively, White can run his queenside pawns at Black by 'llc2 and b4, a4 and a5. Right in the middle of that process Black has to be able to strike in the centre based upon the looseness of White's queenside; whether he is able to do so resolves the question of who stands better. 16 .itfl (D) As explained, this clears the second rank, and the bishop might have been a target along the e-file anyway.

16 ... l:tfe8 Fun with move-orders: 1 6. .. 'ifb8 is right if Black's plan is to play ... .itd8-c7, but it's very unclear and involves a pawn sacrifice: 1 7 'lt>hl (l 7 'llc2 .itd8 !? 1 8 'ifxd6? .ltc7; there are plenty of options here) 1 7. .. .itd8 ! ? (or 17 ... l:tfe8) 1 8 .itf4 ( 1 8 'ifxd6! ? .ltc7 19 'ifd2 .itxh2 20 g4 'ifg3 ! ) 1 8. . . llle5 1 9 'ifxd6! ? .ltc7 20 'ifd2 'llh5 2 1 .lte3, and now 2 1 . . .'ll g6 22 g3 ! ? f5 ! is scary. Needless to say, this just scratches the surface. 17 'lt>hl 'ifb8 18 'll c2 lt:Je5 This time 1 8. .. .itd8? 1 9 'ifxd6 .ltc7 20 'ifd2 .ltxh2?? 21 g4 .lte5 22 g5 costs Black a piece.

19 b3 .lta8 20 .ltgl l:ted8?! 21 'lld4 .itf8?!

Black makes it difficult to protect b6 . 22 l:tel llled7 23 a3 .ltb7 24 b4 l:tc7 25 'llb3 .lta8 26 lt:Ja4! .ltc6 27 'll b2! Very original! c4 needs protection in a lot of lines and 'll d3 could be useful at the right time. 27  .lta8 28 .ltd4 l:tdc8 29 l:tedl .lte7 30 'iff2 'ib7? But 30 ...b5 3 1 llla5 ! is good for White. 31 'll a4 l:tb8 32 'll xb6! lllxb6 33 lll a5 'ifa7

(D)

34 c5 A nic combination. White wins his piece back with more to come. 34 dxcS 35 bxc5 lllc8 After 35 ... .ltxc5 36 .ltxc5 'll fd7 37 l:txd7 l:txd7 38 .ltxb6 White wins due to the back rank.

36 c6 l:tb6 37 l:tbl l:txbl 38 l:txbl 1-0

Conventional Development Lukin - Taimanov St Petersburg 1995

1 e4 c5 2 'll

f3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lt:Jxd4 'llc6 5 lllc3 White chooses the simple path. If Black plays 5 ... 'll f6 in this position, we return to the Sicil ian Four Knights. In spite of many fascinating struggles resulting from the most frequent con tinuation 5 ... 'ifc7, I'm going to forego that and explore only one set-up within the Taimanov Sicilian proper. 5 ...a6 (D) This sequence can sometimes transpose into the ... 'ifc7 lines. But Black often uses this move-order because he wants to play 6 ... lllge7 next, the system that Taimanov himself loved

SICILIAN DEFENCE 135

[diagram]

10. ..

.itd6! (D) It's not unusual for the dark-squared bishop to go to this square in the Paulsen and Taima nov. In general (i.e., in a broader context than this specific line), ... .itd6 has several points: a) It sometimes develops a piece with tempo by threatening ... .ltxh2+. Then if White replies

236 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

h3, he has weakened his kingside and failed to contest the f4-square. But upon g3, Black's ad vance ...h5-h4 can be extremely annoying. Fur thermore, the bishop can switch to the g l -a7 diagonal when called upon to do so. If White plays f4, a bishop on c5 may be very strong. b) Black's bishop controls important dark squares from d6; in some lines it goes to e5 in advance of moving the d-pawn, or it may go to f4 and trade bishops. The ending in that case is easier for Black than it looks provided he keeps his king in the centre. c) Black may also be able to delay f4, which is key to White's strategy. One theme in this re gard is ... ltJe5-g6, perhaps in conjunction with ...f6. Along those lines, it's worth noting that if White had avoided the exchange of knights on d4, then the same idea could be expressed by ... ltJge7-g6. By the time f4 is played (probably supported by the preparatory move g3), then Black will normally have ...b5 and ... .ltb7 in, so that White has some weakness on the long di agonal which will discourage him from playing e5. All this is rather exotic and clearly won't be achieved in one game, but it demonstrates the same sort of flexibility that we saw in the Paul sen Variation.

11 Whl (D)

Here's another typical set-up for Black: 1 1 ii h3 O-O 1 2 l:!.adl f6! 1 3 .Itel b5 ! ? ( l 3. .. b6 would prevent the next move). White now has a common tactic that must always be weighed by both sides: 1 4 .ltxb5 ! ? axb5 15 ltJxb5 .ltxh2+ 16 'ii xh2 'ii xh2+ 17 Rxh2 l:Ixa2 1 8 l:!.fel g5 ! 1 9 f3 ltJe5 (a pseudo-outpost) 20 Wgl .ltb7 21 ltJc3 l:Iaa8 22 Rf2 .ltc6 23 l:Ihl 1h-1h V.Miiki- 0st Hansen, Gj0vik 1985.

11...ltJeS

Not 1 1 ....ltxh2? 1 2 g3. However, 1 1 ...f6 1 2 .lte3 b5 1 3 f4 .lte7 14 e5 i s perfectly good, Nijboer-Van Mil, Dutch Ch (Eindhoven) 1 993. Sommerbauer then suggests that Black snatch the centre pawn and hold on to it by 1 4. ..fxe5 1 5 fxe5 ltJxe5 1 6 ii d4 .ltb7 1 7 l:!.adl l:!.f8, a contin uation admitting of some risk, of course. 12 ii d2 f6 13 .ith4 ltJg6 14 .ltg3 .ltxg3 It might be more Taimanov-like for Taima nov to have continued 14. .. ctJf4 looking for a dark-square grip following ...g5, with . . . b6, . .. .ltb7 and a kingside attack to follow; for ex ample, 1 5 .ith5+ Re7 1 6 l:!.adl .lte5 1 7 .itf3 g5, etc. 15 hxg3 b5 16 f4 .ltb7 17 .itd3 O-O The position is equal. Sozin Attack (and the Classical Sicilian)

[diagram]
The Sozin Variations are characterized by the move .ltc4, and can arise from either 2 ...e6 or 2 ...d6. The following variation is known as the 'Classical Sicilian' : 2 ... d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ltJxd4 ctJf6 5 ltJc3 ltJc6

(D)

This can include a variety of lines but the most important ones are the Richter-Rauzer Attack (6 .ltg5), and the Sozin Attack (6 .ltc4), which is the subject of this section. These moves both strongly discourage Black from playing ...e5.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 13 7

Instead, 6 .lte2 e5 ( D) is the Boleslavsky Variation, one of the original . . .e5 Sicilians that still discourages players from 6 .lte2. When compared to the Najdorf with 5 ...a6 6 Sl..e2 e5, it turns out that ... ltJc6 is usually more useful than ...a6. An example with typical cen tral themes: Apicella - Kramnik Moscow OL 1994

[diagram]
ltJc3 d6 6 .lte2 e5 7 ttJf3 h6 This is played to prevent 8 .ltg5, which would strengthen White's control of d5, although Black has done well enough with 7 ... .lte7 too. S h3 .lte6 9 O-O .lte7 10 .:!.el .l:.cS 11 .itfl liJbS!? (D) Delaying castling has certain positive ef fects. 12 ctJdS ltJxdS For one thing, this capture no longer loses a piece and Black retains his bishops. 13 exd5 .itf5 14 c4 O-O 15 'ifa4!? a5 And here the moves ... .l:.c8 and ... ctJb8 help to set up a blockade on c5.

16 a3 .itd7 17 'if

dl a4 lS b4 axb3 19 'irxb3 ltJa6 20 .lte3 'ifc7 21 a4 ltJcS! 22 .ltxc5 'irxc5 23 'ifxb7 .l:.c7 ( D) Black has the benefit of the bishop-pair. con trols the dark squares, and can play against the weaknesses on a4 and c4. Meanwhile White's fl -bishop is pathetically bad. All for a pawn. 24 'ifh3 :as 25 ltJd2 rs The central majority is a weapon in any line where a knight capture on d5 has bee n met by exd5. 26 ctJbl .lth4 27 g3 .itf6 2S ltJc3 e4 29 :al 'ifaS 29 ... .ltxc3 30 'ifxc3 .l:.xa4 is already bener for Black but Krarnnik wants more. 30 .:!.cl .lteS 31 .l:.cc2 lk5 32 ctJbS 'ifi>h8 Now even a pawn-storm by ...g5 and ...f4 be comes a possibility. 33 'ife3 'ifb4 34 ctJd4 .l:.ccS 35 ctJe6 .lha4 36 .l:.xa4 'ifxa4 37 .l:.d2 'ifal! 3S \t>g2 l:tbS 39 tDf4 .:!.bl 40 'ife2 .:!.el 41 .l:.a2 .l:.xe2 42 :xal lhf2+ 43 \t>xf2 .ltxal 44 \t>e3 @gS 45 ctJe6 g6 46 c5 .lteS 47 g4 .ltxe6! 48 dxe6 d5 And so forth - Black has three passed pawns! Another significant difference between 2 ... e6 and the Classical order (with 2 ... d6, 4 ... ctJf6 and 5 ... ctJc6, for example) is that after 6 .ltc4 in the latter instance, Black has the option of 6 ... 'iWb6 (the 'Benko Variation') rather than transposing to a Sozin by 6 ...e6. His idea is to disturb the

238 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

d4-knight. White can respond in a number of ways, but by far the most common one is 7 ctJb3, in order to protect the b-pawn and play .lte3; for example, 7 ...e6 8 O-O .lte7 9 .lte3 "fic7. As I describe elsewhere, this creates a sit uation in which Black seems to have wasted an important tempo by ... "iib6-c7, but White may make up for that by playing ctJb3-d4. Lines with ... "iib6 have become more popular over time for this reason.

[diagram]
Here both 4 ... ltJc6 5 ltJc3 d6 and the Najdorf move-order 2 ...d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ctJxd4 ctJf6 5 ltJc3 a6 circumvent the Keres Attack described in the next note, but of course they have their own peculiarities. 5 ltJc3 d6 (D) 6 .lte3

6 g4 is the Keres Attack, which has a high

reputation among players, and accounts for the fact that the Scheveningen with . . .e6, . . .d6 and ... ctJf6 (before other moves) is not played as much these days - Scheveningen lines more of ten arise by transposition from the lines men tioned in the previous note. However, I am using this sequence of moves in order to lay out some move-order issues and transpositions. Instead of 6 .lte3, for instance, 6 .ltc4 a6 transposes to the 6 .ltc4 Najdorf. The traditional 6 .lte2 can also transpose into other variations such as the Najdorf with . . . ltJbd7; but if . . . ltJc6 is played soon the varia tions take on their own character. One line is 6 .. .a6 7 O-O .lte7 8 f4 ltJc6 9 .lte3 O-O 10 a4 "fic7 1 1 \t>h l l:te8 1 2 .itf3 .itf8 1 3 fid2 ltJa5 ! ? ( 1 3. . . .itd7 develops simply and sensibly) 1 4 b3 ! (to stop . . . ltJc4) 14. .. l:tb8 1 5 l:tadl ( a posi tional mistake is 1 5 f5? ctJc6 ! 16 fxe6 fxe6 1 7 .ltg5 .lte7 1 8 l:tad 1 ltJe5, Hossain-Goloshcha pov, Dhaka 2003 ; in this position a major plus for Black is that d5 and f5 are unavail able to White's pieces) 1 5. .. ltJc6 (or 1 5. . . .itd7 with equality) 16 .itf2 (heading for g3 or h4) 16 . . . ctJd7? ! 1 7 .ltg3 ctJxd4 1 8 fixd4 b5 1 9 axb5 axb5 20 b4 g6 21 e5 ! d5 22 f5 ! gxf5 23 ctJxd5 ! "fic4 (23 ...exd5? 24 e6) 24 fid2 h6 25 h3 exd5 26 .itxd5 fixb4 27 c3 "fic5 28 l:txf5 l:te6 29 l:txf7 ! ctJb6 (29 ... @xf7 30 fif4+ \t>e8 31 .ltxe6 is decisive) 30 l:tdfl ctJxd5 31 l:txf8+ fixf8 32 l:txf8+ \t>xf8 33 fixd5 and White went on to win easily in Adams-Topalov, Wij k aan Zee 2006.

6. ..

ltJc6 7 .ltc4 (D) We have arrived at the Sozin Attack. It is sim ilar to the Najdorf 6 .ltc4 variation but Black's knight is on c6. That implies the possibility of earlier simplification by ... ctJxd4, which ren ders White's idea f4-f5 less effective. Black is also unlikely to have to worry about the sacri fice .ltxe6 that was a hallmark of the Najdorf line. And even the possibility of f4 followed by e5 can lose force because Black has a natural retreating and counterattacking square for his attacked knight on d7 . White has ample resources, the nature of which are completely dependent upon his choice of piece deployments, especially that of the queen. If she goes to f3, for example, Black will struggle to achieve ...b5 unless he exchanges on d4. But . . . ctJxd4 brings another piece to the cen tre, normally White's bishop, which then aims

SICILIAN DEFENCE 139

at Black' s king. In the absence of that exchange, the move f5 can still be effective. If White cas tles kingside he will almost certainly play f4 and aim for e5. But the most compelling varia tions arise when White castles queenside and plays his remaining attacking weapon, namely g4-g5. It is no coincidence that the g-pawn ad vance established itself in this variation some years back and presaged the flood of g4 attacks in the Sicilian and other openings. Somehow modem theory keeps settling upon that move as the most effective one in long-disputed attack ing variations. 7 ... i.e7 Here we'll show three games illustrating the ...e6/ ...t?Jc6 positions: one in which White cas tles king side, another in which his king stays in the middle of the board, and a modem one in which he plays O-O-O. Sozin with Kingside Castling Fischer - Spassky Reykjavik Wch (4) 1972

8 O-O

This introduces a traditional and still impor tant line. 8  O-O 9 i.b3 White has to watch out for 9 ...d5, and also for the trick 9 ... t?Jxe4! 1 0 t?Jxe4 d5, opening up the centre and freeing Black's game. 9 ... a6 (D) This position could also have come from 2 ... d6 via the Najdorf 6 i.c4 Variation, as it did in the main game that we are looking at.

10 f4 t?Jxd4 11 i.xd4

1 1 'ifxd4 runs into l 1 ...t?Jg4!.

11...bS! 12 a3

[diagram]

Here we have a quintessential old-style Si cilian scenario: White's forces aim at the king side, including his knight, queen, both of his bishops, and his rook on the open file. He would like to play 'ifg4 and tiJf6 (even as a sac rifice), and l:tad l , whereas the sacrifice llxf7 might easily enter into the picture. For his part, Black will be sure to target White's unsupported weakness on e5. Black's kingside is generally solid and his e6-pawn ne gates the pressure from White's b3-bishop. He would also like to simplify, beginning by ex changing off the bothersome knight on e4. be fore White can cause him tactical difficulties. In the meantime Black has his usual control of the c-file, supporting desirable moves such as ... t?Jc5 at the right moment. Play usually contin ues 1 5 tiJd6 ( 1 5 'if g4 i.xe4 1 6 'if xe4 t?Jc5 is equal) 15 ... i.xd6 1 6 exd6 'ifg5 17 l:tf2 ! (this protects the 2nd rank and prepares 'if d2; after any exchange of queens the two bishops will be a major advantage; 1 7 'ife2 e5 1 8 i.c3 'ifg6 has been analysed thoroughly following the Short Kasparov world championship match, leading to equality with best play) 1 7. ..a5 ! 1 8 'ife2 :a6! (White was threatening i.xe6) 1 9 i.c3 (or 1 9

140 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.Bxe6 l:!.xd6 with equality) with unclear play; perhaps 19 ... b4 20 .itd2 'ii c5 2 1 .itf4 is best. A great study line!

12. .. .ltb7 13 ii

d3 1 3 'ii el a5 ! with ... b4 next; then 1 4 ctJxb5? ! ltJxe4 (or 14. . .a4 and then . . . ltJxe4) conquers the centre and eliminates White's attacking chances. 13.aS! (D) This pawn sacrifice diverts White from the centre by threatening . . . b4. 14 e5?! The right spirit, but weakening. A better try is the aggressive 14 f5 !?, but then Black can counter by 14 ... b4 1 5 axb4 axb4 with approxi mate equality after 1 6 iib5. 14 . dxeS 15 fxe5 ltJd7 16 ltJxbS 1 6 ltJe4 .ltxe4 ! 1 7 'ii xe4 ltJc5 1 8 .ltxc5 .Bxc5+ 19 \t>hl ii d4; that pawn on e5 is a struc tural problem, so White has to be wary of too much simplification. 16 . ltJcS 17 J.xc5 J.xc5+ 18 \t>hl 'ii g5 ( D) In return for a pawn, Black's bishop-pair rakes the kingside and White's e5-pawn is weak. The opening has ended successfully for Spassky. I'll skimp on the notes as we proceed through the rniddlegame: 19 'ii e2 Here 1 9 'ii g3 ! 'ii xg3 20 hxg3 improves. Then 20 ... .lta6 21 a4 .ltxb5 22 axb5 .ltd4 is only nominally better for Black. 19 . l:!.ad8 20 l:!.adl l:!.xdl 21 l:!.xdl h5!? 21 ....lte3 ! 22 ctJd6 .ltc6 is better, when a cute line is 23 l:!.fl .ltf4 24 ii f2 'ii g4 ! with the idea of ... ii h3 !. 22 ltJd6?! .lta8 23 .ltc4 Not 23 l:!.fl ?! h4 24 ltJxf7? h3 ! 25 ltJxg5 hxg2+ 26 'ii xg2 l:!.xfl#. 23 h4 24 h3 .lte3 25 'ii g4 'fixes As the centre pawn falls, so does White's ability to control the enemy pieces and keep his own out of trouble.

26 ii xh4 g5! 27 'ii g4 .ltc5! 28 ctJbS \t>g7 Now ... l:!.h8-h4 looms. 29 liJd4 (D) 29  l:!.h8?! But now 29 ... l:!.d8 ! 30 c3 ii e3 ! was terribly strong. Spassky's model use of the bishop-pair falls short only for tactical reasons. 30 ctJf3 .itxf3 31 ii xf3 .itd6? 3 1 .. .l:!.h4 ! may still have been winning, one line being 32 l:!.fl l:!.f4 33 ii e2 l:!.xfl + 34 ii xfl .itd6 (34 ... ii xb2) 35 \t>gl ii h2+ 36 \t>f2 .ltc5+ 37 @el 'ii e5+ 38 ii e2 ii xb2 and the opposite coloured bishops are still helping Black. 32 ii c3! 'ii xc3 33 bxc3 .lteS 34 l:!.d7 6 35 \t>gl and the game was drawn shortly thereafter.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 241

Short - Kasparov London PCA Wch (12) 1993 8 .ltb3 O-O 9 f4 a6 10 'iff3 This attacking move used to be popular, un derstandably, since it gets ready to castle queen side and blow the opponent off the board. But the queen on f3 is subject to harassment on the long diagonal, especially in the game line.

10. 

ltJxd4 11 .ltxd4 b5 (D) 12 .itxf6!

12 e5 dxe5 hits the d4-bishop, almost forcing

1 3 .ltxe5 ( 1 3 'ifxa8 'ifxd4 1 4 'iff3 exf4 already gives Black two pawns, the bishop-pair and a load of weaknesses to work on, all for an ex change) 1 3 . .. l:!.a7 ! 1 4 l:!.dl l:!.d7 1 5 O-O .ltb7 with the better pawn-structure and position.

12. .. .itxf6! 13 e5 .lth4+ 14 g3 l:!.b8! (D)

15 gxh4 The superiority of Black's pawn-structure shows in lines like 1 5 l:!.fl .lte7 1 6 O-O-O b4! (or 1 6. .. .ltb7) 1 7 exd6 bxc3 18 dxe7 cxb2+ 19 b2 'ifxe7 with the idea of ... a5, ... .ltb7 and ... l:.fc8.

15. ..

.ltb7 16 ltJe4 dxe5! Threatening ... 'ifd4 among other moves. 17 l:!.gl g6 18 l:!.dl .ltxe4 19 'ifxe4 'irxh4+ With an attack. At the very least Black can get three pawns for the piece, but White bas some activity, so an assessment of 'equal' seems fair. Many similar tactical themes appear in the positions with ...e6 and ... b5. Velimirovic Attack 8 'ife2 (D)

[diagram]

242 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1967. It isn't too stunning by Velimirovic At

tack standards, but since most of the fun in this section will be White's, I'll show how Black fights back when apparently lost: 10 .Bb3 ctJxd4 l l .Bxd4 .Bd7 1 2 @b l .Bc6 1 3 f4 .l:.ad8 14 .l:.hfl b5 15 f5 b4 16 fxe6 bxc3 17 exf7+ @h8 18 .l:.f5 1ii b4 19 'iiV fl lbxe4 20 a3? (20 1ii f4!) 20 ... 1ii b7 2 1 1ii f4 .Ba4! ! (a brilliant move that turns the tide) 22 1ii g4 .Bf6 23 .l:.xf6 .Bxb3 0- 1 .

9 O-O-O (D)

[diagram]

9 ...O-O

[diagram]

SICILIAN DEFENCE 243

[diagram]

12 g4 ctJxd4

[diagram]

MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.,.,, _ _,_....U of these games will give J1119- s lbe best possible lessons in Sicil ian tactics and combinations. 13 .i.xd4 bS 14 gS b4 15 Yi'hS ctJeS (D) After 1 5. ..bxc3, there's nothing fancy: 1 6 l:t.d3! and wins.

16 f4 lbg6 17 fS! lbf4

A wonderful variation that you shouldn't miss: 17. .. bxc3 1 8 .l:.dfl ! cxb2+ 19 @b1 lbe5 20 .l:.f4 f6? 21 .l:.h4 lbc4 22 .Bxc4 "Yi'xc4 23 Yi'xh7+ @f7 24 Yi'g6+ @g8 25 Yi'xg7+! @xg7 26 gxf6++ @f7 27 .l:.g7+ @e8 28 .l:.xe7+ @d8 29 .Bb6+ Yi'c7 30 .Bxc7#.

18 Yi'f3 eS 19 g6! ! (D) 19 . bxc3 The variations are amazing: l 9 ...hxg6 20 Yi'xf4! exf4 21 .l:.xg6 and Black is helpless; l 9 ... .Bf6 20 Yi'xf4! exf4 (20 ...exd4 21 Yi'h6! !) 21 .Bxf6 @h8 22 .Bxg7+ @xg7 23 gxf7+ @h6 24 .l:.d3. 20 Yi'xf4! @h8 After all those ideas, 20 ...exd4 21 Yi'h6! looks pedestrian. 21 gxf7 .Bf6 22 .l:.xg7! .Bxg7 Or: 22 ... .Bxf5 23 .l:.xh7+ !; 22 ... .Be6 23 .Bxe6 .Bxg7 24 f6 .l:.xf7 25 .Bxf7 Yi'xf7 26 fxg7+ Yi'xg7 27 .Bxc3.

23 f6 Yi'd8 24 .l:.gl 1-0

The above presentation may have been self indulgent, but those attacks are the Velimirovic Attack, and to understand them is to understand the variation. More significantly, the same at tacking themes quickly spread to the practice of the Sicilian Defence in general and appear in multitudinous variations today. Accelerated Fianchetto

[diagram]
ctJf3 ctJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ctJxd4 g6 (D) This system is similar to the Dragon (into which it often transposes), so my treatment will mainly concern White's most important chal lenge to Black's move-order, one that is not available in the Dragon: 5 c4 This variation is known as the 'Maroczy Bind', and indeed the same name is often ap plied to White's pawn-structure when it arises in other openings. Before moving on to it, let me point out a few unique features in the Accelerated Fianchetto after the normal-looking 5 lbc3 .Bg7, which is loaded with tricks and positional traps: a) After 6 ctJb3, 6 ... ctJf6 7 .Be2 O-O 8 O-O d6 leads us back to a Classical Dragon. Instead,

SICILIAN DEFENCE 245

the Accelerated Fianchetto move-order gives Black another option in 6 ... .Bxc3+! ? 7 bxc3 ctJf6, trying to exploit White's doubled c-pawns at the cost of losing the important dark-squared bishop; see the section of Chapter 3 devoted to doubled c-pawns for a short discussion of pre cisely this position. b) 6 .Be3 ctJf6 ( D) and then: bl) 7 f3? ! O-O 8 1ii d2, in order to get into a Yugoslav Dragon, allows Black to free his game immediately in the classic fashion: 8 ...d5 ! and White should probably simplify by 9 exd5 ctJxd5 10 lbxc6 bxc6 1 1 ctJxd5, with rough equality, before he stands worse due to the weaknesses that f3 has created; see how Black has saved a tempo by playing ...d5 rather than ... d6 and ... d5. b2) Likewise, the Classical moves 7 .Be2 O-O 8 O-O can be answered by 8 ...d5 !. b3) Therefore White might want to play in the style of the Reversed Dragon by 7 ctJb3 O-O 8 .Be2, if slower play is his inclination. b4) 7 .Bc4 (D) and then: b4 1 ) At this point the move 7 ... ,.a5 has some other tricks associated with it. For exam ple, 8 1ii d2? lbxe4 ! 9 lbxc6 1ii xc3 ! !, or 8 f3? 1iib4! 9 .Bb3 ctJxe4 !. White should simply play

8 O-O O-O 9 ctJb3 1ii

c7 10 f4 d6 1 1 .Be2 with a sort of Classical Dragon in which the queen is arguably a little misplaced on c7. This line has proven a disincentive for those who are consid ering playing 7 ... 1ii a5. b42) Black usually plays 7 ... O-O 8 .Bb3! (an other trick is 8 f3 'iiV b6 ! with the ideas of . . . fue4 and ... lbg4 as well as the direct ..... xb2) 8 .. . d6 (Black has speculative options such as 8 . .. a5 !?. an extremely complicated line; however, top masters who have specialized in that move have usually abandoned it) 9 f3 .id? 10 .. d2. This gives Black one extra opportunity to steer clear of the main lines: 10 ... lbxd4 ! ? 1 1 .i.xd4 b5 with a complicated game that seems to favour White slightly. On the flip side, many players and theoreticians feel that 10 ... l::t c8 1 1 h4! saves a critical tempo over 1 1 O-O-O and leads to an advantage for White. This is all in the boo ks (or at least most of it is), and will certainly repay study. We now return to 5 c4 ( D ): After 5 c4, White has a large space advan tage that will usually dominate the centre for as long as White maintains the c4/e4 structure. On the negative side, he has a weakness on d4 (much as in a queen's pawn opening where White plays d4, c4 and e4). White's plan is to use his superiority in space to expand and throt tle Black's position. All three areas of the board are available, but he will normally use the centre and queenside. Many endgames favour White.

246 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

and in particular Black has to be sure that with his queen on a5 and White's on d2, the move tZ'Bd5 won't be effective. Black would like to achieve the break ...b5 in order to chip away at White's centre; obviously this usually involves ...a6. Sometimes he can play .. .f5 for the same purpose, but that is un common until later in the game. Finally, he would like to work on the dark squares, espe cially in view of the unprotected state of d4. Some specifics follow: 5 .. i..g7 Bareev - Pavlovic Plovdiv Echt 2003 This is the traditional main line of the Mar oczy Bind. 5 ... tZ'Bf6 6 tbc3 d6 (6 ... tZ'Bxd4 7 Yi'xd4 d6 is another well-known idea, when White has vari ous ways to proceed, including 8 i..g5 i..g7 9 Yi'd2) 7 i..e2 tbxd4 8 Yi'xd4 i..g7 9 i..e3 O-O 1 0 Yi'd2 i..e6 1 1 O-O Yi'a5 12 .l:.ac l ( 12 .l:.fc 1 puts both rooks on the queenside, which seems a good idea; White would like to play f3 and in some cases .l:.abl and/or tZ'Bd5; for instance, 12 ... .l:.fc8 1 3 f3 ! with the idea 1 3. .. i..xc4? 1 4 tZ'Bd5) 1 2. . JHc8 (D). We have reached a standard position. Here's an example of a successful anti-Maroczy Bind idea for Black: 13 b3 a6 1 4 f3 ( 1 4 f4 b5 1 5 f5 is a highly-charged line with plenty of theory to study) 1 4. ..b5 ! 1 5 tZ'Bd5 (after 1 5 cxb5 axb5 1 6 tZ'Bxb5 { 1 6 i..xb5 .l:.xc3 1 7 "Yi'xc3 Yi'xb5 and Black has won material } 1 6. .. Yi'xd2 1 7 .l:.xc8+ i..xc8 1 8 i..xd2 .l:.xa2 Black has the more active position) 1 5. .. Yi'xd2 1 6 i..xd2 tZ'Bxd5 1 7 exd5 ( 1 7 cxd5 i..d4+ 1 8 @hl i..d7 with equality) l 7 ... i..d4+ 1 8 @h l i..d7 and Black has no prob lems, Uribe-Perelshteyn, Oropesa del Mar U- 1 8 Wch 1 998. 6 i.. e3 6 tbc2 ! ? tZ'Bf6 7 tZ'Bc3 can be a very irritating sequence for Black because it prevents ex changes and increases White's control over d5. The succeeding play is rather technical, but White will continue i..e2, O-O, and aim to gain more space by b4, while Black will play ...

O-O,

... d6, perhaps with ...a5 and ... i..e6 depending upon what White does. The analogous Rubin stein Variation of the English Opening goes 1 c4 c5 2 tbc3 tbf6 3 g3 d5 4 cxd5 tZ'Bxd5 5 i..g2 tZ'Bc7 6 tZ'Bf3 tZ'Bc6 7 O-O e5. Even a tempo down, Black has reasonably good prospects. Incidentally, if Black likes one of the options with an early ... tZ'Bxd4, that exchange will pre vent the tZ'Bc2 variation. 6. tZ'Bf6 7 tZ'Bc3 O-O 8 i.. e2 d6 9 O-O i..d7 9 ... tbxd4 10 i..xd4 i..e6 is a long-studied line which has lost some of its popularity. Needless to say, that may be only a temporary situation. 10 Yi'd2 tZ'Bxd4 11 i..xd4 i..c6 12 f3 (D) White's development has been natural and normal. He still controls more space and is ready to attack in the centre and on the queen side.

12. ..aS

Preparing to take over the dark squares.

13 b3 tZ'Bd7!

This is the point of Black's system: he wants to end up with a wonderful knight on c5 oppos ing a restricted light-squared bishop.

SICILIAN DEFENCE 247

14 i.e3! 14 i.xg7 @xg7 used to be played, but White wants to keep his good bishop in order to sup port his queenside play. Otherwise he has noth ing to challenge the c5-knight with. . lbcs (D) 15 abl The basic idea is simple: fc 1, a3 and b4. The execution turns out to be more complicated. 15 ... 1ii b6 More dark-square control. He wants to re strain b4, and also to connect rooks. 16 fcl fc8 17 c2! 17 a3? lbxb3 ! 18 i.xb6 ctJxd2 19 b2 lbxc4 ! 20 i.xc4 i.d7 turns out to be good for Black. Now White is ready for a3. 17 ... 1ii d8! 18 i.fl After Black's last move, 18 a3 a4 ! 19 b4 ctJb3 is unclear.

18. ..hS! ?

[diagram]

19. .. @h7 20 lbe2!?

[diagram]

248 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

some respects by limiting White's options: spe cifically, White has to commit his bishop to c4 and has lost the opportunity to play the popular antidote to the Dragon involving 9 O-O-O. But Black needs to be clear that he can only avoid the 9 .Bc4 version of the Yugoslav Attack by playing sidelines such as 8 ... a5, which are un likely to equalize fully. None of this should discourage a player who is below master level, of course. There will al ways be plenty of winning chances against av erage competition, even with the Maroczy Bind. I do think, however, that you probably won't want to play this system for life. Alapin Variation l e4 c5 2 c3 (D) Known as the 'Alapin Variation' , 2 c3 partic ularly appeals to those turned off by the mas sive theory associated with the Open Sicilian. On the positive side, White tries to build up a centre with minimal risk. Generally, however, 2 c3 lacks punch and might not appeal to the at tacking player. My stated philosophy in this book is to exam ine the most 'important' openings, especially older and established ones that have played a leading role for many years. For the purposes of presenting a Sicilian variation that isn't in that mould, I've chosen the Alapin Variation instead of, for instance, the Closed Sicilian, because it has some universal ideas that are applicable to other lines in this book and opening study in general. The main responses are 2 ... d5 and 2 ... tZ'Bf6. We' ll have only a partial look at those but with relevant details. Other fairly respectable con tinuations include 2 ... b6, 2 ...d6 (and perhaps even 2 ... 1ii a5 ! ?), but I'll skip those and talk briefly about some alternatives that are better known: a) 2 ...e6 is discussed under the order 2 tZ'Bf3 e6 3 c3 in the 'Introduction to 2 ...e6' , except for the line 3 d4 d5 4 exd5 ( 4 e5 is the Advance French, an important transposition to bear in mind) 4 ... exd5 (4 ... 1ii xd5 will usually trans- pose) 5 .Be3 when 5 ... cxd4 6 .Bxd4 tZ'Bc6 7 .Bb5 a6 is considered equal. The plan discussed via the 2 tZ'Bf3 move-order of 5 ... c4 still has the ef fect of making .Be3 look like an unnecessarily passive move and with care to bring his pieces out quickly Black should stand satisfactorily. b) 2 ...g6 3 d4 cxd4 4 cxd4 d5 will often transpose to the variation 1 e4 c5 2 tZ'Bf3 g6 3 c3 .Bg7 4 d4 cxd4 5 cxd4 d5. The main lines are 5 exd5 (5 e5 .Bg7 is similar to the transposition mentioned; then 6 tZ'Bf3 .Bg4 7 .Bb5+ tZ'Bd7 has been played, among others) 5 ... tZ'Bf6 6 tbc3 (6 tbf3 tZ'Bxd5 7 tZ'Bc3 .Bg7 comes directly from that line) 6 ... .Bg7 7 .Bc4, when Black chooses his method of regaining the pawn: ...a6, or ... tZ'ibd7 and ...tZ'Bb6. According to current knowledge, he is able to get a quite playable game and come close to achieving full equality. Counterattack with . . . dS 2  d5 3 exd5 1ii xd5 4 d4 tZ'Bf6 4 ...tZ'Bc6 5 tZ'Bf3 .Bg4 is also played, when one ambitious line for White is 6 .Be2 cxd4 7 cxd4 e6 8 tZ'Bc3 'iiV a5 9 h3 .Bh5 1 0 d5 !? but 1 0. .. exd5 1 1 tZ'Bd4 tZ'Bxd4 ( l 1 ....Bxe2) 1 2 .Bxh5 tZ'Bc6 was easy enough (and equal) for Black in Nayer Lautier, Khanty-Mansiisk FIDE WCup 2005. 5 tZ'Bf3 (D) 5   .tg4 5 ... tbc6 is an important alternative for those who are unhappy with some aspect of 5 ....Bg4, perhaps 6 dxc5 in the next note. Play usually continues 6 .Be2 cxd4 (or 6 ...e6 7 O-O cxd4) 7 cxd4 e6 8 tZ'Bc3 1ii d6 9 O-O .Be7. Black wants to play ...O-O, ...b6 and ... .Bb7, with ... .l:.fd8 in some cases. White can build up by .Be3, 1ii d2 and .l:.fd 1, but his position would contain little dynamic potential. Therefore White sometimes

SICILIAN DEFENCE 249

tries to force the pace: 10 ctJb5 'iiV d8 (10. .. 1ii b8 !? 1 1 g3 ctJd5 1 2 .Bc4 a6 1 3 .Bxd5 axb5 14 .Be4 favours White's active pieces) 1 1 ctJe5 ! ? ( 1 1 .Bf4 ctJd5 1 2 .Bg3 O-O { or 12 ...a6} 1 3 .Bc4 a6 14 .Bxd5 exd5 1 5 ctJc7 .l:.b8 with equality) 1 1 ...O-O ( l l ....Bd7 1 2 ctJxd7 'iiV xd7 1 3 .Be3 O-O is also fine: d5 is permanently blockaded) 12 lbxc6 bxc6 13 ctJc3 .l:.b8 (D ). We see this kind of position in several open ings. As long as Black can develop quickly and use the b-file, his isolated c-pawn is not a prob lem. White's d-pawn is just as exposed and is obviously not going anywhere if Black doesn't exchange it. Neither side can claim much, if any, advantage, but either side can play for a win. 6 .Be2 6 dxc5 was brought to the forefront about a decade ago and has enjoyed a steady popular ity. That may say less about the move's merits than it does about White's difficulties in getting an advantage with 2 c3. In any case, the main line goes 6 ... 1ii xc5 ( 6 ... 'iiV xd 1 + 7 @xd 1 e5 8 b4 e4 9 h3 has been tested and argued about for some years now; most players seem to shun it as Black) 7 ctJa3 (7 .Be3 1ii c7 8 h3 .Bh5 9 ctJbd2 ctJbd7) 7 ... ctJbd7 8 h3 .Bh5 9 .Be3 1ii c8! and Black should have a satisfactory position. That assessment is not shared by everyone, however. 6 ...e6 7 .Be3

7 c4 1ii

d7 only serves to expose White's cen tre. 7  cxd4 Now that 8 dxc5 is a threat (in some cases c4 is as well), Black exchanges. But by delaying he has committed White's bishop to the rather passive post on e3. 8 cxd4 ctJc6 9 ctJc3 1ii d6 (D) This retreat is better than another (for exam ple, 9 ... 1ii d8) for two reasons: it stops the active move .Bf4 and allows Black to increase the pressure on White's d-pawn after ... .l:.d8 at some point. The dark-squared bishop belongs on e7 anyway.

10 O-O .Be7

We've reached a standard isolated pawn posi tion in which White will pit his activity against Black's more static advantages, primarily pres sure on the isolated queen's pawn and well placed pieces. White may nudge Black's bishop to h5 by h3 and reserve the move g4 for later. He sometimes builds up by means of 'iiV b3 fol lowed by bringing a rook to d l . We saw many examples of this type of position in the intro ductory chapters. This particular one appears unpromising for White, since his pieces are less active than in those positions and d5 will be ex tremely hard to achieve.

250 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

The 2 . . . lbf6 Variation 2 . lbf6 3 es liJdS (D) This set-up resembles an Alekhine Defence, and Black would very much like to have ...c5 in if he were playing that opening ! But it's not so simple, because White is not intending to kick the d5-knight around with pawns when he can develop his pieces instead. The Alapin with 2 ... ctJf6 can lead to rather theory-heavy play. Here's an outline of some of the wide range of continuations: 4 d4 4 ctJf3 lbc6 5 ii.c4 ctJb6 6 ii.b3 c4 7 ii.c2 g5 ! ? is another eccentric line; current theory has it as equal, whatever that means in such an unbal anced position. 4 ... cxd4 The usual starting-point. Only a 2 c3 special ist would know if White has any way to squeeze something from the position. 5 ctJf3 White can also play the direct 5 cxd4 d6 (5 ...e6 6 ctJc3 lbxc3 7 bxc3 'Ji/Bc7 8 .Bd2 b6 has been a popular system in the past) 6 ctJf3 lbc6, when a traditional line is 7 .Bc4 (or 7 ctJc3 lbxc3 8 bxc3 e6) 7 ... ctJb6 (7 ... e6) 8 .Bb5 dxe5 9 lbxe5 .id? I O .Bxc6 .Bxc6 l l ctJxc6 bxc6, giv ing us the standard structure discussed above in the 2 ...d5 line. The game is equal. 5 ... ctJc6 (D) 5 ...d6 6 cxd4 e6 leads to a line discussed in the introduction to the 2 ctJf3 e6 section. 6 .Bc4 6 cxd4 d6 7 ctJc3 can be met by 7 ...e6 8 ctJxd5 exd5 with equality.

6. . ctJb6

If Black plays 6 ...e6 7 cxd4 d6, we again have the line referred to in the note to 5 ... ctJc6. 7 .Bb3 d5 Capturing the offered pawn by 7 ...dxc3 8 lbxc3 is risky. 8 exd6 'Jilixd6 (D) Black is generally thought to have equality here, although as usual there are lengthy analy ses of variations which, fortunately, your aver age opponent will never have heard of.

9 O-O

Among many other established lines is 9 ctJa3 a6 1 0 O-O .Be6 1 1 .Bxe6 'Ji/Bxe6 with equal ity. 9 . .Be6 10 .Bxe6 'Ji/Bxe6 1 1 ctJxd4 ctJxd4 12 'Jilixd4 .i::t d8 13 'Ji/Bh4 'Ji/Be2 14 ctJd2 Now Black can play 14 ... h5 ! ? or 1 4. .. g6, both of which have been satisfactory for him. Nevertheless, White may be interested in play ing such a position because it's double-edged enough to be interesting. 1 2 Caro-Ka n n Defence l e4 c6 (D) This is the official starting-point for the Caro-Kann. Now 2 d4 is played in a clear ma jority of games, though naturally White can try to react to the idea of 2 ... d5 in other ways. As always, these early deviations can be very edu cational, and one of them sets up a respectable structure that is played on a regular basis: Caro-Kann Two Knights 2 ctJf3

2 c4 is another important alternative to the

main lines: 2 ...d5 (2 ... e5 3 ctJf3 d6 4 d4 is some sort of Old Indian Defence that most Caro Kann players won't be comfortable with) 3 exd5 cxd5 usually transposes to the Panov At tack by means of 4 d4 - see later in this chapter. White can also try 4 cxd5, when 4 ... 1ii xd5 loses a tempo after 5 ctJc3. However serious that may or may not be, White will follow up with d4 and some advantage; e.g., 5 ... 1ii a5 6 d4 ctJf6 7 ctJf3

This compares well for White with a Scandi navian Defence ( 1 e4 d5 2 exd5 1ii xd5 3 ctJc3 1ii a5 4 d4 ctJf6 5 ctJf3), because Black cannot re strain White's centre by the useful ...c6. In re turn, White has no pawn on c2. But in the Scan dinavian, the c2-pawn can be a disadvantage for White for a couple of reasons. For one thing it's a target of a bishop on f5 and sometimes a knight on b4; but more significantly it's not up on c4 to make the centre more mobile, nor on c3 where it would protect White's d4-pawn. Furthermore, you should note that without a c pawn, White has the handy move 1iib 3 if Black's c8-bishop strays from the queenside. Thus, instead of 4 ...1ii xd5, Black almost al ways plays 4 ... ctJf6 5 ctJc3 (5 i.b5+ will even tually lead to White losing back his d-pawn after either 5 ... i.d7 or 5 ... ctJbd7; in the latter case, ... a6 and either . . . b5 or ... ctJb6 can fol- low) 5 ... lbxd5 6 d4 and we're back to the iso- lated queen's pawn position that characterizes the Panov Attack. The text-move (2 ctJf3) is easily White's most promising independent try and deserves a look for those who want a somewhat less-travelled path. 2 ... d5 3 ctJc3 (D) This sequence tries to use piece-play and quick development to cause Black discomfort. For instance, line 'a' in the next note is a good example of this. 3 ... i.g4 This is most players' choice. Otherwise: a) If Black plays 3 ...dxe4 4 lbxe4 i.f5?!, White shows the benefit of his quick develop ment by harassing the bishop with 5 ctJg3 i.g6

252 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

6 h4 threatening h5. Compare this with the

[diagram]

[diagram]

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 253

happy to have exchanged his light-squared bishop, since he will be setting up his pawns on light squares. Play can develop along several lines. 5 ... e6 Another set-up begins with 5 ... lt:Jf6 6 d3 e6. White's bishops don't have any exceptionally good squares, and while White gets reorga nized Black will get all his pieces out and play ... e5, trading space and active pieces for the two bishops. A good piece organization for Black to achieve that is ... lt:Jd7, ...g6 and ....i.g7.

6 d4 (D)

[diagram]

D)

Black sets up the kind of restraint structure that is seen in the Slav, Scandinavian and other defences: pawns on light squares to comple ment the dark-squared bishop while restraining White's centre. As in those openings, one idea is to get developed quickly and play either ... c5 or ... e5. See the Chapter 3 on structures for some examples. Let's now tum to the main lines.

1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 (D)

The Caro-Kann resembles the French De fence in that Black places a pawn on d5 on the second move and forces White to decide what to do with his e4-pawn: advance, exchange, defend

254 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

or gambit. Some of the resulting positions are quite similar. It has also been said that the Caro Kannresembles the Slav because l ...c6 takes away the 'best' square c6 from the knight, but keeps an open view for his light-squared bishop. Not surprisingly, however, the characters of the positions arising from 1 e4 and 1 d4 turn out to be radically different: there isn't a Slav Advance Variation, and e4 by White is a rarity in the Slav. In any event, 2 ... d5 compels a response. I'll be looking at 3 exd5 (both the Exchange Varia tion and Panov Attack) and 3 e5, the Advance Variation. I think that those variations are the most useful and consistent in terms of this book's organization. I won't be dealing with the 3 tl:Bc3 main lines, although naturally they're full of wonderful ideas. I'm also leaving out the 'Fantasy Variation' 3 f3, although it has its points of interest. A curious positional compar ison arises after 3 f3 e6! ? 4 tl:Bc3 i.b4 (these are not the only moves, of course), when 5 e5(?) c5 is actually a good version of the French De fence because White's 'extra' tempo due to ...c6-c5 has been used for the awful move f3, which not only loosens White's kingside but takes away f3 for the knight and cuts off White's queen from the kingside. Exchange Variation 3 exd5 cxd5 (D) An enormously instructive variation, the study of which will benefit all chess-players. We'll look at White's slow build-up with c3, and then tum to the more aggressive Panov At tack with c4. The c3 Systems 4 i.d3 tl:Bc6 5 c3 This more conservative development isn't supposed to promise White much, but it has some sting and the pawn-structure is particu larly thought-provoking. 5 . tl:Bf6 (D) Now we'll run into some familiar ideas. 6 i.f4 This is the customary approach, and most likely to achieve something tangible. However, let's say that White plays 6 tl:Bf3, Black answers with the natural 6 ... i.g4, and there follows 7 O-O e6 8 tt:'ibd2 i.d6 9 .l::t el O-O. All very logical. Then White might want to re spond to the presence of Black's bishop on g4: 10 tl:ifl V/ii c7 1 1 i.g5 tt:'Bd7 12 tl:Bg3 (D). What do we have here? A classical Queen's Gambit Declined Exchange Variation (Carls bad) with colours reversed ! In this position,

CARO-KANN DEFENCE

[diagram]

7 f3 .llh5 has the idea of ....llg6 with the ex

[diagram]

30 h4 h5 31 @h2 d4

This is still good. 32 .lld3! ? dxc3!

256 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 257

should mention that 6 ... e6 7 lt:Jf3 i.e7 leads to one of those positions that we were talking about in which White may not want to lose a tempo after 8 i.d3 dxc4 9 i.xc4, and thus con siders moves such as 8 l:tc 1 and 8 a3. The inde pendent idea of 8 c5 is also possible. These positions will repay study, and in fact you might want to sit down and try to work out the details without recourse to books or other sources. b) 6 lL:\f3 ( D) is the main move. Then: bl) Sometimes 6 ... i.e6 is played to threaten ...dxc4 and protect the centre at the same time. Anand-Miles, Wijk aan Zee 1 989 shows one way to convert the pawn-structure (pretty much by force) and then build up a superior position:

[diagram]
1 1 O-O O-O 1 2 J::i. e l i.e8 1 3 h3 (or 1 3 e2) 1 3. .. @h8 14 i.f4 lt:Jg8 1 5 b4 f6 1 6 lt:Jf3 d7 1 7 a4. White has a moderate but certain advantage. It's difficult for Black to find anything positive to do, and Anand won rather easily. b2) The most important reply is 6 ... i.g4, because it carries with it the positional threat of 7 ... i.xf3 and gives White few serious options. The most common and well-analysed one is 7 cxd5 lt:Jxd5 8 b3 i.xf3 9 gxf3 (D). White has implemented the mini-rule that when one side brings their queen's bishop out early, the opponent should strongly consider bringing his queen to the queenside, in this case to b3, because the bishop has abandoned de fence of that wing. Here White has carried out that idea at the cost of doubled f-pawns. Now 9 ... lt:Jxd4?? loses to 10 i.b5+, and 9 ...lt:Jxc3 1 0 bxc3 i s considered good for White because of

[diagram]

14 O-O (D).

[diagram]

258 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

14 lt:Jxd5+ xd5 15 J.g5+ f6 1 6 xd5 exd5 17 J.e3 (D). Again, we have bookloads of theory on this fascinating and educational ending. White's horrible doubled f-pawns are compensated for or outweighed by his open files (providing some bothersome threats against the king), his more effective bishop, and Black's own two weak pawns. Probably the result with perfect play is a draw, but Black has to play more accurately than White does, which probably explains a lot of players' inclination towards the more com mon move 5 . .. e6 (D), to which we return now. 6 lt:Jf3 Here we'll look at a few of the thousands of games that have been played from this position. Fortunately there's quite a bit of material on iso lated queen's pawns throughout this book (for a lengthy introduction to the subject, see Chapter 3), so this lesson will not stand on its own. We'll see three different 6th moves for Black. Velimirovic - Benko Vrnjacka Banja 1973 6  J.e7 7 cxd5 exd5 ( D) I think it's important to understand that this recapture, while safe-looking, can give White some real prospects.

[diagram]
8 ... J.d7 9 J.xd7+ lL:lbxd7 10 O-O O-O 1 1 b3 lt:Jb6 12 .l::t el .l::t e8 13 J.g5 with a definite advan tage, Petronijevic-Nikolic, Belgrade 1 997. Here we see one danger in the pawn-structure after 7 cxd5 exd5, which is that the d-pawns are iso lated. Normally when such a pawn is masked by another (and thus not on an open file), it poses no problems. But the fact that 1 1 3 targeted the d5-pawn caused Black's knight to go to a miser able position on b6, which became the reason for White's advantage. 9 lt:Je5 J.d7 10 O-O O-O 11 l:lel .l::t c8 12 J.g5 J.e6 13 J.xc6 bxc6 14 lt:Ja4 h6 15 J.xf6 J.xf6 16 lt:Jc5 (D)

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 259

[diagram]

260 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

24 d5 .l::t

[diagram]

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 261

20 tt:'Be5 .i.d7

20. .. tt:'Bxe5 ! ? 2 1 dxe5 .i.g5 22 .i.xg5 'ti'xg5 23

[diagram]

12 bxc3 (D) ... h6 In order to get castled. 13 'ti'e2! 'ti'd5 He still can't castle due to 1 3. ..O-O 14 e4. Something has already gone wrong. 14 l:tbl a6 15 c4 'ti'h5 16 'ti'e4 f8 A terrible concession. 17 l:tel tt:'Be7 18 .i.d2 'ti'f5 19 'ti'e3 'ti'h5 20 'ti'f4! tt:'Bg6 21 'ti'c7 @gs 22 .i.e4 h7 23 'ti'xf7 Now it's really over. Black only lasted a few more moves.

23. ..

l:tdS 24 .i.e3 l:td7 25 'ti'e8 l:te7 26 'ii' a4 .i.d7 27 'ti'dl ! .i.e8? But 27 ...@g8 28 l:txb7 is awful. 28 tt:'Bg5+ 1-0 Advance Variation

1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 e5 (D)

This extremely popular move has led to re markably exciting, creative play. There have

262 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

been more discoveries here than in any other variation of the Caro-Kann, and indeed more than most openings. 3 . . . .ltf5 Strong players over the years have tried to at tack White's pawn-chain at the base by 3 ...c5, the idea being that 4 c3 might allow Black's c8- bishop to develop outside Black's own pawns; e.g., 4 ... tt:'Bc6 5 tt:'Bf3 cxd4 6 cxd4 .ltg4 or some such. But this takes Black two moves with his c-pawn, and 4 dxc5 changes the structure dra matically. After 4 ...e6 (D), you may recognize the similarity to the French Defence Advance Variation, i.e. 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 e5 c5 4 dxc5, but then it's Black's move! That's because of the tempo loss ...c6-c5. In the French Defence move-order. 4 dxc5 is harm less or worse because it weakens e5 and brings Black's pieces out quickly. The first question, then, is whether having lost a whole tempo, this position can still be played for Black. That is at least possible, since it is generally favourable for Black in the French. The flip side of the question is whether this basic white pawn structure, advocated by Nimzowitsch, really can be played for an advantage. According to conventional theory, White is supposed to over protect the e5-pawn against assault by .. .f6, such that any capture with .. .fxe5 will leave him with a permanent outpost on d5 from which his pieces can't be driven away. That is not so eas ily done. Alternatively, White can use his extra tempo simply to hold on to the c5-pawn and re main a pawn up! It's worth examining these two strategies, which can be introduced in a few ways: a) 5 .ltd3 tt:'Bc6 (5 ... .ltxc5? 6 'ti'g4 forces Black into an awkward defence of his g-pawn; he either has to move his king or make the very weakening move ...g6) 6 tt:'Bf3 (this is the same as 5 tt:'Bf3 .ltxc5 6 .ltd3) 6 ... .ltxc5 7 O-O tt:'ige7 ! (7 .. .f6 8 'ti'e2 ! - strongpoint - 8 ... fxe5 9 tt:'Bxe5 tt:'Bf6 10 .ltf4 O-O 1 1 tt:'Bd2 tt:'Bxe5 1 2 .ltxe5 'ti'b6 1 3 tt:'Bb3 .ltd6 14 .ltxd6 'ti'xd6 15 l:tae l ) 8 'ti'e2 tbg6 9 c3 O-O. Black appears to be doing fine in these positions. b) Also by analogy with the French De fence, the apparently untried 5- 'ti'g4! would be very interesting, tying Black's bishop to f8 and preparing tt:'Bf3, .ltd3, etc. The queen is ready to overprotect e5 from g3, as shown by 5 ... tt:'Bc6 6 tt:'Bf3 f5 (6 ... 'ti'c7 7 .ltb5) 7 'ti'g3 'ti'c7 8 tt:'Bc3 (or 8 .lte3) 8 ... .ltxc5 9 tt:'Bb5 'ti'd7 1 0 .lte3 !? .ltxe3 1 1 tt:'Bd6+ @f8 1 2 fxe3 (D). The strong point lives, and before d6 can be challenged White will have played O-O-O and c4. c) Black has yet another difficulty if White uses his extra tempo to hang on to the c5-pawn:

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 263

[diagram]
264 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Ci'Jge7 14 l:tb 1 and White was ready to play b4- b5. In keeping with his open-lines approach, Black should play 14 ...f5 !, when the positional threat of . . .fxg4 encourages 15 g5 g6! and White has failed to close the kingside so Black will have an attack there. b2) 1 0 @f2 ! ? (White continues with the anti-development theme) 1 0. . .f6 1 1 @g3 O-O-O

12 a3 (now b4 is the idea) 12 ...

c4 1 3 Ci'Jbd2

After 1 3. ..@b8 14 b3 ! White launched a suc cessful assault on the queenside in Malaniuk Psakhis, USSR 1979: 14 ... cxb3 15 Ci'Jxb3 Wic7

16 Si..d3 Si..c8 1 7 a4 Ci'Ja5 1 8 Ci'Jxa5 Wixa5 19

[diagram]

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 265

The Short Variation 4 tt:'Bf3 (D) This move revolutionized the Advance Vari ation by showing that White could opt for slow and simple development with protection of the pawn-chain, usually by c3. This is in spite of the fact that Black has a 'good' French Defence due to the development of his bishop outside the pawn-chain. As it turns out, such an ab stract theoretical view doesn' t mean much in practice and there are cases when the bishop would be better-placed on d7. Short and others won various nice games until theory caught up and roughly evened things up. Today the same structure is widely seen, and the Short Variation itself has evolved, often involving .i.e3 instead of c3. Here's one of Short's original wins. It illustrates some of the underlying ideas and some that have more to do with pawn-chains as a whole. Short - Seirawan Manila IZ 1990 4 ..e6 5 c3 c5 6 .i.e2 tt:'Bc6 7 O-O h6 8 .i.e3! With the idea dxc5. 8. cxd4 9 cxd4 tt:'ige7 10 ttJc3 tbcs 11 l:tcl White has active development and the c- file. 11 .. a6 12 tt:'Ba4 tt:'Bb6 13 tt:'Bc5 .i.xc5 14 l:txc5 Now Short has gained the two bishops. His opening has been a success. Let's see how it plays out:

14. .O-O 15 'ti'b3! tt:'Bd7 16 l:tc3 'ti'b6 17 l:tfcl

'ti'xb3 18 l:txb3 White has queenside pressure and the f5- bishop is cut out of the action. 18  l:ttbS 19 tt:'Bd2 @f8 (D) 20 h4! @es 21 g4 .i.h7 22 h5 Short wins space on a second front that is to be opened later - a classic chess technique. Of ten you simply have to have more than one area of attack to break down a well-fortified posi tion. 22 .. tt:'idS 23 l:tbc3 tt:'Bb6 24 tt:'Bb3! ltJa4 25 l:k7 tt:'Bxb2 26 tt:'Bc5 He concludes by switching to that second front and conducting a direct attack on the king. 26.. b5 27 g5! (D)

27 .. tt:'Bc4 Or 27 ... hxg5 28 .i.xg5 .i.f5 29 l:te7+ @f8 30 tt:'Bd7+ @g8 3 1 l:te8+. 28 gxh6 gxh6 29 tt:'Bd7 tt:'Bxe3 30 fxe3 .i.f5 31 @r2 z:tb1 32 tt:Jr6+ @rs 33 z:tgl! 1-0 There would follow 33 ... l:txc7 34 l:tg8+ @e7 35 l:te8#.

266 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

4 Si.e3 (D)

This modern move (a typical case of bishop before-knight development) has several points. First, it helps to stop ...c5, which after all is Black's goal once he has played ... Si.f5, and all the more so after ...e6. It also directly protects d4, the main target of Black's attack. Moreover, a piece gets out that normally has difficulty doing so in the Advance Variation. Now the queen's knight can follow by moving to d2 and not interfere with that bishop, leaving the pawn moves c3 and c4 free to be played. Here you might compare 4 tt:'Bc3 above; one of the reasons that White must strike out with the early tactical move g4 in that line is that he is no longer able to play c3 and protect d4, so his centre is faced with demolition by ...c5 and ...cxd4. After 4 Si.e3, however, the option of c3 exists, or White can defend with pieces follow ing tt:'Bd2-b3 or he can counterattack by c4. On the kingside we have a somewhat similar situa tion, in that delaying tt:'Bf3 retains the option of f4, while the g4/h4 ideas that we see after 4 tt:'Bc3 are not ruled out. Eventually White will probably play Si.e2 and O-O, but he doesn't want to waste a precious tempo on those moves until it is necessary. As in so many openings today, White's underlying philosophy is one of flexi bility. There are of course drawbacks to all this, first and foremost that White is not granted two moves for every one of Black's, and can only implement these strategies one at a time! Fur thermore, there is the concrete problem that to play it within the next few moves. Let's re call again our idea about the early development of White' s dark-squared bishop: whenever that happens, Black should always consider target ing the queenside dark squares. That normally applies to Si.f4 or Si.g5, but there's no particular reason to reject the same thought after Si.e3 (al though at least White needn't worry as much about d4). The queen sortie to b6 also assists with ... c5 . So it is probably best played right away or early on, because given a little time White can play tt:'Bb3 or c3 and b4. Black, having been informed that a bishop is on e3, can also aim to put a knight on f5 or g4 and look for a favourable way to obtain the two bishops. One might want to compare all this to the Kupreichik line in the Advance French: 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 e5 c5 4 c3 tt:'Bc6 5 Si.e3. In that case, too, Black will often play ... tt:'ige7, aiming for . .. tt:'Bf5, or even more often ... tt:'Bh6 with the dual ideas ... tt:'Bf5 and ... tt:'Bh6. Of course there's much more in terms of strategy in this wonderfully complex line. The players' positional under standing will usually be put to the test, and therein lies the chance for a challenging and competitive game. We look at two games after 4 Si.e3: 4 . . .e6 (D) 5 tt:'Bd2 Shirov - Dreev Poikovsky 2006

5 c3 can be slow and is perhaps out of touch

with White's philosophy of flexibility: maybe

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 267

the pawn wants to go to c4, so don't decide yet. In Haba-Dautov, Bundesliga 2002/3 Black played 5 ... CDd7 6 ctJd2 f6. Now 7 f4?! looked a little loose after 7 ... 'ti'b6! - compare the Ad vance French. The b2-pawn is attacked, but if White doesn't protect e5 again he can run into ...fxe5 or even the risky ...g5 !?. In fact, the game continued 8 'ti'b3 g5 9 exf6 g4 ! 10 f7+ @xf7 and Black already had a pleasant advan tage. 5  ctJd7 6 Si.e2!? (D) Utterly noncommittal ! There have been all kinds of moves played here, especially 6 f4, strengthening the centre and meeting 6 ...c5 with 7 lLigf3. Again this seems loose after 7 ... 'ti'b6, when White went 8 Si.e2!? in Morozevich-Bar eev, Russian Cht (Sochi) 2004, sacrificing the b-pawn based upon development and open lines. The game went 8 ... ctJh6 9 h3 'ti'xb2 1 0 c4 Si.c2 ! (to exchange queens and clear f5 for a knight) 1 1 'ti'cl 'ti'c3 ! ? ( 1 1 ...'ti'xc l + ! 1 2 J:!.xc l Si.e4 should be fine) 12 @f2 ctJf5 13 ctJfl and Black had to deal with White's centralized pieces and some tactics based upon the c2-bishop. Never theless, he stood well in the opening. Maybe f4 isn't such a great idea. The simplest option is 6 ltJgf3, as in the Short Variation. 6 ... 'ti'b6 7 lLib3 Si.g6 A natural alternative is 7 ...f6. White's centre is hard to assail, as shown by 8 ctJf3 lLie7 9 O-O Si.g6 1 0 c4 ! ? (pretty good, but the simple 10 Si.f4 ! keeps a nice advantage) 1 0. ..a5 11 lLic5 ! ? lLixc5 12 dxc5 'ti'xb2 13 ctJd4!? ( 1 3 Si.d4! 'ti'c2 14 'ti'xc2 Si.xc2 1 5 exf6 is very strong, but Shirov is known for taking a few chances for fun) 1 3. ..fxe5? ( 1 3. .. @f7 !) 14 lLixe6 l:!.c8 1 5 Si.g4 with an obvious advantage, Shirov-Eren burg, Caleta 2005. 8 h4 An innovation. 8 f4 had been played previ ously. 8 ... f6 9 h5 Si.f7 10 ctJf3 ctJh6!? 1 0. .. lLie7 1 1 g4! covers f5 and is typical of the unrestrained expansion in this variation.

11 Si.xh6!? gxh6 12 exf6 a5 13 a4 .i.b4+ 14

@fl?

14 c3 Si.d6 destabilizes the b3-knight, tying

down White's queen.

14. .. 'ti'd8 (D)

15 'ti'cl 'ti'xf6 16 ctJh2! Aiming at the h6-pawn. Shirov has also played this move in the French Defence. 16 ... J:!.g8 17 lLig4 'ti'g5 18 g3!? Si.rs 19 'g2 'ti'xcl 20 J:!.axcl This position illustrates the two-sided nature of 4 Si.e3: it can lead to tactics or positional play. Here White controls e5 and can add f4 and c4 into the mix.

20. ..

J:!.g5?! This sacrifices the exchange for insufficient compensation (perhaps Black thought that he could retain the two bishops), but 20 ... Si.g7 21 f4 ! was pretty bad.

21 f4 l:!.xh5 22 J:!.hel! Si.e7

22 ...l:!.f5 23 Si.d3 Si.g6 24 J:!.xe6+ wins for White. 23 lLie3 ctJf6 24 Si.xh5 Si.xh5 25 f5! Now it's a matter of technique, although when you hear that phrase, remember that some players' technique is better than others. 25 ... Si.d6 26 c4 Si.b4 27 J:!.fl Si.e2 28 f2 Si.xc4 29 lLixc4 dxc4 30 l:!.xc4 lLie4 31 J:!.e2 exf5

268 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

32 tt:'Bc5 O-O-O 33 tt:'Bxe4 fxe4 34 J:!.xe4 @d7 35 l:!.h4 .i.f8 36 l:!.h5 l:!.a8 37 d5! .i.g7 38 b3 @d6 39 l:!.g4 .i.f8 40 dxc6 bxc6 41 l:!.g8 @e6 42 J:!.xh6+ @f7 43 l:!.h8 J:!.a6 44 l:!.6xh7+ .i.g7 45 J:!.c8 @g6 46 l:!.h4 J:!.b6 47 l:!.g4+ @h6 48 J:!.c4 1-0 Grishchuk - Anand Mainz (rapid) (8) 2005 This closely-fought encounter is full of posi tional niceties in the opening and early middle game. 4 ... 'ti'b6 5 'ti'cl (D) Avoiding dark-square weaknesses, and as sisting White's forthcoming plan in this game. 5 ... e6 5 ... tt:'Bh6 ! ? is frequently played. It has the idea we mentioned above, aiming at g4. In one game White played simply 6 h3 and 7 tt:'Bf3, ask ing where the knight is going, but that is rather slow. A more provocative course is 6 tt:'Bf3 e6 (6 ... tt:'Bg4 7 .i.f4 e6 8 h3) 7 c4 ! (7 tt:'ibd2 c5 8 tt:'Bb3 ! ?) 7 ... dxc4?! 8 tt:'ibd2! ? (or 8 .i.xc4 with a small but definite advantage) 8 ... .i.d3 and now: a) 9 .i.xd3 ! ? (a little too fancy) 9 ... cxd3 10 .i.xh6 gxh6 11 O-O tt:'Bd7?! (l l ...tt:'Ba6!) 1 2 J:!.dl 'ti'a6 13 tt:'Be4 J:!.g8 14 tt:'Be1 O-O-O 15 tt:'Bxd3 with a pleasant position, Anand-Khenkin, Bundesliga 2002/3. b) White should simply win the pawn back with tempo by 9 .i.xh6 ! gxh6 1 0 tt:'Bxc4! .i.b4+ ( 1 0. .. 'ti'b4+?! 1 1 tt:'ifd2 .i.xfl 1 2 J:!.xfl with a3 and tt:'Be4 to come) 1 1 @dl .i.xc4 1 2 .i.xc4. Then White is in the pleasant position of being able to claim the advantage after @e2 and J:!.d 1 , while also targeting Black' s weakened king side. 6 c4!? (D) The strategy of opening queenside lines is common with 4 .i.e3, and all the more so with a queen on c 1 . There are many options in these positions; for instance, 6 tt:'Bf3 c5 7 .i.d3 ! ? might be a refreshing idea.

6. . dxc4!

Black has had some difficulty with the loss of territory after these alternatives: a) 6 ... tt:'Be7 ?! 7 c5 ! 'ti'a5+ 8 .i.d2 'ti'c7 9 tt:'Bc3 tt:'Bd7 1 0 .i.e2 h6?! (after 1 0. . .f6, White's flexi ble strategy pays off with 1 1 f4 ! ; Kasparov sug gested 10. .. .i.g6 ! ? 1 1 tt:'Bf3 .i.h5) 1 1 b4 g5 ? 1 2 g4 ! .i.g6 1 3 h4 and White will win at least a pawn, Kasparov-Shirov, Moscow (Russia-Row rapid) 2002. b) 6 ... .i.xbl ?! 7 J:!.xbl .i.b4+ 8 .i.d2 .i.xd2+ 9 'ti'xd2 and White had space and smooth de velopment in Gelfand-Dreev, Moscow 2002. 7 tt:'Bd2!? Simply 7 .i.xc4 tt:'Be7 8 tt:'Be2 'ti'd8 9 O-O led to some advantage in Shirov-Anand, Monaco (blindfold) 2005. In that manner White keeps his space advantage, which is the key to the Short Variation and to 4 .i.e3 (its derivative). 7 . 'ti'a5! To stop tt:'Bxc4. 8 .i.xc4 tt:'Be7 9 tt:'Be2 tt:'Bd7 10 O-O tt:'Bd5 11 tt:'Bg3 .i.g6 12 h4! h6 13 h5 White's whole idea here, rightly or wrongly, is to acquire space. Black has found a perfect reorganization, however, and has equal play.  .i.h7 14 a3 'ti'd8 15 tt:'Bf3 .i.e7 16 J:!.dl J:!.c8

CARO-KANN DEFENCE 269

16 ... tt:'i7b6 1 7 .i.e2 'ti'd7 would emphasize the light squares, although I see no special plan for Black. 17 .i.d3!? (D) What a decision ! Once again White opts to exchange his good bishop and retain his bad one. However, there is a compensating factor here. When one has space, a bad bishop can be used to protect your weakest central point (d4) while you advance on the wings. At any rate, Anand chooses to tum the game down tactical channels, spoiling White's fun: 17 .  c5 18 dxc5 .i.xc5 1 8. .. tt:'Bxc5? 19 .i.xh7 tt:'Bb3 20 'ti'bl tt:'ixal 2 1 .i.e4 tt:'Bb3 2 2 .i.xd5 exd5 23 tt:'Bf5 ! f8 24 'ti'a2 ! followed by J:!.xd5 is devastating. 19 .i.xh7! ? .i.xe3 20 'ti'bl .i.f4! 21 tt:'Be2 tt:'Bxe5 Black is obviously better now. 22 tt:'Bxf4? Slightly crazy: White wants to confuse mat ters. Black would have an easy advantage fol lowing 22 .i.e4 tt:'Bxf3+ 23 .i.xf3 .i.e5, although in theory this is the better of evils. 22 ... tt:'Bxf3+ 23 n tt:'Bh2+! 24 el Or 24 gl tt:'Bg4 25 .i.f5 ! 'ti'h4! . 24 ... 'ti'e7 25 'ti'e4 tt:'Bf6? Anand falters. 25 ... J:!.xh7 ! 26 'ti'xh7 tZ:'Bxf4 27 'ti'xg7? 'ti'c5 ! is winning due to the idea of ... 'ti'b5. 26 'ti'a4+ f8 27 J:!.acl ( D) 27 ... l:!.a8 Avoiding Grishchuk's clever idea 27 .. .:.Xc l

28 J:!.xc l J:!.xh7 29 l:!.c8+ tt:'Be8 30 tt:'Bg6+! fxg6 3 1

[diagram]

30. .. e5 31 tt:'Bd5 tt:'Bxh5 32 l:tc7 g6 33 0.el!?

[diagram]

[diagram]
1 e4 e6 the Queen's Gambit Declined ( 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6),

Strictly speaking, this move defines the French Defence. However, I shall pass over White's second-move options, and get straight to the position that most players think of as the starting-off point.

2 d4 d5 (D)

The French Defence ranks behind only the Sicilian Defence and l ...e5 as a reply to 1 e4. It is hard to characterize in general terms since it combines highly tactical and ultra-positional types of play. But the French has one quality that few other openings have, and perhaps none to this extent: a persistence of central struc ture. In the main lines (mostly characterized by White's move e5), the fundamental formation of ...e6 and ... d5 has a tendency to last for many moves into the middlegame and fairly often into an endgame. The exceptions consist of variations with ...dxe4, which are proportion ately infrequent, and lines in which Black achieves the freeing move ...e5, something that White usually denies his opponent until the middlegame. This brings us right away to the main disad vantage of the French Defence, Black's light squared bishop. Whether that piece assumes a useful role can determine the success of the opening. We run into a similar phenomenon in where in most of the traditional lines the move ...e5 is needed to bring the c8-bishop into play. A significant exception in the Queen's Gambit occurs when the bishop is freed by White' s vol untary exchange on d5. The situation with the Semi-Slav ( 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 tt:'Bf3 tt:'Bf6 4 tt:'Bc3 e6) is obviously worse still. In any event, re turning to the matter of the French Defence, we find that if White advances his pawn to e5, the freeing move ... e5 becomes unlikely in the short term, so Black may try to develop his light squared bishop via . . .b6 and ... .i.a6. More often it stays on c8 or d7 for a while, perhaps await ing the move .. .f6, after which it plays a useful defensive role guarding e6. The bishop may later transfer to the kingside (g6 or h5) via e8. It' s interesting that the Sicilian Defence varia tions which include the moves ...d6 and ...e5 are a mirror image of certain Tarrasch French main lines, right down to the role of the bad bishop as protector of a backward d-pawn (in the Sicil ian) or a backward e-pawn (in the French); see the section on 3 tt:'Bd2 tt:'Bf6 for more about that remarkable comparison. Finally, Black's light squared bishop may go in the other direction to c6, b5 or a4. Where it ends up will reflect the pawn-structure and thus indicate the nature of the play. What else is going on in the initial position? On the most basic level, Black's second move of the French Defence attacks the e-pawn! Ac cording to the Hypermodern theorists, White's e4-pawn is too much of a target for 1 e4 to be a good move, and in fact Black puts the question to White, who has to choose between exchang ing the pawn, advancing it, protecting it, and gambiting it. We discuss this in the Introduc tion to the Semi-Open Games (Chapter 1 0). Looking over White's options against the French, we find: a) There is no realistic method of gambiting White's e4-pawn that doesn't leave him strug gling for equality.

FRENCH DEFENCE 2 71

[diagram]

2 72 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

3. .. cs (D)

[diagram]

FRENCH DEFENCE 1 73

[diagram]

4...

[diagram]

[diagram]
7 O-O ! ? cxd4 at best gets to the same position

[diagram]

2 74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

18. ..as

FRENCH DEFENCE 175

Perhaps 18 ... .l::i. ad8 ! ? should be tried, although White still has the better game.

19 a4 lbxd4 20 lbxd4!

[diagram]

1 e6 ! .l::i.

[diagram]

D)

[diagram]

2 76 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

15 .. l:i.xe2! 16 l:i.xe2 bxc6 There's no hurry to take the rook on e2 be cause the f-pawn is pinned. 17 .i.g3 .i.e7! Black surprisingly avoids the exchange of bishops, seeing that his bishop will become strong and White's subject to harassment. But to lose time like this takes some courage. Actually, 1 7. .. .i.xg3 ! ? 1 8 hxg3 lDf8 ! wasn't bad either because Black's knight would cover all the good squares from e6. This is more or less the end of the opening but it's worth seeing more because the moves are wonderfully instructive.

[diagram]

20 c3 h5! (D)

[diagram]

21.  h4 22 .i.h2 .i.f6 23 l:tdl a4!

[diagram]

FRENCH DEFENCE 177

Well anticipated. White can't hang on to ev erything. And White's officially 'bad' bishop (because of the dark-squared centre pawn) really is bad! 37 .l:i.fl White loses material anyway after 37 @gl tlld3. 37 . tlld3 38 f4 tllf2! 39 l:i.al tll xg4+!? Instead, 39 ... @g6! ! would have been a bril liant move to make just before the time-control, based upon 40 ..Bf8 tllxg4+ 4 1 @h3 @h5 42 l:i.gl l:i.e3+ 43 g3 tllf2+ 44 @h2 h3 ! 45 ..Bxg7 @g4! and Black will actually checkmate after ... l:i.e2. The rest of the game is also enjoyable: 40 @h3 tll e3 41 l:i.a6 l:i.xg2 42 @xh4 ( D) 42 l:i.xc6? l:i.g3+ 43 @h2 tllg4+ 44 @hl h3

45 b5 tll

f2+ 46 @h2 l:i.g2#. 42  l:i.g4+! 43 @h3 l:i.xf4 44 l:i.xc6 g5! 45 b5 g4+ 46 @h4 46 @h2 l:i.f2+ 47 @g3 l:i.f3+ 48 @h4 f6! with ... l:i.h3# next. 46 ..f6! 47 ..td6 l:i.f3 48 ..tg3 @g6 0-1 Adams - Yusupov Port Barcares 2005 10 l:i.el O-O 11 ..Bd3 ( D) This position has been considered the main line for some time now. 1 1 ..Bd3 doesn't cover d4, but prevents 1 l .....Bg4? due to 1 2 ..Bxh7+ @xh7 1 3 tllg5+. The d4-square never seemed to be quite enough for White to win with any way. l l. .. h6 12 h3 From what we've seen, stopping ... ..tg4 is a good idea.

12. .. tt:irs

Black concentrates upon d4 as usual. He can also think about a move like ... tllh4. Or, after his dark-squared bishop vacates d6, the knight can go there to great effect.

[diagram]
16 g4 was threatened.

16 d2 Rublevsky-Dolmatov, St Petersburg 1 998 went 16 ..Bd2 a5 ! (with the idea ... b6 and ... ..ta6; this also gains space, a key consideration for both sides) 17 a4 b6 1 8 ..Be3 ..ta6 19 d2 tllxe3 20 xe3 @g7 2 1 ..Bd3 l:i.e8 22 d2 ..Bc4! 23 tll bd4 tllxd4 24 tll xd4 ..Bc5 with equality. 16 ... ..tfS 17 f4 g7 1 7. .. ..Bd6 1 8 a4 ..Bd7 doesn't look so bad. but White could repeat by 1 8 d2. 18 ..td2 Adams-Lputian, Armenia-Row (Moscow) 2004 pitted a super-grandmaster against one of the world's leading French Defence experts: 1 8 h 4 d6 (with so much pressure on d4, Black

2 78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

FRENCH DEFENCE 2 79

off this line for so many years. With more and more willingness to defend difficult positions in openings, players who recognized the very real advantages in Black's pawn-structure and his smooth development began to try out the line. A standard plan goes ... lbc6, ... lbf6, ... a6, ...VJll. c7 and ... b5 with ... .i.b7, depending upon how much is permitted him. These are typical Sicilian ideas and, as in the Sicilian, players re alized that the pawn on e6 in particular makes Black's position hard to crack. White in turn uses his lead in development to restrict Black's own pieces from getting out by posting pieces on support-points like e5, still looking for and often finding attacking chances. For Black, it' s all about structure: White doesn't have a centre pawn to attack with, and his c- and f-pawns tend to take a long time to enter the fray. About 15 years ago this turned into the most popular line of the Tarrasch at the very top levels and it is still leading to great wins for both sides. We'll explore three games from this position. Lastin - Bareev Russian Cht (Sochi) 2004

7 O-O lbf6 8 lbb3 lbc6 9 lbbxd4 lbxd4 10

lbxd4 White has recovered his pawn. In the early days of the variation, quite a few players tried 10 VJll. xd4 (D). In spite of White's lead in development, Black has a solid position. If the game actually reached a simplified ending with no structural changes, Black's central majority would give him the advantage. In any case, Black's most popular continuation is 10 ... .i.d7 (10. .. VJll. xd4 1 1 lbxd4 .i.c5 ! is also reasonable: 1 2 lDb3 .i.e7 1 3 .i.f4 .i.d7 14 .i.e2 {White intends to exert pres sure from f3; this is the standard plan} 14 ... ltJd.5 15 .i.g3 h5 ! 16 h3 h4 17 .i.h2 O-O-O, Akopian Shirov, Merida 2000) 1 1 .i.f4 VJll. xd4 1 2 lDxd4 l:i.c8 (or 12. .. .i.c5) 1 3 .i.e2 lbd5 14 .i.g3 h5 !

Black even has some initiative! Acs-Shaked, Budapest 1997 continued 15 h4 .i.c5 16 lDb3 .i.b6 17 c4 lbe7 1 8 .i.d3 f6 ! . 1 0. .. a6 ll .i.b3 VJll. c7 1 2 VJll. f3 A renowned line that has been analysed to death is 12 l:i.el .i.d6 1 3 lDf5 .i.xh2+ 14 Whl O-O 15 lbxg7 l:i.d8, eventually leading to a draw. 12 .. .i.d6 13 Whl White uses this defensive technique a lot; he refuses to weaken himself by h3 or g3. Another line runs 1 3 h3 O-O 14 .i.g5 lbd7 15 c3 b5 ! ? (D). This standard 'sacrifice' usually works be cause Black gets active play regardless of the material: 16 .i.c2 (too greedy is 16 "VJl/.xa8 .i.b7

280 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1 7 xf8+ { not 1 7 a7? .i.c5 } 1 7. ..lbxf8; al though White has two rooks for a queen, Black's bishops rake the kingside and ... c5 together with ... lbg6-h4 can follow) 1 6. .. .i.b7 1 7 1lV115 g6 1 8 1lV114 and now: a) In one game Black got careless and fell for a nice sacrificial piece attack: 1 8. .. e5? 1 9 lDf5 ! f6 ( 1 9. . . gxf5 2 0 .i.xf5) 2 0 lbxd6 xd6 2 1 .i.h6 l:i.fe8 22 l:i.adl e7 ? 2 3 .i.b3+ 'lt>h8 24 l:i.xd7 ! 1 -0 Azarov-Wiedenkeller, Saint Vincent

ECC 2005.

[diagram]

13. . .tes

[diagram]

17. .eS! 18 'lt>xh2!?

Perhaps better is 18 lDf3 .i.g4 1 9 .i.g5 ( 19 'lt>xh2? O-O) 19. ..h4 20 .i.xf6 gxf6 2 1 'lt>xh2 hxg3++ 22 'lt>gl . 1 8 h4 19 'lt>gl (D) This time 1 9 'lt>g2 ! ? is worth looking into . All these moves are hard to assess. 19 

O-O-O?

[diagram]

FRENCH DEFENCE 281

24. tllg4! Bareev had presumably seen this blow long before. 25 .I:txc6+ .txc6 26 .txf7 The queen can't move because . . .f2+ forces mate. 26 ... tllxf2 27 .te6+ .td7 28 .txd7+ .I:i.xd7 29 @xf2 .I:th2+ 30 @xf3 .I:txc2 31 .I:tel .I:tf7 0-1 Another important variation is: 7 ii'e2 (D) This is a line that goes directly for the kill. White forgets about recovering his pawn on d4 for the moment and concentrates on quick de velopment, normally including O-O-O. The cur rent main line continues: 7 ... tllf6 8 tllb3 tllc6 Black has to catch up in development and anyway, the harder he can make it for White to recover his pawn on d4, the better. But White isn't going to slow down. 9 .tg5! a6 What's this move about? In some positions we get from 4 ... ii'xd5, it helps Black rearrange by ... ii'c7 and ... .td6. But in this case he wants to strike out with ... b5 before anything else hap pens. If White's bishop retreats, he will have fewer worries about a sacrifice on e6, a problem that is always present when White has rooks on the open central files and a knight on d4. To some extent the game is becoming a race.

10 O-O-O b5 11 .td3 .tb7 (D)

I'll show two games from this position. Oral - Khuzman Batumi Echt 1999 12 tllbxd4 tllxd4 13 tllxd4 ii'd5! (D) Black attacks g5 and a2 (and g2!). 14 .txf6 gxf6 15 tllxb5!? 15 @bl ! is solid. Then 15 ...O-O-O 1 6 tllf3 could be followed by c4 or .te4 depending upon Black's response.

282 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

15 . ii'xa2 16 tllc7+ <Jile7 17 ii'h5 (D) Not 1 7 tll xa8?? .th6+ and White has to give up his queen on e3. 17 ... .th6+! A shot! The obvious 1 7. .. l:.d8? 1 8 ii'c5+ l:.d6 fails to 1 9 ii'xd6+ ! @xd6 20 .tc4+ <Jilxc7 21 .txa2. 18 ii'xh6 ii'al+ The point was to distract White's queen from a5. 19 @d2 ii'a5+ 20 @cl ii'xc7 Black wants to keep playing instead of ac cepting 20 ... ii'al+ 2 1 <Jifd2 ii'a5+. 21 l:.hel!? .td5 22 .te4 .txe4 23 l:.xe4 ii'aS 11z_11z Typical of the back-and-forth nature of this variation. 12 @bl Rozentalis - Luther Panormo ECC 2001 This looks slow but is interesting to compare with Oral-Khuzman. There the key move ... ii'd5 hit a2 as well as the kingside, while here Rozen talis protects his a-pawn, at the cost of time. ... .te7 13 tllbxd4 tllxd4 14 tllxd4 ii'c5

(D)

Black has also played simply 14 ...O-O here, but that's risky. The text-move gets the queen off the d-file and gains a tempo by attacking White's g5-bishop. 15 h4! Or maybe he hasn't gained a tempo, since the h-pawn will be handy in an attack!

15 ...O-O

1 5. ..O-O-O!? is obviously risky. White might try 1 6 tllf3 @b8 1 7 tlle5 .I:thf8 18 .te3 ! ? . 16 l:.hel White piles up on e6. This is one of those openings where Black knows what's coming but can't always stop it.

16. ..

l:.fe8 A typical tactic follows 1 6. ..l:.fd8 ! ? 17 tllf5 ! ? (this move seems to appear in every line! But in this case it's probably not that great) 1 7. ..exf5 18 ii'xe7 ii'xe7 19 .I:txe7 .txg2 20 .I:i.gl <Jiff8 (forced) 2 1 .txf6 gxf6 22 l:.eel .te4 and Black should come out OK. 17 t2Jf3 h6 Better seems 1 7. .. l:.ac8 1 8 tlle5 l:.c7. The text-move is weakening and Black probably overlooked the reply. 18 tlle5! hxg5?! 19 hxg5 g6 20 gxf6 .txf6 21 f4! (D) Now how can Black get any play going? ... .txe5 will leave the dark squares unbearably weak.

FRENCH DEFENCE 283

21.  .I:i.ad8 22 g4 i..g7? He had to try something like 22 ...f8. 23 tllxf7! xf7 Black was probably counting upon 23 ... .I:i.xd3 24 .I:i.xd3, but it's not even close. Rozentalis gives 24 ...f2 25 tllh6+! f8 26 .I:t.xe6 .I:t.xe6 27 .I:i.d8+ e7 28 .I:i.e8+ xe8 29 xe6+ d8 30 tllf7+ c7 31 d6+. 24 i..xg6+ f8 25 .I:t.xd8 1-0 There follows 25 ... .I:i.xd8 26 xe6 with mates threatened on both f7 and e8. Tarrasch with 3 . . . ltJf6

1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 tll

d2 tll f6 With this move Black challenges White to set up a pawn-chain and the game enters typi cal French territory. Since White's e-pawn is threatened, there's nothing much else to do but advance. 4 e5 4 exd5?! exd5 already favours Black because the knight on d2 is poorly placed for an Ex change Variation, as you can confirm by experi mentation. 4 ... tll fd7 (D) Now we have a position characterized by pawn-chains. The traditional choices here are 5 i..d3 and 5 f4. Development by 5 i..d3 5 i..d3

[diagram]
6 i..d3. White might prefer that because of the next note. 5 .c5 6 c3 tll c6 6 ...b6 intending ... i..a6 looks logical. Never theless, after 7 tllh3 (or 7 g4) 7 ... i..a6 8 i..xa6, White misplaces Black's knight and can put his space advantage to good use. If White is really worried about this (and no one seems to be) he can play 5 c3. Now I'll examine the two main moves, 7 tll e2 and 7 tllgf3. The Traditional 7 tlle2 7 tll e2 This continuation has dominated the practice of 3 ... tllf6 since time immemorial, but recently it's been sharing the spotlight with 7 tllgf3. 7 ..cxd4 8 cxd4 f6 (D) 9 exf6 Don't fall for 9 f4?! fxe5 IO fxe5 tllxd4! l l tllxd4 h4+ 1 2 g3 xd4. A big-time alternative whose consequences have never quite been solved is the tactical and less common 9 tllf4. It's a real mess, and unfor tunately very theoretical, in the sense that many logical moves are losing and the forced nature of the play doesn't admit of time-consuming over-the-board reflection. I'll give a few im portant moves, skipping most of the options: 9 ...tllxd4 (9 ...e7 I O tllf3 fxe5 l l dxe5 tlldxe5 1 2 tllxe5 tllxe5 1 3 h5+ tllf7 14 O-O g6 15 e2 makes it hard for Black to develop) l 0 h5+ e7 ( D ). l l exf6+ ! ( l l tllg6+ hxg6 1 2 exf6+ xf6 ! ? 1 3 xh8 f7 is a very old line, but at the least Black can also transpose by l 2. .. tllxf6, so why give him an additional option?) l l ... tll xf6 (now

284 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

l l ... 'it>xf6? 12 'iV11 4+ g5 13 tllh5+ 'it>f7 14 ii'xd4 is killing) 12 tllg6+ hxg6 1 3 ii'xh8 'it>f7 14 ii'h4 (notice the trap 14 tllf3?? .tb4+, winning the queen; people have lost this way!) 14 ...e5 15 tll f3 e4! ? (15 ... tllxf3+ 16 gxf3 .tf5 17 .txf5 gxf5 18 .tg5 also leads to deep analysis) 16 tllxd4 .tb4+ 1 7 .td2 .txd2+ 18 'it>xd2 ii'a5+ 19 '>t>dl exd3. These are mad positions; I refer you to the books and databases. 9 . . . tllxf6 It's a shame that this venerable line, which has generated such great games and so many at tractive and thought-provoking ideas, has be come laden with theory in so many byways. Nevertheless, we'll take a look at the basic complex of variations, so that you can get a start in understanding what's going on. 9 ... ii'xf6, keeping an eye upon the critical e5-square, is another idea that is moderately alive after some years of experimentation. The essential idea can be seen after 10 tllf3 h6 ( D) (to stop .tg5-h4; e.g., 10. .. .td6 1 1 .tg5 ii'f7 12 .th4 O-O? 1 3 .txh7+). Now if White plays conventionally by 1 1 O-O ( 1 1 .tbl ! .td6 12 ii'd3 is much harder to meet; compare what follows) 1 l ....td6 12 .tbl O-O! 13 ii'd3 Black replies 1 3. .. .I:i.d8 ! 14 ii'h7+ 'it>f7 and plays ... tllf8 next. Although gaining a tempo with 1 1 .tbl poses Black a problem, it may be amenable to solution. 10 tllf3 .td6 11 O-O (D) 1 1 .tf4 ii'a5+ confuses White's pieces: 1 2 ii'd2 ( 1 2 'it>fl ii'c7 1 3 .txd6 ii'xd6 i s equal) 1 2. .. .tb4! 1 3 tllc3 O-O 14 O-O tlle4.

11. . . ii'c7

Black aims at White's kingside, but even more significantly, he stops .tf4, which effec tively exchanges Black's good bishop. This comes at the cost of committing the queen early on, which could be considered a relative loss of time. I'd guess that at least thousand pages of anal ysis (adding up all sources and annotations) have been devoted to the lines beginning with

1 1 ...O-O (D).

FRENCH DEFENCE 285

I'm going to stick with the queen develop ment instead. But I do think that it's intriguing to compare this position with the Sicilian line 1 e4 c5 2 tt:Jf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tt:Jxd4 tLlf6 5 tt:Jc3 tt:Jc6 6 .te2 e5 7 tLlb3 .te7 8 O-O O-O 9 .te3 .te6

It's a mirror image! Notice especially the roles of the bad bishops protecting backward pawns. The biggest difference in structure is Black's open f-file in the French Defence. He also has the opportunity to attack White's vul nerable d-pawn. Both of these are comparative advantages. But in the Sicilian Defence posi tion, Black has an important minority attack with ...a6 and ...b5, by which he gains space, at tacks the queenside, and helps with control of d5. In the French, Black has nothing of the sort; as such, his strategy is more piece-based, with moves like ... "file? (supporting the idea of . . .e5), ... tt:Jh5 (or ... tt:Jg4), intending to attack on the king side. And as long as we're digressing, a thought provoking comparison also arises between this sort of position and that of the Guimard De fence, 3 tLld2 tt:Jc6. It turns out that the lack of a c-pawn in our 3 tLld2 tLlf6 French Defence can be a disadvantage in comparison with the Gui mard! Let's look at a fairly normal example: Rasik - Cernousek Ostrava 2005

[diagram]
tt:Jd7 6 .td3 f6 7 exf6 fii xf6 7 . . . tt:Jxf6 is also played in this kind of posi tion. The same ideas apply.

[diagram]
.te3 e5! 13 dxe5 tt:Jdxe5 14 tLixeS tt:Jxe5 15 .te2 c6 (D) This is the relevant position. Black has made his ...e5 break and retains a healthy centre be cause his d5-pawn is fully protected. Contrast this with the case of the 3 ... tt:Jf6 main lines: be cause of the insertion of the moves ...c5 and ... cxd4, Black almost always ends up with a weak isolated queen's pawn if he plays ...e5. 16 l:.cl fii g6 17 .thS fii h7!? Or 17 ... fii f5 with the idea ... tt:Jg4. Black may stand slightly better. 18 l:.c3 .tfS 19 tt:Jd4 .tg6 20 .te2 lbe8 21 tt:Je6 l:.f7 22 tt:Jf4 .te4 23 .thS g6 24 .te2 ..tf6 25 .td4 fii h8! (D) 26 l:.g3 @h7 27 .tc3 fii f8! Threatening both 28 ... "fii xc5 and 28 ... .th4. Suddenly Black is winning. 28 tt:Jd3 tt:Jxd3 29 .txd3 "fii xc5 30 fii g4? .txd3 0-1

286 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

25. ..

[diagram]

(D):

Let's look at a real game: 12 i.gS Biti - Gleizerov Zadar 2005 The main line, which has the logical idea of i.h4-g3 to exchange off that good bishop of Black's. Then White can start thinking about occupying the juicy outpost on e5 by means of l:.el . If Black plays ... e5 first, he gets saddled with an isolated queen's pawn and remember that they tend to be weaker after simplification, especially the exchange of the better bishop. That's White's general strategy, but of course it takes time. As explained after 1 1 ...O-O, Black tends to rely on piece-play, so he'll start putting everything close to the king, provoke weak nesses and then strongly consider ... e5 in order to bring the last pieces into the attack. 1 2 tllc3,

FRENCH DEFENCE 287

12 g3 and 12 h3 are all interesting alternatives

which we won't go into.

12. ..O-O 13 .th4 tllh5 14 ii'c2

Since Black's doing all right here (I guess), White might want to try 14 tllc3 a6 15 l:.c l g6 1 6 tll a4. Then best seems 1 6. .. .td7 ! 17 .tg3 ( 17 l:.el l:.xf3 !) of Mamedov-Hanley, Nakhchivan jr W ch 2003, when McDonald likes 17 ... tllxg3 18 hxg3 ii'a5 !?. ...h6 15 .tg6 McDonald also analyses 15 l:.acl g5 ! (D). It's typical of the French Defence that such a move can be good - it also works in several lines of both the Advance and the Winawer Variations. Aside from snatching space and launching an attack on the king, it gives Black's pieces more room to move about safely and not get too cramped on the queenside. Black's pos sible follow-ups include ... .te8-g6 and ... ii'g7. Black's knight is also better protected after ... tllh5-f4. Specifically, this version of ...g5 al lows Black to exchange White's good bishop for his knight, and threatens ...g4, weakening d4. The analysis continues 1 6 .Bg6 (trying to disrupt Black's build-up; Pedersen analyses 1 6 .tg3 tllxg3 1 7 tllxg3 ( 1 7 hxg3 ii'g7 } 1 7. . . ii' g7 1 8 tllh5 ii'e7 ! intending 19 ...g4, 19 ... tllb4 or

19. ..

.td7) 1 6. .. tllf4 17 tllxf4 .txf4 (17 ...gxf4!?) 1 8 .tg3 .txg3 19 hxg3 ( 19 fxg3 ! ?) 19 ... ii'g7 with pressure on d4 after, e.g., ...g4. . l:.xf3! Alas, we now enter into high theory again. I'll reduce things to an outline, with few details. The standard exchange sacrifice on f3 is hardly surprising in the French, of course, but it's hard to determine if it' s good. It seems to be in this case, although theory hasn't yet settled down. 16 gxf3 .txh2+ 17 'it>hl tllf4! (D) 18 tllg3 e5!? Typical tactics for this variation. As usual, I'm not going to go into much detail about such a precise tactical variation. 1 8. .. ii'd6 used to be considered brilliant, but maybe not so much these days. Check the books. 1 8. .. ii'b6, how ever, is at the moment theoretically satisfactory after 19 l:.ad l tllxd4 20 ii'a4 tllxg6. 19 l:.fel Or 19 'it>xh2 ii'd6 20 .Bh7+ 'it>h8 21 dxe5?! tllxe5 22 .tf5 .txf5 23 tllxf5 ii'e6 ! with a great attack, Ulybin-E.Berg, Santa Cruz de la Palma 2005. It looks like 19 .th7+? 'it>h8 20 'it>xh2 g5 ! 2 1 .tf5 gxh4 2 2 .txc8 ii'xc8 2 3 tllf5 ii'd7 ! ! i s win ning for Black, Can-E.Berg, Kusadasi 2006. It's enough to make your brain explode. On the other hand, these tactics are kind of amazing! . .th3! (D)

288 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

20 .I:i.adl A simple but beautiful idea is 20 'it>xh2? tll xd4! 21 "fii xc7 (21 fii d l tll xg6 22 'it>xh3 fii d7+ 23 'it>h2 tllf4!) 21...tll xf3+ 22 'it>hl il..g2#. 20 il..xg3? Much better is 20 ... tllxd4 21 l:.xd4 (a differ ent version of the last note is 21 "fii xc7? il..g2+ 22 'it>xh2 tllxf3#) 2 1 . . .fii xc2 22 il..xc2 exd4 23 'it>xh2 d3 24 ii.bl g5. 21 il..xg3? He should play 21 fxg3 ! .

21...il..g2+ 22 'it>h2 il..xf3 2 3 l:.d2 e 4 (D)

24 il..xe4!? And here another brilliant line is 24 fii b3 fii d7 ! 25 il..xf4 tlla5 ! ! 26 fii b4 "fii g4 27 il..g3 fii xg6 28 fife? tllc4! 29 l:.c2 tll d6! 30 'it>gl (30 fii xd6 fiih5+) 30 ... tllf5 ! 3 1 fii xb7 fii h5 ! 32 "fii xa8+ 'it>h7, as given by McDonald. 24 dxe4 2S l:.xe4 il..xe4 26 "fii xe4 l:.f8 27 dS "fifes 0-1 The Fashionable 7 tllgf3 Variation

1 e4 e6 2 d4 dS 3 tll

d2 tllf6 There are two ways to transpose into the main line here: 3 ... c5 4 tllgf3 tll f6 5 e5 tllfd7 6 c3 tll c6 7 il..d3 and 3 ... il..e7 4 tllgf3 tllf6 5 e5 tll fd7 6 il..d3 c5 7 c3 tllc6. The latter is a varia tion that could also arrive by the game's order but with 7 ... il..e7. There is a lot of theory on that position. 4 es tllfd7 S il..d3 cS 6 c3 tll c6 7 tll gf3 (D) Developing the knight in this way was al ways regardedi:as second-best, because now the d2-knight has nowhere good to go. Then play ers began to feel that the tempo White 'gained' (instead of tll d2-f3, White plays tllgf3 directly) was worth something, and that he might have a clearer path for his queen to the kingside than with having two knights to jump over (on e2 and f3). Still, in some respects Black calls the shots. As long as Black doesn't commit to a radical move right away, White needs a positive plan. He can't play tll b3 due to ... c4, and dxc5 gives up the centre. That means that a slow move by Black at this point could be the most effective course, as in the following game. Zhang Pengxiang - M. Gurevich Hoogeveen 2004 7 g6!? Black has the strange-looking idea of play ing ... il..g7 and ...f6, breaking up White's cen tre. It's hard to stop! At this juncture an especially noteworthy al- ternative is 7 ... il..e7, preparing the now-routine attack with ... g5. Then the critical continuation is 8 O-O and Black has two main tries: a) 8 ... g5 9 dxc5 ! (D) has done fantastically well and is an instructive positional device for White. By surrendering the centre he gives his king's knight the d4-square, which ruins Black's at tacking plan, and he can blast away at the sud denly poor-looking g-pawn by f4; for example, 9 ... tll dxe5 (9 ...g4 10 tll d4 tlldxe5 1 1 il..b5 il..d7 1 2 tll 2b3 gives White the advantage, Smirin Akobian, Minneapolis 2005) 10 tllxe5 tllxe5 1 1 tll b3 il..d7 1 2 f4 !, Hracek-Stellwagen, Solin gen 2005. White is ripping open the f-file and Black's king will have trouble getting away.

FRENCH DEFENCE 289

b) 8 ...a5 is a sort of prophylactic move, dis couraging tllb3 at any point due to ... a4. One game went 9 l:.el (9 dxc5 tll dxe5 doesn't make much sense without the g-pawn as a target) 9 ... cxd4 l O cxd4 g5 ! ? (D) (now that there's no dxc5, Black can go ahead). 1 1 g4 ! ? (this radically prevents ...g4; unfor tunately, it exposes White's king; so does 1 1 h3 ! h5 1 2 tllfl g4 1 3 hxg4 hxg4 1 4 tll3h2, but at least then White wins the g-pawn! Black has to break up White's centre while he still can: 14 ... tllxd4! 1 5 'iVxg4 .tc5, and we reach an other position that is hard to assess; it looks about equal) l l ...h5 12 h3 hxg4 1 3 hxg4 iVb6 14 iVa4 (Gormally-McDonald, London 2001 ) and McDonald suggests 14. . . tllf8 ( 1 4. . .f6! ? 1 5 tll fl !) 1 5 tllfl .td7, when White has t o respond to the discovered threat: 1 6 .te3 ( 16 .tbs tll xe5 ! - remember that tactic; it's seen all over the place) 1 6. .. iVxb2 17 l:.abl tllb

4. Black has some

advantage. Let's return to 7 ...g6 (D): 8 h4! The critical move. 8 O-O .tg7 9 .I:te 1 O-O 10 tllfl has been played a lot but Black comes oul well after I O ... cxd4 1 1 cxd4 iVb6! (White con trols the critical squares after l l ...f6 12 exf6 tllxf6 1 3 .tb5 !) 1 2 .tc2 f6 1 3 exf6 tllxf6 14 .ta4 tlle4 1 5 .txc6 bxc6 16 tllg3 e5 ! (if Black can play this in the French he's usually in good shape) 17 .te3 exd4 1 8 .txd4 ( 1 8 tllxd4 tllx f2 1 9 tll xc6 "iVxc6 20 .txf2 l:.xf2 21 @xf2 cs+ 22 l:.e3 .ta6 is winning for Black) l 8 ... .txd4 1 9 'iVxd4 tllg5 !, with clearly the better position for Black. 8 ...h6!? A strange-looking move, yet consistent with the waiting policy. Now 9 O-O looks inconsis tent with h4, so White must try to make some thing happen. 8 ... .te7 9 'it>fl ! ? (D) is another odd idea, but White wants to 'castle' while leaving the rook on h l ! For example, 9 ... O-O (if 9 ... iVb6, then 10 'it>gl ! cxd4 1 1 cxd4 tllxd4 12 tll xd4 iVxd4 13

290 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

tllf3 is a typical gambit in this line; Black has a lot of weak squares) 10 'it>gl f6 1 1 exf6 .txf6 1 2 tllg5 ! ? .txg5? ( 1 2. .. ii'e7 has the idea of playing ... e5) 1 3 hxg5 ii'e7 14 tllfl! e5 15 tlle3 ii'f7 16 tllg4 'it>g7 17 dxc5 tllxc5 1 8 tllf6 and White had a winning game in Sebag-V.Popov, Cappelle la Grande 2006.

9 O-O

Another game with typical themes contin ued 9 a3 ! ? ii'b6 10 O-O g5 ! 1 1 hxg5 hxg5 1 2 tllxg5 cxd4 1 3 cxd4 ii'xd4! 1 4 tlldf3 ii'g4 1 5 tllxf7 ! l:.g8 ! 1 6 tll7g5 tlldxe5 17 .te2 tllxf3+ 1 8 .txf3 ii'h4, Perunovic-E.Berg, Gothenburg Echt 2005; here 1 9 .th5+ '>t>d8 20 \i'f3 is best, with mutual chances after 20 ... .te7. 9 ... g5 You'd think that White had gained a tempo, but now his king is committed and ...g4 is a real threat. 10 h5! ? After 10 hxg5 hxg5 1 1 g 4 .te7 1 2 l:.el , Black might try 1 2. .. tll f8 ! ? with the idea ... tllg6 and ... tllf4 or ... tllh4. The position is closed enough to justify these elaborate knight ma noeuvres, and White can do the same by 1 3 tll fl ! cxd4 14 cxd4 .td7 15 tllg3 ! (D). I'll leave you to contemplate this picture. ... ii'b6 11 c4!? cxd4 12 cxd5 exd5 13 tllb3 .tg7 14 tll fxd4! A pseudo-sacrifice. White has to move rap idly or his centre will fall as Black's king scur ries to safety. White now threatens 1 5 tllf5. 14 ... tll xd4 15 .te3 .txe5 16 l:.el! (D) White (assisted by .tfl if needed) recovers the piece with a strange position. Black's extra pawn and some weakness are pitted against White's somewhat better pieces. The opening has come out about even, as the game continua tion shows.

16. ..O-O 17 tllxd4 ii'f6!? 18 l:.cl l:.d8 19

ii'd2 tll f8!? Black is attempting to combine kingside de fence with challenging d4 via ... tlle6. Instead, 1 9. .. tllb6! is solid, protecting the d-pawn. 20 tllf3! .tf4 21 .txf4 gxf4 22 ii'b4 22 .te2 ! ? .tg4. 22 .. .tg4 23 tlle5 .txh5 24 ii'xb7 f3 25 tllc6 fxg2! 26 l:.e3!? Or 26 tll xd8 ii'h4 (26 ... l:.xd8 27 l:.e3) 27 'it>xg2 ii'g4+ 28 'it>fl ii'f3 (28 ...ii'h3+ 29 'it>gl l:.xd8? 30 .tfl ) 29 'it>gl \i'g4+ with a draw. 26 . . . l:.e8 27 tll e7+ 'it>h8 28 ii'xd5 (D) 28 ....tg4?! 28 ... tlle6 29 ii'xh5 l:.xe7 30 l:.f3 \i'g5 3 1 ii'xg5 hxg5 32 'it>xg2 tllf4+ 3 3 'it>g3 l:.d8 is roughly equal. 29 l:.g3 l:.ad8 30 l:.xg4! l:.xe7 31 ii'xd8 l:.el + 32 l:.xel ii'xd8 33 .tc4

FRENCH DEFENCE 291

Now it looks as though White stands better but Black works his way out. 33  lllg6 34 .ltxf7!? llle5 35 .:gs+ 'i'xg8 36 .ltxg8 lll f3+ 37 Rxg2 lll xel + 38 Wfl llld3 39 .ltb3 Rg7 40 .ltc2 lll xb2 41 Rg2 Rf6 42 .ltb3 lf2.lf2 A fantastic back-and-forth battle! Seizing Space by 5 f4

1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 llld2 lll

f6 4 e5 lllfd7 5 f4 (D) White constructs a big centre, with the pawns forming a wedge that extends into Black's posi tion. The advantage is obvious: it's now ex tremely hard to break down the front of the pawn-chain, which is always the essence of Black's strategy in the .ltd3 lines. The moves ...f6 and .. .fxe5 can be answered by fxe5 (or in fewer cases by dxe5, which cedes the c5-square to Black's pieces). I'll concentrate on this d4/e5/f4 pawn-chain structure here and in the Classical French because it's different from most other pawn-chains in this book. The only other major opening with similar properties is the King's Indian Defence with pawns on e4, d5 and c4, and Black's treatment in that open ing is radically different from what we shall see in the French Defence. White's strategy has one major drawback: he has to make so many pawn moves, not only these first four but also c3 and usually g3 and/or h4. Even a3 and b4 are part of a typical forma tion. Because of this it turns out that Black can almost inevitably sacrifice something in the centre to open up attacking lines for his better developed pieces. The result is often a confused disarray of pieces and threats, with White try ing to defend an exposed king against Black's open lines and advanced centre. Of course, there are two possible outcomes in White' s favour . Either the sacrifice isn't possible, when White will almost always enjoy a large, cramping space advantage and potential attacks on both wings. Or Black' s sacrifice may prove insuffi cient for equality. Ensuring such a result takes a lot of accuracy on White's part, however, and many players seem to have grown tired of be ing on the receiving end of brilliancies. The normal and logical response to 5 f4 is to attack the d-pawn with 5 ...c5. As a mini-rule. we can generalize that attacking the front of a double-winged pawn-chain like this with ... f6 is best delayed until some of your other pieces are out. You might compare the King's Indian c4/d5/e4 double-wing, in which ...c6 can be very useful, but doesn't usually occur until Black has castled. Nevertheless, you will see that eventually ...f6 will be essential to open counterattacking lines. 5  c5 6 c3 I should mention that 5 c3 c5 6 f4 is another move-order that reaches this position. 6 ... lllc6 7 llldf3 This is played in the great majority of games. Otherwise the knight on d2 is only getting in the way. 7 .. 'i'b6 Here Black has the option of a 'closed' sys tem with 7 ...cxd4 8 cxd4 f5 (D) that is quite playable. The idea is ... .lte7, ... O-O (this may be de- layed), ... lllb6, ...a5-a4(-a3), ... .ltd7 and attack

292 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

on the queenside. White can never fully neu tralize this attack if Black is careful. His prob lem is that White plays for I:!.gl and g4 and Black's king must be defended. The manoeuvre ... .ltd7-e8-g6 can be useful in that respect. It's an interesting system for positional players. One example after 9 .ltd3, by transposition: 9 ... .lte7 ! I 0 lt'Be2 lt'Bb6 1 1 h3 O-O 12 g4? ! ( 1 2 a3 ! a5 1 3 b3 a4 14 b4 lt'Ba7 I S I:!.gl .ltd7 and now 1 6 lt'Bc3 'i'e8 ! ? 1 7 g4 ctJbS or 1 6 g4 .ltbS) 1 2. . .aS! 13 a4?! lt'Bb4 14 .ltbl .ltd7 IS Rf2?! I:!.c8 16 I:!.g I Rh8 17 Rg2 .lte8 ! 18 Rh2? (I 8 Wh l ! ?) 18 ... .ltg6 19 lt'Bc3 'i'e8 20 lt'iel 'i'f7 21 I:!.g2 fxg4 22 .ltxg6 'i'xg6 23 hxg4 'i'h6+ 24 Wgl gS! and Black stood much better in Ye Jiang chuan-Short, Lucerne Wcht 1989. We now return to 7 ... 'i'b6 (D): We'll look at three games with characteristic tactical motifs that you should know. Saltaev - M. Gurevich Cappelle la Grande 2001

[diagram]
fxeS! ? Or l I ... O-O, denying White squares such as f4. 12 fxeS O-O 13 .ltd3? This move tends to interfere with White's control over d4 and in general exposes the bishop to later attack by Black's centre. 1 3 a3 .lte7 14 b4 is one course, and 1 3 lt'Be2 ! tries to take advantage of Black's I I th: 1 3. .. lt'idxeS ! ? (McDonald's recommendation) 14 dxeS d4 l S lt'iexd4 ( 1 S .ltxd4 ! lt'Bxd4 1 6 lt'iexd4 .Iles 1 7 Re3 looks solid enough; Black should probably play 1 7. .. 'i'xb2 1 8 .lte2 'i'c3+ 1 9 'i'd3 I:!.xf3+ ! - somehow Black always has tactics in these lines - 20 Rxf3 'i'xd3+ 21 .ltxd3 .ltxd4 22 I:!.ae l , and probably White still has a tenuous advantage) I S. .. .ltcS (or I S. .. lt'ixeS ! ?) 16 ctJc2 lt'ixeS with a strong attack.

13. ..

lt'Bxd4! (D) A theme that occurs again and again; you need to know it whether you're playing White or Black. 14 lt'Be2! lt'ixeS This is good, but a creative suggestion by Kalinichenko is more fun: 14 ... lt'Bxf3 ! I S .ltxb6 ctJfxeS+ 1 6 Rg3 lt'Bxb6. This looks overwhelm ing. Black has only two pieces for the queen but his minor pieces will slaughter White. 15 .ltxd4 lt'Bg4+ 16 Rg3?! Better is 16 WgI .Iles 17 .ltxh7 + ! ? Rh8 ! 1 8 .ltxcS 'iY'xcS+ 1 9 lt'ied4 eS, but it's obviously good for Black. 16.. 'i'd6+ 17 Rxg4 eS+ 18 Rg3 exd4+ 19 Rf2 .ltg4 20 I:!.cl (D)

FRENCH DEFENCE 293

20 ... .l:.ae8!? 20 ... 'i:Ve5 ! is decisive, since ... 'i:Ve3+ can't be stopped except by 2 1 ilxh7+ Rxh7 22 ll:iexd4 .l:.ae8, etc. 21 ll:iexd4?! 2 1 'i:Vb3 .ltd2 ! .

21...ilaS!

Threatening ... .ltb6.

22 b4 'i:Vxb4 23 Rg3 hS 24 .l:.bl ilc7+ 0-1

Gufeld - Hummel Las Vegas 2000

8 g3 cxd4 9 cxd4 .ltb4+ 10 @r2 gS!?

This is a theoretical line that should ulti mately be equal. Neither of the games I'm giv ing is best play, but show how each colour can quickly get into trouble. 11 ile3?! A win for White with a great finish went 1 1 fxg5 ll:idxe5 1 2 ll:Bxe5 ll:Bxe5 1 3 ile3 ll:Bc6 14 ll:Bf3 ilf8 1 5 'i:Vd2 ilg7 1 6 ild3 ! ild7 1 7 .l:.ac l ll:Bxd4 1 8 'i:Vc3 e5 1 9 ilxd4 exd4 20 .l:.he1 + Rd8 2 1 'i:Va3? ! ilf8 22 ll:Be5 ! ile8 23 'i:Va4 ! h6?? 24 'i:Vd7+! 1 -0 Solak-Kozamemik, Ljubljana 2003 (24 ... ilxd7 25 ll:Bxf7#). 1 l ... g4! 12 ll:Bd2 r6! (D) 13 'i:Vxg4? White should have played 1 3 ll:Bb3 ! fxe5 1 4 dxe5 ilc5 1 5 ll:Bxc5 ll:Bxc5, which i s equal or perhaps slightly better for Black. 13 ... ilxd2 14 ilxd2 'i:Vxd4+ 15 @el 'i:Ve4+ 16 @r2 ll:idxe5! 17 'i:Vg7 .l:.f8! 18 ile2 'i:Vxhl 19 ll:ir3 ll:Bg4+! 20 'i:Vxg4 'i:Vxal 21 rs exrs 22 'i:Vr4 ild7 23 'i:Vd6 'i:Vxb2 24 .tr4 .l:.r7 25 'i:VxdS @rs 0-1 Krupkova - Gleizerov Mariehamn!Osteraker 1997

[diagram]
White follows a traditional plan in which he tries to force Black to defend his e-pawn. That's simply too slow, so Black will be forced to sac rifice a piece instead: 10 ... O-O 11 ll:Be2 r6! 12 .:n? White has to be consistent and take the pawns: 12 ilxe6+! Rh8 1 3 ilxd5 fxe5 14 fxe5 ll:idxe5 ! 15 dxe5 ll:Bxe5 and Black has a power ful attack, but with White a piece up it's hardly clear. 12 ... Rh8 13 ll:Bc3!? rxeS 14 rxeS (D)

14. ..

.l:.xf3! A sacrifice that's almost as old as the French Defence itself. It's a little more difficult in this situation to summon up the courage to do it. be cause Black has to reorganize before he can bring all his pieces into the attack. Generally. however, ... .i:.xf3 should become your first in stinct as Black in these f4 positions, and Public Enemy Number One for White! 15 'i:Vxr3 ll:Bxd4 16 'i:VhS! 'i:Vd8! White's back-rank threats are prevented and Black's pieces get out to aggressive positions. 17 'i:Vdl? 1 7 @d1 ! is the best try, even if it is no fun to defend: 1 7. .. ll:Bc6! 1 8 ilf4 ( 1 8 ilxe6? ! ll:idxe5 and Black is well on top) 1 8. .. ll:Bc5 intending ... ild7. With the king on d 1 , these positions are awfully hard to play for White. Black even has a pawn for the exchange. 17 ... ll:Bc6 18 ilxe6 d4! (D) 19 ll:idS

294 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Or 1 9 tlle2 tll dxe5 20 i.. xc8 .l:.xc8 with moves such as ...d3, ... tllc4 and ... tll g4 to come. Black is practically winning already. 19 ... tlldxeS 20 i..xc8? A blunder. But 20 tllxe7 i..xe6 21 tllxc6 tll xc6 is terrific for Black because of his tre mendous unopposed bishop and White's king position. 20 ... 'iY'xdS (D) Everything is falling apart for White. 21 i.. xb7 Or 2 1 i..f5 .i:.f8 !, which threatens ... .l:.xf5 and there's no defence. 21 ... i..b4+ 2 1 ...d3 ! 22 i..xc6 'i'xc6 23 i.. e3 'i'e4 wins for Black.

22 Rf2

Now 22 ... 'i'f7+ 23 Wgl 'i'xb7 wins. After the inconsistent 1 2 .l:.fl ? the opening was a disaster for White, but the objective as sessment of the g3/ .lth3 manoeuvre is anyone's guess. Classical Variation

1 e4 e6 2 d4 dS 3 tllc3 tllf6 (D)

[diagram]

FRENCH DEFENCE 295

the pawn on d4 on moves 6 and 7, or of playing a move other than ...'iVb6 on move 7. S. ..cS 6 c3

6 f4 leads to its own move-order deviations

like 6 ... ii.e7 7 lllf3 O-O 8 c3 f6! ? or 6 ... 'i'b6 7 lllf3 ii.e7; or even 6 ... 'i'a5+!? 7 c3 b5 ! ?. All of these deserve more trials, as they are seldom seen in master play. 6  lllc6 7 f4 (D) These pawn-chain lines look like the Tar rasch lines with 5 f4 and sometimes transpose into them, but in some ways White has a better grip on the centre. For example, there are no lines in which ...cxd4 followed by ... ii.b4+ both ers him. We'll look at two games from this posi tion, one in which White tries to maintain his entire pawn-chain and another in which White plants a piece on d4 and establishes himself there: Anand - Shirov Teheran FIDE Wch (4) 2000 7 . 'i'b6 8 lll f3 f6 (D) The lines are formed for a classic battle: White wants to batten down the hatches, avoid making any weaknesses in his own position, se cure and increase his space advantage, and fi nally, drive back Black's pieces. For his part, Black wants to blast open the centre, sacrifi cially if necessary.

9 a3 ii.e7 10 h4 O-O 1 1 .l:.h3! as 12 b3

All these pawn moves can be a little slow. White's got a lot of space on the kingside and might want to use a move to secure it. With that in mind, he could simply allow Black to get ...a4 in and let him try to infiltrate on the queen side; even if he gets a piece to b3 it doesn't look as though Black would get anything useful out of it. In the meantime, that' s a big and danger ous pawn-mass that White would have at his disposal on the kingside. 12 .. 'i'c7 13 lll egl!? (D) A surprising and clever retreat: White un develops his pieces only in order to hold the centre together and anticipate all of Black's threats. On the other hand, although Anand's last few moves are ingenious and were praised by one and all, they're also slow. That's Black's cue to throw everything he's got at the white centre. 13 .a4! This loosens things up a bit before launching into the complications. You'll see later how useful this interpolation is. Anand recommends 1 3. .. b6, but is exchanging bishops useful? See my comments in the next game.

14 b4 fxeS 15 fxeS lll

dxeS! (D)

296 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

It's now or never. That's about all you need to know about these lines when playing Black: if you don't sacrifice at an early stage, you'll probably never be able to sacrifice later! White will just have too many pieces covering all the key squares and then you'll die slowly, waiting around as he slowly advances on your cramped position. If you're handling the white pieces, the sac rifices are also about all that you need to know ! If you can prevent those, the rest won't be diffi cult. So try to set up your pieces for maximum post-sacrifice defence, as Anand has tried to do here by playing l:.h3 and lt'ieg l , both designed to overprotect the f3-square, which is generally the most vulnerable target. It pays off for him in this game. 16 dxeS lt'ixeS 17 lt'ixeS 'iVxeS+ (D) 18 'iVe2 i..xh4+!? Shirov pours more gasoline on the fire. He could also say to himself, "I've got two mobile centre pawns and tremendously active pieces, so I'll just take it easy and retreat by 1 8. .. 'iVc7 (D ). Then I'll play ... e5 (hitting h3) and ... i..f6." That' s probably a good plan: If you want to see Black's reward for sacri ficing his piece, try to defend the diagrammed position for White. It may or may not be that he can succeed in repulsing the attack, but few players could do so in practice. One line would be 19 i..g5 ! ( 19 'iVh5, to get out of the way of the bishop and play i..d3 next, can be answered by 1 9. ..cxb4 20 axb4 g6 21 'iVh6 e5; for instance, 22 l:.g3 l:.xfl + ! 23 Wxfl 'iVc4+ 24 lt'Be2 .ltg4 ! 25 l:.xg4 'iVxg4 with a big attack) l 9 ....ltxg5 20 hxg5 e5 21 l:.f3 .ltf5 22 'iVf2! ? cxb4 23 cxb4 e4 24 'iVg3 l:.ac8 ! 25 'iVxc7 l:.xc7 26 l:.f2 d4 and the pawns and open files make life pretty tough for White. Objectively it's hard to assess this as favourable for either side.

19 Wdl (D)

Not 1 9 l:.xh4? 'iVg3+. 19 . 'iVf6?!

FRENCH DEFENCE 29 7

[diagram]

[diagram]

298 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

impossible, obscure the issue as much as you can. 17 'i'e2 (D)

17. ..

.l:.ac8!! Now every piece is in the act. Of course Ivanchuk has a few of them hanging, but he's got it all worked out. Instead, l 7 ... lllxf3+ ?! 1 8 lll xf3 .ltb5 looks attractive except for 1 9 .lte3 ! . 1 8 .ltxh7+! Tough defence! The variations after 1 8 lll xe5 .ltxh4+ ! (D) are fantastic: a) 19 .l:.xh4 .l:.xc2! (Black must avoid the tempting 19 ... 'iY'xg 1 +? 20 Rd2 .l:.f2 because 21 .ltxh7+ Rf8 22 .l:.f4+ ! .l:.xf4 23 lll g6+ Re8 24 lll xf4 refutes the attack; White's got a lot of pieces, and sometimes they simply do the job) 20 'i'xc2 (20 'i'e3 .l:.xcl + 21 'iY'xcl 'iVxgl +) 20 ... 'iY'xgl + 21 Rd2 .l:.f2+ 22 c.t>c3 d4+ 23 Rb3 a4+ ! and the queen goes. b) 19 Rd2 'i'd4+ 20 'i'd3 .i:.f2+ 21 llle2 .:Xe2+ ! 22 Wdl (22 Rxe2 .ltb5 23 'i'xb5 .:Xc2+) 22 ... 'i'xe5 23 'i'xh7+ Rf8 24 'i'xh4 .l:.exc2 and Black wins. c) In response to 19 Wdl there is a simple but hard-to-see piece of geometry: 19 ... .lta4! ! 20 .ltxa4 'i'd4+ 2 1 llld3 'i'xa4+, mating in a few moves. ... Rxh7 19 'iY'xeS .ltd6 20 .lte3 'iVb3 21 llld2 (D) 2 1 'i'xd6 'i'xe3+ 22 lll e2 .l:.c2 wins at once. Now Ivanchuk finishes it off prettily:

21. ..

.l:.fl+! 22 Wxfl 'i'd3+ 23 Rf2 .ltxeS 24 lllgf3 .ltxb2 25 .l:.abl .l:.c2 26 .i:.hdl eS 27 g3 .ltg4 0-1 Winawer Variation

1 e4 e6 2 d4 dS 3 lll

c3 .ltb4 (D) This is the Winawer Variation. Black pins the c3-knight and, in the same way that he does when he plays 2 ... d5, puts the question to White:

FRENCH DEFENCE 299

exchange, gambit, protect, or advance? We are going to concentrate upon the main line, which is marked by the advance. 4 e5 Easily the most ambitious move, restricting Black's development and staking out territory on the side of the board that Black's dark squared bishop has just abandoned. Various other lines may be found in the books, several of them involving the sacrifice of White's e-pawn with subsequent recovery. For example: a) 4 a3 .ltxc3+ 5 bxc3 dxe4 6 'iVg4 lll f6 7 'iVxg7 l:tg8. b) 4 .ltd2 dxe4 5 'iVg4 lllf6 6 'iVxg7 l:tg8. c) 4 llle2 dxe4 5 a3 .Ile7 6 lllxe4. And so forth. There are numerous options on every move of these lines, with theory tending towards a verdict of equality with best play. As always, the reader may want to consult special ized books to learn more.

4...cS (D)

Black decides to attack the base of the pawn chain first. He will almost inevitably attack the front of it later. 5 a3 White wants to force a decision by Black's bishop; you'll have to check theoretical works and databases in order to find out about the alter natives. Of these, 5 dxc5 and 5 .ltd2 are perhaps the most interesting. If you are not inclined to play the main lines presented below, this may be a good place to investigate potential weap ons for use. The defender, of course, should be aware of and prepared for White's various 4th and 5th-move alternatives. 5    .ltxc3+ Black cedes the bishop-pair to White in or der to gain a tempo and inflict doubled pawns on his opponent. 5 ... .lta5 is a respectable option played by some specialists, but isn't nearly as popular; we'll pass that by. 6 bxc3 llle7 (D) 6 ... 'iVc7 is also played, posing a different set of problems. Those who enjoy play upon col our complexes may be attracted to lines such as 7 'iVg4 f5 8 'iVg3 cxd4 9 cxd4 llle7 1 0 .ltd2 O-O 1 1 .ltd3 b6 1 2 llle2 .lta6, when White's con centration upon dark squares (h4-h5-h6, lllf4- h5 and .ltb4 are typical ideas) contrasts with Black's on the light squares (by . . . .l:.c8 and ... lll b8-c6-a5, for example). It is my belief that the most instructive and engrossing lines follow from the positions after 6 ... llle7. At this j uncture, White chooses between the Positional variations, involving the moves lll f3, a4 and/or h4 in various orders, and the 'French Poisoned Pawn Variation' 7 'iVg4. Positional Variations In this section we'll look at lines in which White bypasses tactics for a while and tries to establish a positional edge. In spite of initial ap pearances, both players will use both sides of the board to generate play. We'll look at a series of games beginning with 7 h4 and 7 lllf3.

7 h4 (D)

With this move White charges forward to as sault Black's position, not caring about piece development. He has several ideas, beginning

300 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

with h5-h6 to compromise Black' s kingside. Black' s kingside dark squares are already weak ened due to the loss of his f8-bishop, so if White can establish holes on f6 and h6 it will not only give him good squares for his pieces, but also discourage Black from attacking on the king side. White' s advantage in space is on the kingside, and h4 only enhances that advan tage. Other matters of note, many of which apply to the Winawer in general: a) White has the two bishops; b) The pawn advance h4-h5 makes kingside castling very difficult for Black, and almost compels ...O-O-O; c) The rook's pawn advance doesn't block off White's queen as lines with tll f3 do, so 'i'g4 is always an issue; d) White has a potentially strong resource in l:.h3-g3/f3 or l:.h4-g4/f4, the latter rook move also introducing the possibility of dxc5 and l:.hb4 for attack. Black's main advantage is less subtle: a growing lead in development. It's quite possi ble that he'll have every piece except one of his rooks in action when White still only has one piece out! White also has weak doubled pawns on his c-file, with the usual problem that if Black exchanges pawns on d4 White gets rid of his doubled pawns only to find that his remain ing backward c-pawn on an open file can be as least as much a problem as the doubled pawns. In general, Black would like to exploit White's queenside light-square weaknesses on c4 and a4. Finally, Black can usually open files on the kingside, after which his rooks directly face White's king. There are many other positional and tactical issues and I shall discuss as many as possible in context. 7 .. tll bc6 8 hS 'iY'aS Black attacks White's c-pawn and, inciden tally, threatens ... tllxd4. 9 ild2 (D) 9 'i'd2? cxd4 1 0 cxd4 'i'xd2+ and 1 1 ... tllxd4 wins the d-pawn. There follow two games that stem from this strategically rich position. Hector - Hillarp Persson York 1999

9. .. ild7

Developing as quickly as possible; Black an nounces his intention to castle queenside.

10 h6 gxh6 (D)

A funny position because Black's doubled h-pawns are so weak on an open file and White apparently controls the kingside. But Black finds

FRENCH DEFENCE 301

a remarkable idea after which both players have the opportunity to play on both sides of the board! In fact that' s often the case in the Winawer. Although White has space on the kingside, Black can counter with .. .f6 and open lines for his pieces there. And Black's attack on White's weak queenside squares can boomer ang when White uses the b-file and dynamic pawn moves on that side of the board including c4, a4-a5, and sometimes dxc5.

11 Cllf3 O-O-O 12 i.d3 c4

Black closes the side of the board on which he appears the strongest! 13 i.e2 Cllg8!! (D) This retreat is Black's salvation, a move in vented by Uhlmann, the Hercules of the French Defence. Instead of going to the obvious f5, the knight deters jg,xh6 (which would mean giving up White's dark-squared bishop) and prepares the key move ...f6. After that, Black's two files on the kingside can cause trouble. 14 a4!? Both sides' ideas begin to become clear af ter 1 4 @fl f6 ! ? 1 5 'iVel fxe5 1 6 lllxe5?! ( 1 6 dxe5 ! .l:i.f8 1 7 g 3 'ic7 ! 1 8 jg,f4 Cllce7 intending . . . lllg6 is very complicated; when White main tains a pawn on e5 he improves his defensive prospects) 16 ... Cllxe5 1 7 dxe5 Clle7 ! 1 8 jg_xh6 .l:!.hg8 19 jLf3 ( 1 9 'iVd2 Cllf5 20 jg,g5 .l:!.xg5 21 'iVxg5 'iVxc3) 1 9 . .. jg,e8 ! and Black has the su perior game, Short-Psakhis, Isle of Man 1 999. Black will play . . . jg,g6 and has a solid advan tage. But these lines always have play for both sides and White eventually won the game. In view of White's improvement on his 1 6th move I think a verdict of dynamic equality is fair, an assessment which also applies to the opening in general.

14. .

.l:!.fS! 15 'iVcl ! (D) 15.f6 16 'ia3 This is White's point: to activate his queen on the precious dark squares, thereby freeing his dark-squared bishop to help on the king side. This would be positionally winning ex cept that time is an element that can't be discounted. 16 .. .l:!.f7 17 jg,f4 lllge7 18 exf6 .l:!.xf6 19 jg,xh6 .l:!.g8 20 @n

20 g3 Cllf5 2 1 i.d2 .l:!.fg6 transposes.

20 .. lll fS 21 jg,d2 .l:!.fg6 22 g3 Now White would like to secure his entire position with jg,f4, but it's Black's move: 22 . eS! (D) 23 .l:!.xh7 A torrent of tactics follows 23 lllxe5 ! ? Cll xe5 24 dxe5 .l:!.xg3 ! ; for example, 25 'iVb4 'iVxb4 26 cxb4 .l:!.3g7 and it's hard for White to unravel

302 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

and counter ...d4; e.g., 27 c3? Cll d4! ! 28 cxd4 jg,h3+ 29 Wel .l:!.gl + 30 jg,fl .l:!.xh l . The other try is 23 dxe5, but 23 ... .l:!.xg3 ! 24 fxg3 lllxg3+ 25 Rf2 'iVb6+ ! is also strong for Black, a rook down, because his key move ... llle4+ will ruin any normal defence like 26 Cll d4 Cllxd4 27 cxd4 'iVxd4+ 28 'iVe3? (28 jg,e3 'iVxe5 with a huge attack and material to come) 28 ... llle4+. 23 .. e4! 24 llle5? A resourceful try is 24 Cllh4! Cllxh4 (not 24 ... lllxg3+? 25 fxg3 .l:!.xg3 26 .l:!.xd7 ! Rxd7 27 jg,f4) 25 .l:!.xh4 Cllxd4! 26 cxd4 'iVxd2 and Black stands better but it's messy. 24 . lll xe5 25 dxe5 (D) 25 ..e3! Black maintains a constant initiative before his king can get into trouble. 26 jg,xe3 lll xe3+ 27 fxe3 .l:!.xg3 28 Rf2 28 'iVe7 jg,c6 defends everything. 28 . 'iVb6 29 .l:!.n .l:!.xe3! (D) Accurate to the end. 30 a5 30 'iVd6 .l:!.xc3+ 3 1 'iVxb6 axb6 is hopeless; Black will end up with four passed pawns. 30  .l:!.g2+! 31 @xg2 'iVg6+ 0-1 A typical game, of the kind that White can also win (and sometimes does) if he penetrates to the king before Black can drum up a sound attack. Hellers - Gulko Biel IZ 1993 9 .. cxd4 10 cxd4 'iVa4 Here we have an innocent-looking position in which White had originally played 1 1 c3 or 1 1 jg,c3 with equality. Then, playing against Anand in Linares 1 992, Kasparov found an ingenious sacrifice to get his usual initiative for a pawn.

11 Cllf3! ? lll

xd4 12 jg,d3 lllec6 13 Wfl (D) White's idea is to use his two bishops on newly-opened lines. In addition, his move h6 can potentially weaken Black's kingside dark squares. Indeed, the game Kasparov-Anand went 1 3. .. Cll xf3 ! ? 1 4 'iVxf3 b6? 1 5 h6 ! with a powerful initiative. Later an instructive solu tion was found that uses Black's pieces to maxi mum efficiency: 13  lllf5 14 jLxf5 exf5 15 h6 .l:!.g8! 16 jg,g5! jg,e6 17 .l:!.h4!? The obvious 17 hxg7 .l:!.xg7 1 8 jg,f6 runs into 1 8. .. 'iVc4+ 1 9 Wgl .l:!.g4 20 .l:!.xh7 Rd7 (D), when Black has some advantage. Every piece on light squares!

17.  .

'iVa6+ 18 @gl gxh6 19 i.f6 .l:!.g4! With opposite-coloured bishops, both sides have rushed to exploit their respective strengths.

FRENCH DEFENCE 303

20 .l:!.bl Better, but still good for Black, is 20 .l:.xh6 ! ? Rd7 2 1 .l:.xh7 .l:.ag8 22 .l:.h2.

20. .

[diagram]

[diagram]

304 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

spring into action along the 4th rank; for exam ple, by .l:!.h4 and .l:!.b l -b4. The bishop-pair can also become more effective with more room to manoeuvre in. Here and in other Winawer posi tions the move dxc5 is an important part of White's bag of tricks. 11  llld7 12 .l:!.h4 'iVa5? ! A mistake; Black's queen belongs o n c 7 in these lines. Note that l 2 ... lllxc5? is a blunder due to 1 3 .l:!.xa4, but 1 2. .. jg,c6 ! is double-edged, when White has to attend to his pawns and a complex battle will result. 13 jg,e3! .l:!.c8 Logically bringing another piece into play along the open file, but 1 3. .. jg,c6 was still cor rect. Not 1 3. .. 'iVxc3+?! 14 Wfl and the queen is in trouble. 14 .l:!.bl jg,c6 15 'iVd2 'iVxa3 16 .l:!.g4 Rf8 (D) 17 .l:!.bb4 Not a bad move, preparing to swing the rook into action along the fifth rank. Perhaps even better was Short's line 1 7 @fl ! ? lllxc5 1 8 jg,xc5 'iVxc5 1 9 ctJd4 with the idea 'iVf4 and a strong attack. This illustrates White's use of the tripled pawns to secure a support-point for his knight. 17 ... lllf5 Practically a necessity in order to defend key squares. The knight is Black's best piece, so White will get rid of it. In the meantime, White gets a situation with opposite-coloured bishops that will aid his attack. 18 jg,xf5 exf5 19 .l:!.gf4! 'iVal+ 20 'iVdl ! The advantage i s also clear i n a queenless middlegame. 20 ... 'iVxdl+?! 20 ... 'iVxc3+! should have been tried, when the trick 2 1 jg,d2 'iVxc5 22 .l:!.xb7 ! (with the idea jg,b4) can be answered by 22 ...a5. 21 @xdl .l:!.e8 22 .l:!.xf5 @g8 23 .l:!.g4 .l:!.e7 24 .l:!.g3 Rh7 25 jg,d4 .l:!.he8 26 .l:!.f4 tt:Jrs 27 .l:!.fg4

(D)

27 ...g5 Instead, occupying the natural blockading square on e6 only lets White's knight in on the ideal attacking square f5: 27 ... llle6 28 lllh4 .l:!.g8 29 ctJf5 .l:!.d7 30 lt:Jd6 and the f-pawn rolls forward. 28 hxg6+ lllxg6 28 ...fxg6 is met by 29 .l:!.f4 or 29 .l:!.h4. 29 .l:!.h3 jg,d7 30 lllg5+ @g8 31 e6! (D) Finally this key breakthrough, opening the fatal diagonal for White's unopposed bishop on d4. From now on White has a clearly winning advantage.

31...jg,xe6 32 lll

xe6 .l:!.xe6 33 .l:!.xh6 .l:!.el+ 34 @d2 .l:!.8e2+ 35 @d3 @rs 36 .l:!.h5 ! .l:!.e4

FRENCH DEFENCE 305

White wins the ending after 36 ... lll e5+ 37 i.xe5 .l:.xe5 38 .l:.xe5 .l:!.xe5 39 .l:!.b4. 37 .l:!.xe4 dxe4+ 38 @d2 .l:!.bl 39 c6 Or 39 g3 ! . 39 .bxc6 40 i.xa7 @e7 4 1 i.d4 .l:!.b5 42 .l:!.xb5 cxb5 43 c4! The finishing blow. Bishop vs knight with an extra passed pawn will win. 43 bxc4 44 @c3 ctJf4 45 g3 lll e6 46 @xc4 @d6 47 i.f6 @c6 48 g4 @d6 49 c3 @c6 50 i.e5 lllc5 51 @d4 lt:Jd3 52 i.g3 lllc5 53 i.f4 1-0 White manoeuvres his bishop to the centre: 53 ...llld3 54 i.e3 lllc5 55 @e5 llla4 56 i.d4. French Poisoned Pawn

1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 lll

c3 i.b4 4 e5 lll e7 5 a3 i.xc3+ 6 bxc3 c5 7 'ig4 (D) The grand old flagship of the Winawer Vari ation. White wants to exploit Black's lack of the dark-squared bishop by direct means. He will try to get Black to weaken himself or castle into a potential attack. It makes sense to work on the side of the board where he has space and to wards which his bishops aim. In addition, the e5-pawn cramps Black in that part of the board. As is true in the positional lines, White would love to get rid of the g-pawn so that his unop posed dark-squared bishop can have a field day on squares like h6 and f6. For his part Black's first goal is to attack White's centre and queenside, where White al ready has serious weaknesses. Ironically, how ever, he usually ends up playing on the kingside too, whether or not he castles in that direction. The key move is .. .f6, which helps defensively but also gives him central threats and a very useful f-file. In any case, Black' s first decision is whether to gambit the pawn by 7 ... 'ic7, or play 7 ...O-O and hang on to his material for a while. The latter is the preferred choice these days but it' s not clear that the former won't come back into fashion. As in so many lines of the French Defence, one notices the persistence of the central pawn structure. This gives both the positional and tactical themes a certain logical consistency, al though it doesn't seem to limit their variety. The Gambit 7  'ic7 8 'iVxg7 .l:!.g8 9 'iVxh7 Now in addition to the other advantages listed above, White has a passed h-pawn. It is worth remembering, however, that the advance of a passed rook's pawn very seldom poses a threat until far into the middlegarne. Their real strength appears in simplified positions and, of course, as outside passed pawns in an ending. 9cxd4 10 lll e2 (D) Other moves like 10 @dl are possible, yet this is how they've played it for 50 years in the vast majority of games. We'll examine two of those encounters from this position, with general considerations dis cussed therein. Karpov - Agdestein Oslo 1984 10 .. lllbc6 11 f4

306 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1 1 cxd4? lll xd4! (threatening c2) 1 2 ctJxd4? is bad in view of 1 2. .. 'iVc3+.

11...jg,d7 12 'iVd3 dxc3 13 'iVxc3 (D)

Simply recapturing the c3-pawn is very pop ular, since it has both a cramping effect and at tacking strengths. On the other hand, the c-file is open for Black's rooks. There are many other moves here such as 1 3 I:Ibl, 1 3 I:Igl and 1 3 lll xc3. Let's take stock. White's advantages are pretty obvious: he has cleared out the kingside, which for one thing means that the move .. .f6 (to undermine his centre) would be unsupported by a pawn. His bishop-pair can be usefully placed on d3 and e3 for both attack and de fence, although the dark-squared bishop can be a target in that case. A bishop on a3 would be wonderful but generally it's just too hard to achieve. In view of this his most potent posi tional threat is to expand on the kingside by means of g4 (preceded by either h3 or I:Ig 1 ). That would deny Black's knight the powerful f5-square. Alternatively, White can try to play g3, jg,g2 and O-O; that arrangement of pieces is another trade-off because when the bishop moves off its original diagonal White tends to be subject to central and queenside attack. Finally, we shouldn't forget that h-pawn. If White can get bishops to d3 and f6, then Black will at the very least have to devote several pieces in an attempt to stop it from marching up the board and promoting. What is Black doing in the meantime? He has sacrificed a pawn, apparently in order to get at White's queenside and gain development. That lead in development is absolutely critical because if he waits too long for White to get his position organized (and especially to get his bishops out!) he will have little to counter White's space, extra pawn, and bishop-pair. Fortunately, his knights at the moment are very well-placed and influential. It' s a kind of semi closed position in which for now the knights are superior to bishops. He also has play down the c-, g- and h-files, whereas right now White isn't using his king' s bishop or rook at all. Is that enough to make up for White's own advan tages? Probably not, except that White also has isolated c- and a-pawns, and hasn't castled. Note too that there is an important interior weaknesses on e3, a square that can be an chored by ...d4 and is particularly vulnerable to a knight on f5 and a queen on b6. Generally speaking, White' s advantages, if he can keep them, are probably the better ones in the long term, so you will usually find Black trying to upset the equilibrium in the near term. All in all one can see why players would be willing to take both sides of this position. 13  tt:Jrs A multipurpose move that holds off ctJd4 and controls e3. This introduces the idea of ... 'iVb6 at some point, which White promptly forestalls. 14 .i:Ibl (D) 14  I:IcS!?

14. ..

O-O-O connects rooks and is considered better. Then . . . @b8 clears the way for ... I:Ic8, and also for the intriguing manoeuvre ... b6, ... jg,c8 and ...jg,a6 or ... jg,b7. For all the time that takes, White cannot easily find his way into Black's position. 15 jg,d2

FRENCH DEFENCE 307

White protects against 15 ... lll cd4, which was otherwise a strong move. 15 . d4 16 'iVd3 lllce7 17 lll xd4! lll xd4 18 'ixd4 ctJf5 19 'ixa7 'iVxc2 (

D)

This sort of position is not easy in spite of White's extra pawns, because Black has all the light squares and a superb piece placement ifhe gets ... jg,c6 in. 20 'iVxb7! A good example of what we saw in the intro ductory chapters: a pawn-raiding queen, as long as it can't be trapped, often does better to stay close to the enemy camp to bother his pieces in stead of retreating to hypothetical safety. 20 . .l:.c7 (D) 21 'iVb8+ Karpov gives the remarkable variation 21 'iVa8+ .l:!.c8 22 .l:!.b8 @e7 ! ? 23 jg,b4+? (23 'iVb7! ) 2 3. . . .l:!.c5 ! 24 jg,xc5+ 'iVxc5 25 .l:!.xg8 'iVcl + 26 @e2 jg,b5+ 27 @f3, which should be a draw af ter 27 ... 'iVdl + 28 @f2, because 27 ... jg,c6+? 28 @g4! jg,xa8 loses to the double attack 29 jg,b5 ! , threatening the queen and mate! Amazing.

21. .. .l:!.c8 22 'iVb4

Now the situation looks bad for Black, in spite of a few tactical details. 22  llld4! 23 @f2 .l:!.g4? 23 ... 'iVe4! 24 .l:!.el 'iVd5 was suggested, but 25 .l:!.c l lllc2 26 'iVd6 ! should do. 24 'iVxd4! 'iVxbl 25 .l:.gl ! 'iVa2 26 jg,e2 .l:!.c2 27 .l:!.dl! (D) Having given up the exchange, Karpov's bishops and three extra pawns reign. Notice how the central structure has remained basi cally the same throughout the entire game. That is typical not only of the Winawer but of the French Defence in general. 27 . .l:!.g8 28 g3 jg,c6 29 'iVd3 jg,d5 30 'iVb5+ @rs 31 f5! exf5 32 'iVxd5! 'iVxd5 33 jg,b6+ @e7 34 .l:!.xd5 @e6 35 .l:!.d6+ @xe5 36 jg,f4+ @e4 37 .l:.d7 .l:!.a8 38 .l:!.e7+ 1-0 Fichtl - Golz Dresden 1959 10 . dxc3 11 f4 ctJbc6 12 jg,e3 A slightly odd move-order by both sides. 12 'iVd3 jg,d7 1 3 jg,e3 lllf5 would transpose. White is playing this way in order to keep the c-file closed and develop quickly. 12  jg,d7 13 'iVd3 ctJf5 (D) 14 jg,d4!? One of White's ideas with jg,e3 was to dis courage ...d4 and this move flat-out prevents it. Nevertheless, the bishop can't be maintained on d4 without allowing exchanges that at least equalize for Black. Other games have seen 14

308 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

14. .. O-O-O 15 i.xc3?!

[diagram]

18 O-O-O l:ige8!

Now the idea is ... e4.

[diagram]
White has four passed pawns but is getting crushed in the centre.

21.  d3 22 ctJc3 ctJc4! (D)

[diagram]

1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 ctJc3 i.b4 4 e5 c5 5 a3 i.xc3+

6 bxc3 llle7 7 g4 O-O (D) Instead of sacrificing the g-pawn, Black de fends it and intends to confront White on the

FRENCH DEFENCE 309

kingside, almost always by means of ...f6 or ...f5. He retains the option of ...c4 (keeping White' s bishop away from d3) or ... cxd4 (at tacking the centre). The drawback of 7 ... O-O is that it subjects Black to a dangerous attack by White's pieces, in particular the queen on g4, knight on f3, and one or both bishops. The attack can be supple mented by h4-h5 and .l:.h3, or by f4, assuming that White's knight has moved. Now 8 i.d3, bringing the bishop to d3 before deciding upon anything else, is the overwhelm ing favourite. 8 Cllf3 is the most natural move, but was put under a cloud by several games, in cluding the following: Roth - Kindermann Vienna 1996

[diagram]
e5! This is the characteristic pawn-break in the 7 ... O-O line. If Black gets ... e5 in, he'll usually be in control of events. Of course, White will sometimes prevail for tactical reasons. 12 'iVg3 (D) .. .l:!.xf3! Here is another instance of the eternal ex change sacrifice on f3 in the French Defence; it is only rivalled in frequency by the ... .l:!.xc3 sac rifice in the Sicilian Dragon. 13 gxf3 1 3 'iVxf3 e4. 13 . c4 14 jg,e2 'iVa5! Black attacks the c3-pawn, but also unpins his knight. 15 i.d2 Cllf5 16 'iVg5 exd4 17 cxd4 c3 18 i.e3 lllcxd4 19 i.xd4 lllxd4 20 .l:.gl Most of these moves are forced. Now White seems to have an attack but everything is cov ered. 20  g6 21 'iVe5 'iVc5 22 'iVeS+ 'iVf8 23 'iVxf8+ Rxf8 (D) Black is an exchange for a pawn down, yet he's winning easily; look at White's five iso lated pawns and his rooks. 24 @dl i.f5 25 .l:.cl .l:.e8 26 .l:.el b5! 27 i.d3 i.xd3 28 .l:.xe8+ @xe8 29 cxd3 c2+ 30 @el a5 A pleasant finish. Kindermann will just march his pawns homeward.

31 f4 b4 32 axb4 axb4 33 Rd2 Cllb3+ 34

@xc2 lllxcl 35 @xcl Rd7 0-1 We'll look at a few games after 8 i.d3, be ginning with two very nice ones for White. J. Polgar - Uhlmann Amsterdam 1990 8 i.d3 (D) 8 ... f5 9 exf6 .l:.xf6 10 i.g5 .l:.f7 11 'iVh5 White's unsophisticated strategy comes down to checkmate. 1 1 .. h6 1 1 ...g6 is also played. We won't cite theory here but follow the game instead. 12 i.g6 .:.rs 13 lllf3 lllbc6 14 o-o 'iVc7!? 1 4. .. i.d7 ! is probably the best move (and certainly the most practical one), leading to complicated play. 15 i.xe7 'iVxe7

310 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

15 ... lll xe 7 l 6 ctJe5 ( D) is the very picture of a dominant knight versus a bad bishop: Black can try to get rid of the knight by 16 ... lll c6 17 f4 cxd4, but 1 8 i.d3 ! threatens g6 with a mating attack, and 1 8. .. lll xe5 19 fxe5 doesn't help because it opens the f-file. 16 .U.ael 'iVf6!? Maybe 16. .. i.d7 is better, but then 1 7 c4 is tough to meet. 17 lll e5! cxd4?! 18 f4! dxc3 A cute line is 1 8 . .. lllxe5 19 fxe5 'iV g5 20 .:.Xf8+ Rxf8 21 'iVf3+ Re7 22 'if7+ Rd8 23 f8+ <Jl;c7 24 'iVd6#. 19 g4! (D) White plays inventively, combining f4 with g4. Polgar is devastating in such positions. 19 .. 'iVe7 20 i.d3!

20 g5 lll

xe5 isn't clear. 20 . 'iVeS 21 ctJg6 i.d7 On 2 1 ....l:!.f7 comes 22 g5. 22 g5! .l:!.f7 23 gxh6 gxh6 24 Whl! lll e7 25 :g1 lll f5 and here the easiest of several wins was 26 i.xf5 .l:!.xf5 27 'iVxh6 Rf7 28 'iVh7+ Rf6 29 llle5. Polzin - Giemsa Bad Wiessee 2004 8 i.d3 'iVa5 9 i.d2 lll bc6 (D) Black tries to tie White down to defending his queenside. 10 ctJf3 By the way: whether White or Black, always watch out for i.xh7+. 10 . fS 11 exf6 .l:!.xf6 12 'iVh5 ctJf5 13 c4! 1 3 g4 is also promising. Then 1 3. .. c4 leads to a heavily-analysed sequence that shows pure attack vs defence at its best and is probably somewhat in White's favour, one line being 14 gxf5 cxd3 1 5 .l:.gl i.d7 1 6 c4 'iVc7 1 7 i.h6 i.e8 1 8 'ih4 filh6 19 'iVxh6 dxc4 20 cxd3 cxd3

21 f6 i.g6, Shirov-Khalifman, Dos Hermanas

2003; now 22 .l:!.xg6! ? hxg6 23 'ixg6 looks

FRENCH DEFENCE 311

[diagram]

13. .

[diagram]

312 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

1 e4 d6 2 d4 tZ:lf6 (D)

[diagram]

2 c4 and 2 tZ:lf3, but 2 ...tZ:lf6 is perfectly viable

against those moves as well, possibly leading into a version of the King's Indian Defence.

314 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black can go his own way with things like I d4 d6 2 c4 e5 or I d4 d6 2 'Lif3 .tg4 ! ? . A great deal of theory now exists on these and related posi tions. We've come a long way from the days of a near-compulsory I e4 e5 and I d4 d5. 3 'Lic3 White plays the most natural and important move, defending the attacked pawn. The Pirc is one of those openings in which the early op tions are instructive, so we'll look at a couple over the next few moves. Here 3 .td3 is some times played, intending to enter into a system with c3 and perhaps 'Lie2. There's nothing wrong with that, of course, but apart from the normal and good 3 ...g6 it allows Black to strike out in the centre immediately by 3 ...e5. Then 4 c3 allows the cute idea 4 ... d5 ! . It's a case of "If you don't want to take the centre, I shall !'' I've discussed this position briefly in Chapter 3 (un der 'Cross-Pollination'). Let me repeat and ex pand upon that exposition. After 3 .td3 e5 4 c3 d5, we find that it's a great asset to know about a wide variety of chess positions and themes. Chemin did a fascinating analysis of 4 ...d5, which I've abbreviated and modestly revised. The play will usually continue 5 dxe5 'Lixe4

In Chapter 3, we already looked at White's option 6 .txe4 dxe4 7 'iVa4+ (7 'iVxd8+ @xd8 gives Black the two bishops and active play; e.g., 8 ..Bf4 'Lid7 9 'Lid2 'Lic5) 7 ... .td7 8 'iVxe4 .tc6. The position is similar to pawn sacrifices made in various openings. Here 9 'iVg4 is forced, when 9 ... 'iVd7 ! is very strong: 1 0 'iVg3 ( I O 'iVxd7+ 'Lixd7 1 1 'Lif3 .txf3 1 2 gxf3 'Lixe5 1 3 Qe2

O-O-O) I O. ..

'Lia6 ! ; for example, 1 1 'Lie2 .tb5 ! 1 2 a4 'Lic5 ! 1 3 axb5 'Lid3+ 14 @fl 'Lixc I , etc. Chernin's 9 ...h5 is also good. But let's continue with a better and more re alistic way for White to develop: 6 'Lif3 'Lic6 7 O-O (7 'iVe2 'Lic5 8 .tc2 .tg4! ; a high-level en counter Yusupov-Adams, Hastings 1 989/90 went 7 'Libd2 'Lic5 8 'Lib3 ..Bg4 { or 8 ... 'Lixd3+ }

9 O-O 'iVd7 I O l:tel O-O-O with equality) 7 ...

'Lic5 8 .tc2 .tg4! 9 l:tel (9 'Libd2 .te7 or even 9 ... d4! ?) 9 ... .te7 (D), shown in the diagram. This position is remarkably like a main line of the Open Variation of the Ruy Lopez, namely, I e4 e5 2 'Lif3 'Lic6 3 .tb5 a6 4 .ta4 'Lif6 5 O-O 'Lixe4 6 d4 b5 7 .tb3 d5 8 dxe5 .te6 9 c3 'Lic5 I O ..Bc2, and now (for example) IO ... .te7 1 1 l:tel (or 1 1 'iVe2 .tg4) I I ....tg4! (D), which helps to control d4 and in many cases is fol lowed by ...d4 or even ... 'Lie6 and ...d4. In fact, the only difference between the two lines is Black's insertion of ...a6 and ... b5 in the Ruy Lopez version. Without entering into yet

PIRC DEFENCE 315

another digression, I'll just say that this has both positive and negative features. 3 . g6 Here there's an important transposition 3 . .. e5 4 ll'Bf3 lt'ibd7, when we're in a Philidor De fence! What's more, this is arguably the only safe way to get to this version of the Philidor because 1 e4 e5 2 lt'Bf3 d6 3 d4 ll'Bf6 allows 4 dxe5 ll'Bxe4 5 iYd5, which is not to everyone's taste. Details about this and associated move order issues can be found in Chapter 7. We shall now move on to a discussion of the main lines of the Pirc. Austrian Attack

4 f4 (D)

As I've pointed out with many examples at the very beginning of Chapter 3 on pawn-struc tures, the first reaction to 'unusual' defences that cede the centre is generally to throw as many pawns forward as possible and push the opponent off the board. The Pirc was infre quently played and generally held in low regard until the mid- l 960s, and indeed this response dominated early theory.

4. ..

.tg7 Before moving on to the main line 5 lt'Bf3, played in thousands of games, let's see if we can understand what the relation between this structure and pawn advances might be. Austrian Attack with 5 e5

5 e5 (D)

What about advancing right away? You won't find much in the books about this, and it's easy to say that 5 e5 is too ambitious, especially since it resembles other openings in which rash pawn attacks are insufficiently supported and expose the centre. But it's another thing to show that. Let's do our own analysis and per haps pick something up about how to study an opening while we're at it. As we know, varia tions that are not highly respected are often the most instructive. Let's look at two answers to 5 e5 as representative of typical ideas in the Aus trian Attack:

[diagram]
ll'ifd7

[diagram]
dxe5

A)

5  .  lt'ifd7 This is a dynamic move in the spirit of the Pirc, avoiding simplification and accepting the challenge. The positions that result are little explored and instructive to investigate. 6 ll'Bf3 c5! The recommended continuation for Black. It's consistent to destroy White's centre before he consolidates; of course, that depends upon the outcome! This line transposes into 5 ll'Bf3 c5 6 e5 lt'ifd7. By the 5 e5 move-order, White has avoided a few of Black's options along the way. 7 lt'Bg5!? This odd sortie may well be the best move, although 7 .tc4 could use more investigation. Positions with a knight on d7 and the possibil ity of the move e6 are notoriously tactical, so the move 7 lt'Bg5 is likely to occur to you if you've run across such positions before.

316 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black's hope was to see something along the Jines of 7 exd6 O-O 8 dxc5 (8 dxe7 'iVxe7+ 9 'iVe2 'iVxe2+ 1 0 ll'Bxe2 l:te8 1 1 @f2 ll'Bc6 1 2 c3 ll'Bf6 with an initiative for the pawn) 8 ...'iVa5 ! 9 ..Be2 ..Bxc3+ ! 1 0 bxc3 'iVxc3+ 1 1 ..Bd2 'iVxc5 1 2 dxe7 l:te8 ! 1 3 l:tbl lt'Bc6 (D). This is the game B.Ivanovic-M.Gurevich, Lucerne Wcht 1 989. White can't easily reorga nize, and look at those exposed internal weak nesses on e3 and e4! This way of destroying White's centre is relatively common, especially the device of allowing White's capture dxe7 and responding with ... l:te8. 7  cxd4 Worse is 7 ...h6?! 8 ll'Bxf7 ! @xf7 9 e6+ @g8 10 exd7 lt'Bxd7 1 1 ..Be3. 8 e6! (D) 8 . 'iVa5!? Not 8 ...dxc3?? 9 exf7+ @f8 10 ll'Be6+. But a good move to counter White's attack might be 8 ... lt'Bc5 9 exf7+ @f8, when Black's mass of central pawns makes up for his poor king posi tion. 9 exf7+ @f8 And above all, not 9 ...@d8?? 1 0 lt'Be6# . 10 lt'Be6+ @xf7 11 ll'Bxd4 lt'Bc5!? Now Black gets good piece activity. Play might continue as follows: 12 ..Bc4+ ..Be6 13 ll'Bxe6! ..Bxc3+ 14 @f2 ll'Bxe6 15 bxc3 'iVc5+!? 16 'iVd4 l:tc8 17 ..Bb3 (D) 17 . lt'Bd7!? Black still has difficulty freeing his king, and he isn't out of the woods after 17. .. 'iVf5 1 8 l:tel ll'Bc6 1 9 'iVd5 either. 18 l:tel ll'idf8 19 g4! Here White still has threats. Naturally both sides have a lot of other options along the way, and it's unlikely that White can actually force an advantage in this line. But the characteristics of the position are what count here, and they can only be indicated by analysis (which in this case is a lot of fun). Mainly, I wanted to show that it's easy to dismiss 'premature' attacks on principle without testing whether the principle in question applies to a specific position (or even whether it is valid at all). 8) 5 ..dxe5 6 fxe5!? lt'Bd5 7 ll'Bf3 (D) White retains his centre. Then we have Black's bishop looking rather restricted on g7. An apparently logical move is: 7 .f6? However, this tends to be dubious before Black has castled and developed, and is ex tremely poor in this exact position. We shall look at a better option after the end of this line.

PIRC DEFENCE 31 7

8 exf6 White makes his usual response to .. .f6. The recapture 8 ... ..Bxf6 would leave Black with a weak isolated e-pawn on an open file; then 9 ctJe4, 9 ..Bc4 and 9 ..Bh6 are all good moves. Therefore Black in principle would prefer: 8  exf6?! (D) Recapturing with the pawn might be OK in some positions but here it is much too early be cause Black's king is stuck in the centre and he also suffers from a weakness on e6 and a bishop on g7 that is blocked off. 9 ..Bc4 W/Je7+ Against 9 ... ..Be6, IO Wife2 simply wins. The only apparent try is I O. .. @f7, but after 1 1 O-O there's no defence to both ctJg5+ and ctJe5+. Moreover, the supporting move 9 ...c6 fails to I O Wlie2+ ! @f7 1 1 O-O l:te8 1 2 ct:Jg5+ @f8 1 3 Wiff3 ! . 10 @f2! Threatening l:tel .

10. .

ct:Jxc3 1 1 bxc3 Wifd6 12 l:tel + @dS 13 a4 ..Bf5 14 ..Ba3 White has a massive advantage. This is a poorly-played example, but it serves as a warn ing as to the consequences of neglected devel opment. Obviously, Black is much better off accept ing the limited problems that stem from 7 ...

O-O

8 ..Bc4 (D). In this position the defence that has actually been played by grandmasters is 8 .....Be6, when 9 ..Bxd5 ..Bxd5 I 0 ct:Jxd5 W/Jxd5 1 1 Wife2 is a modest line with an excellent record. Black normally plays l l ...b5 (to stop c4) 1 2 O-O; for example, 1 2. .. ctJd7 1 3 c3 ( 1 3 b3!, intending 1 3. ..b4 1 4 a3 !) 1 3. .. ctJb6 ( 1 3. .. a6) 1 4 b3! a5 1 5 ..Ba3 Wifd7 16 ..Bc5 with the better game for White, Unzicker-Chandler, Buenos Aires OL 1 978. At the end White is enjoying more space, while Black's bishop is still hemmed in on g7. Possibly Black should opt for 8 ... ctJxc3 9 bxc3 c5 10 O-O, or 8 ...ctJb6 9 ..Bb3 ..Bg4 IO O-O ctJc6 1 1 ..Be3 ct:Ja5 1 2 Wifd3! ? and White's centre and space may count for somewhat more than the bishop-pair, but that's open to argument. After all that, I should add that after 5 ... dxe5, 6 dxe5 (D) is less instructive but may be even a better move (or at least an easier one to handle in practice). Theory gives White a slight advantage after 6 ... Wif xdl + 7 Qxdl ct:Jg4 (7 ... ctJh5 resembles the main line 5 ctJf3 O-O 6 e5 dxe5 7 dxe5 ctJh5, but in our case you won't get the pin on g4 that hap pens there - see below; one of several ways for White to proceed is the calm 8 ..Be2! ..Bh6 9 ct:Jd5 @d8 I 0 g3 c6 I I ctJc3 Qc7 1 2 ..Be3 with better-placed pieces) 8 ctJd5 ! @d8 9 Qel c6 I O ctJc3 f6 ! ? 1 1 h 3 ctJh6 1 2 ctJf3 .

318 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

In general, 5 ... dxe5 may leave something to be desired; it illustrates the dangers of early simplification when the opponent commands more space. What have we learned by this exercise? For one thing, White seems to have more positive chances after 5 e5 than indicated by what little existing theory is devoted to it. More signifi cantly, we see how one might go about investi gating a position on one's own, and how helpful it is to have general knowledge about structures and their characteristic properties. The Austrian Attack Main Line: 5 ll'Bf3 5 lt'Bf3 (D) With this natural move we return to normal theory. Now in the face of 6 e5 (or 6 .ltd3 and 7 e5), Black has two logical reactions, the natural de veloping move 5 ...O-O and the central counter attack 5 ...c5. We'll try to understand each. Austrian with Conventional Development

5 ...O-O

[diagram]

16 c3 with an edge for White, Banas-Kinder

[diagram]

PIRC DEFENCE 319

If White wants to keep the pieces on, 7 fxe5 ct:Jd5 8 ..Bc4 will generally transpose to the 5 e5 line; that's a position that's a little irritating for Black and makes you wonder about 6 .. .dxe5. 7 . . . 'iVxdl+ S @xdl ctJh5! (D) Black sees a third option (other than 8 ... ctJfd7 or 8 ... ctJg4). With a knight on the rim Black can try to force weaknesses. Instead, 8 ... l:td8+ 9 ..Bd3 ctJd5 10 ct:Jxd5 l:txd5 1 1 @e2 is probably better for White, at least in practice. 9 ..Bc4!? Allowing doubled pawns but gaining the bishop-pair in return. 9 ... ..Bg4! As mentioned above, this pin wasn't avail able in the line 5 e5 dxe5 6 dxe5 'iVxdl + 7 @xd l . White has to be very careful now. 10 ctJe2! (

D)

Odd, but perhaps best. The natural 1 0 @e2 ct:Jc6 1 1 ..Be3 runs into 1 l .....Bxf3+ 12 @xf3? ..Bxe5 ! ; and 10 ..Be3 ..Bh6! shows another point of . . . ct:Jh5.

10  ..Bxf3 11 gxf3 ct:Jc6 12 c3 l:tad8+ 13 @c2 Remember this handy square for the king; you'll want to go there in queenless middle games that arise from numerous openings.

13.  .

..Bh6 14 b4 e6 The game is equal. 6 ..Be3 (D) Beliavsky - Anand Munich 1991 This has been a successful move in many games; White not only develops, but also dis courages ... c5, which is Black's main source of counterplay. Anand finds a way to challenge White's centre that draws upon several of the main ideas that the Pirc has to offer. Then he ap plies a touch of ingenuity. 6 .. b6 Black prepares to play ...c5 anyway, and he hopes that the move ... ..Bb7 will come in handy at some point. Notice that 6 ... ct:Jg4 is met by 7 ..igl followed by h3. That's why White didn't castle first before playing ..Be3.

[diagram]
This is the standard picture of an undermin ing process by Black.

9 h3 ctJh6

A standard Pirc manoeuvre: from here the knight can go to f5 hitting g3 and d4. But while this happens, White will form a huge centre. 10 d5! ..Bb7 11 'iVd2 1 1 g4 keeps the knight trapped and unable to move (another Pirc theme that has won White

320 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

many a game), but Black has anticipated that: l l ...dxe5 1 2 fxe5 e6 ! (there are no obvious threats but suddenly all of Black's pieces will be aimed at the centre) 13 ..Bc4 ll:Bd7 ! 14 ..Bh2 l:te8 ! (D). 'The threat is stronger than its execution' ! 15 O-O exd5 16 ..Bxd5 ..Bxd5 17 ll:Bxd5 ll:Bxe5 1 8 ll:Bxe5 ..Bxe5 1 9 ..Bxe5 l:txe5 20 ll:Bf6+ @g7 and Black is a pawn ahead. 11  ll:Bf5 12 ..Bh2 dxe5 13 fxe5 e6! 14 O-O-O 14 g4? ll:Bh4 takes away another central de fender; 14 d6 is met by 14 ... ll:Bd7 and the long diagonal adds to White's worries. 14 .. exd5 15 ll:Bxd5 ll:Bc6 If Black gets a knight to d4 everything will fall apart for White, so:

16 c3 ll:icd4!

[diagram]

22 d6 ll:Bd5 has the idea of ... c3 and also the

[diagram]

[diagram]

PIRC DEFENCE 321

play 6 ... .Bg4 directly? A plausible answer is that, without the possibility of ... lllg4, White can play 7 .Be3, but then 7 ...e5 ! ? is rather compli cated. Better is 7 h3 .Bxf3 8 Wkxf3; for example, 8 ...e5 9 dxe5 ! dxe5 1 0 f5 ! with a straightforward advantage, intending 10. .. lll c6 1 1 g4 llld4 1 2 Wkf2. J. Polgar - Svidler Tilburg 1996 6 ... llla6 (D) By developing his knight to the rim, Black prepares ...c5, keeps a diagonal open for his c8-bishop and, non-trivially, stays out of the way of pawn attacks by White. The move's main drawback, obviously, is that the knight is far from the centre and cannot be fully effective in that area of the board. As an instructive les son in positional themes you couldn't do better than to study this variation.

[diagram]
Since 8 ...cxd4 was a positional threat, and since 8 dxc5 lll xc5 brings the knight into the centre with an easy game, White tries to take the c5-square away from the knight and cramp Black's position at the same time. If he gets the chance he will simply forge ahead with his cen tral pawns by e5 and drive Black back, or he might play for f5 in conjunction with moves like Wke 1 -h4. This is all quite dangerous. For the moment, however, it is premature for White to play 8 e5? lllg4! 9 h3 cxd4 10 lll e2 llle3 ! . See how the centre keeps collapsing in these extended-centre lines? White should also avoid 8 .Bxa6? ! cxd4! 9 lll xd4 bxa6 (D). We talk about doubled a-pawns at several points in this book. Generally speaking, the sur render of one's light-squared bishop and ceding of the b-file is a poor deal. Here White's sound position should balance out those advantages; e.g., 1 0 Wkd3 with the idea of Whl and .Be3, or perhaps .Bd2. But L.Barczay-Sandor, Hungary 1 968 showed how easily the active black pieces can create threats: 10 lll b3? a5 ! 1 1 Wkf3 .Bb7 12 a4? (but 12 .Be3 a4 1 3 llld2 a3!) 12 ... Wkb6+ ! 1 3 .Be3 Wkb4 (suddenly the e-pawn is falling) 14 .l:i.ael ( 14 .Bd4 lllxe4!) 14 ... .Bxe4 1 5 lllxe4 Wkxe4 16 Wkxe4 lll xe4 1 7 .Bd4 .Bxd4+ 1 8 lllxd4 f5 ! 19 lllc6 Rf7 20 lllxa5 .l:i.fc8 (White has re gained his pawn - the a-pawn - but Black's e4- knight is a rock and he has two open queenside files) 2 1 .l:i.e2 .l:i.ab8 22 lll b3 .l:i.c4 23 a5 a6 24 .l:i.dl lll c5 ! 25 .l:i.del .l:i.b7 26 lll xc5 .l:i.xc5. White loses a pawn, and Black stands to win. 8 ... .Bg4 (D) A position with some curious features has arisen. It's often the case that if Black tries to

322 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

PIRC DEFENCE 323

square again!) 26 l:i.4f3 l:i.xfl + 27 l:i.xfl llle8 28 .i.d4 112-112. White' s remaining bishop is bad, so he doesn't have the forces to do any damage. 9 ... llld7 10 h3 .i.xf3 11 iVxf3 l:i.c8! (D) Simple but also insightful. White will stop ...b5 and use his bishop-pair if given half a chance, so Svidler decides to make room for his pieces in a more aggressive way, based upon some good calculation. 12 .i.e3 1 2 iYe2 would prevent c4 temporarily but 1 2. .. iVa5 1 3 lll d l (not 1 3 .i.d2?? c4! 1 4 .i.xc4 'iVc5+) 1 3. .. lll c7 ! (threatening ...b5) 1 4 .i.d2 iVb6 1 5 c4 e6 ! breaks up the centre just in time. ... iVa5 13 iVf2 c4 14 .i.e2 lllac5 Now that the knights have access to c5 they're roughly as good as the bishops. Giving up the dark squares by 1 4. .. .i.xc3? 1 5 bxc3 'iVxc3 is not recommended in any case, but White even has 1 6 .i.g4! (protecting c2) 1 6. .. l:i.c7 1 7 .i.d4 'iVa5 1 8 iVh4 with a terrific initiative. 15 .i.f3 llla4 16 lllxa4 'iVxa4 ( D) 17 c3 The b2-pawn needs protection, and neither 1 7 .i.d4? .i.xd4 1 8 iVxd4 'iYxc2 nor 1 7 l:i.abl b6 is very inspiring. l 7 ... lllc5 18 .i.xc5 l:i.xc5 19 l:i.ael iVa5 20 iVg3 iVb6 21 l:i.f2 e6 22 dxe6 fxe6 23 .i.g4 l:i.f6 24 iVe3 h5 25 .i.dl l:i.c8 26 iVxb6 1/z-112 The opposite-coloured bishops ensure equal ity. A fair result from a well-played game. Hellers - Ftacnik Haninge 1989

6. .. lll

c6 (D) This is the most conventional move. It strikes at the slightly shaky d4 point ( ... .i.g4 can fol low) and Black contemplates ...e5. Having given 6 ... llla6 so much attention, I'm going to pick out only a few points of interest here.

7 O-O

White has one very dangerous alternative: a) 7 .i.e3 lllg4 8 .i.gl e5 9 fxe5 dxe5 10 d5 lll d4 is not clear, but probably Black stands sat isfactorily. b) 7 d5 lllb4 8 .i.'c4 (8 .i.e2 c5 ! ?) 8 ...c6 ! changes the central equation and should be OK after 9 a3 cxd5 10 exd5 llla6 or 10 ... iVa5 !?. These ideas also show up in the main line with 4 lllf3. c) 7 e5 is not so easy to equalize against, since Black has neither ...c5 nor ...e5 at his dis posal; for example, 7 ... dxe5 8 fxe5 llld7 ! ? (D) (with the idea of ... lllb4 and ... c5, although that may not achieve much; Black has the moves 8 ...lllg4 and 8 ...lll h5 to look at, and the same moves before exchanging - a key move against

324 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

every one of them is .i.e4, strengthening White's control over the centre; both sides should check theory for details). Now: c 1 ) 9 .i.e4 ! ? is very interesting, because Black needs a plan, and White does well after 9 ... lll b6 10 O-O .i.g4 1 1 .i.e3 ! with the idea l 1 ...lll c4 1 2 .i.f2 lllxb2? 1 3 iYbl lll c4 1 4 'iYxb7 lll 4a5 1 5 iYb5 .i.d7 16 l:i.abl l:i.b8 17 iYc5, when Black's pieces are uncoordinated, espe cially that knight on a5. c2) 9 llle4 lll b4 10 .i.c4 c5 1 1 c3 lllc6 1 2 O-O cxd4 1 3 cxd4 lll b6 1 4 .i.b3. Here is the key point. Since ...f6 isn't possible, Black needs to put pressure on the d-pawn or eliminate some of White's pieces: 14 ... .i.g4 ( 14 ... llla5 15 .i.c2 .i.e6 ! ? looks initially promising, but 1 6 iYel lll c6 1 7 iYh4 threatens various attacks with .i.h6, lll fg5, l:i.f3-h3, lll c5, etc., in whatever or der works !) 15 lll eg5 e6 16 h3 .i.xf3 17 lll xf3 iYd7 1 8 .i.g5 with a small but definite advan tage because of the dark squares and Black's hemmed-in g7-bishop, Wang Zili-D.Gurevich, Lucerne Wcht 1989. 7 ... .i.g4 8 eS (D) It makes a lot of sense to make this move when ...c5 is a long way off. 8  dxeS! There are two other possibilities that should give you an idea of the strength of White's cen tre: a) 8 ... llld7 9 .i.e3 dxe5 (9 ...lll b4 10 .i.e4!) 10 dxe5 f6 ( 10. .. lll b6) 11 exf6 exf6 (as so often, this turns out to leave Black's position a little airy) 1 2 h3 .i.e6 1 3 .i.b5 lll b6 1 4 'iYe2 l:i.e8 1 5 l:i.ad l 'iVe7 16 l:i.fel iYb4 17 llld4 .i.c4 1 8 iYf3 with a distinct edge, Hector-Ftacnik, Haninge 1 990. b) 8 ... lll h5? 9 .i.e3 dxe5 10 dxe5 f6 1 1 exf6 .i.xf6 1 2 h3 and Black's got that awful e-pawn and e6-square to deal with. 9 dxeS llldS 10 h3?! Better is 10 lll xd5 iYxd5 1 1 iYel ! . 1 0. . . lllxc3 11 bxc3 .i.fS 1 2 .i.e3 The g7-bishop is suffering, but we've al ready seen that ... f6 would come with problems and isn't worth it yet. 12 .. iYd7 Hellers-Ftacnik, Haninge 1989. It's about equal. White should play 1 3 l:i.bl and lll d4. Austrian with 5 . . . c5

1 e4 d6 2 d4 lllf6 3 lllc3 g6 4 f4 .i.g7 5 lll

f3 cS

(D)

Black plays to free his game immediately and avoid the cramped games that can arise af ter 5 ... O-O. The problem is that many lines here

PIRC DEFENCE 325

are simply tactical sequences of 'only' moves, so I'll try to limit the quantity of material. Note that 6 e5 lll fd7 ! ? (not the only move) transposes to the 5 e5 line. 6 .i.bS+ Hermlin - Chipashvili

USSR 1976

This is still the critical line. Black has held his own for years after 6 dxc5 'iVa5 7 .i.d3 'iVxc5, but this is the variation that most resem bles other openings in its positional themes, and deserves a look. We'll follow Kindermann M.Gurevich, Haifa Echt 1989: 8 'iVe2 O-O (if Black wants to be sure of getting ... .i.g4 in, he can play it now) 9 .i.e3 'iVa5 J O O-O (D). 1 0. .. lll c6 (JO. .. lllbd7 ! ? is a Sicilianesque move that has been tried out, but most players don't want to be so cramped) 1 1 a3 .i.g4 (the move-order has been a bit strange; normally

JO. ..

.i.g4 comes first) 1 2 h3 .i.xf3 1 3 'iVxf3 llld7 (Black is essentially playing a Sicilian Defence, where his knights are harmoniously placed and he should have equality; for the mo ment, ... .i.xc3 is threatened) 14 .i.d2 iVb6+ 1 5 Whl lllc5 1 6 l:i.abl lll xd3 1 7 cxd3 f5 ! . An ex cellent move. It creates a few weaknesses, but blocks off the fl-rook and especially the d2- bishop from entering the game; the move f5 would have freed them both. The game contin ued 1 8 llld5 ( 1 8 g 4 e6 19 gxf5 exf5 20 llld5 iVb3 2 1 .i.c3 l:i.ae8 22 iVg2 llle7, Glek-Lobron, Bundesliga 1 990/1 ; Black should have no prob lems) 1 8. ..iVb3 1 9 .i.c3 (the same position but without g4; the difference should favour Black somewhat, as ...e6 remains in the air) 1 9. .. l:i.f7 20 .i.xg7 Rxg7 2 1 'iVe3 e6 22 lll c3 d5 ! (D). Black has dissolved his weakness and taken over the initiative. He was never in trouble in the opening. We'll follow the game with minimal notes: 23 iVf3 fxe4 24 dxe4 d4! ? (24 ... l:i.af8 ! 25 exd5 l:i.xf4 26 'iVxf4 l:i.xf4 27 l:i.xf4 exd5 and ...d4 follows) 25 lll e2 iVxf3 26 l:i.xf3 e5 27 fxe5? l:i.xf3 28 gxf3 d3 ! 29 lllc3 (29 lll f4 lll xe5 30 l:i.dl g5 !) 29 ... l:i.f8 30 Rg2 lll xe5 3 1 l:i.fl g5 32 l:i.f2 lllg6 33 l:i.fl lll f4+ 34 Rg3 Rf6 35 h4 Re5 ! ? 36 hxg5 l:i.g8 37 Rh4 h6! ? 38 gxh6 l:i.g6 39 llldl (39 h7! l:i.h6+ 40 Rg3 l:i.xh7 4 1 Rf2 l:i.h2+ 42 Re3 l:i.xb2 43 l:i.bl !) 39 ...l:i.xh6+ 40 Rg3 l:i.g6+ 4 1 Rh4 Rd4 0- 1 . 6 . . . .i.d7 7 es This is the main move, leading to complica tions that any player of 5 ...c5 must know. 7 .i.xd7+ is a more interesting move from a posi tional point of view: 7 ... lllfxd7 (7 ... lll bxd7 8 d5 isn't as easy for Black, in part because 8 ... b5 can now run into 9 e5 and 8 ...O-O 9 iVe2 isn't comfortable) 8 d5 b5 ! ? 9 iVe2! b4 JO lll d l lll b6 ! ? (to prevent e5 by hitting the d-pawn) 1 1 O-O O-O (or 1 l ...iVc8 ! ?), and now: a) 12 c4 bxc3 1 3 lllxc3 'iVc8 ! intending ... iVa6, Martinovic-Jansa, Lingen 1 988. End ings should be fine for Black: the combination of ...c4 and the b-file grant active play. b) 1 2 lll f2 'iVc8 1 3 l:i.el ? ! a5 1/z-1/z Shirov Beliavsky, Madrid 1 997. Once again ... 'iVa6 is corning. c) 12 f5 ! has been suggested, because the knight can't get to e5 yet. Then 1 2. ..gxf5 1 3 c4 yields surprising compensation. As usual, f5 frees the c l-bishop and fl-rook.

326 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
PIRC DEFENCE 327

White's e-pawn is weak. Most of the lines in this whole variation (excluding 6 dxc5) have a positional basis but are also forcing. They should probably be learned by heart. The .tc4 Variation

1 e4 d6 2 d4 lll

f6 3 lll c3 g6 4 lll f3 4 .i.c4 could be the right move-order if you want to play this system, depending upon what you think of 4 ... lllxe4 5 .i.xf7 + (or 5 lll xe4 d5 6 'iVe2 ! ? dxe4 { 6 ... dxc4 ?? 7 lllf6#} 7 'iYxe4) 5 ... Rxf7 6 lllxe4 .i.g7, when a sample line is 7 ll:Bf3 l:i.f8 8 c3.

4. .. .i.g7 5 .i.c4 (D)

We'll take a quick look to see how both sides handle this potentially tactical line.

5 ... O-O

Rublevsky - Khalifman St Petersburg 1999 Now 5 ... lll xe4!? 6 .i.xf7+ (6 lllxe4!? is also possible) 6 ... Rxf7 7 lllxe4 l:i.f8 8 O-O Rg8 might be worth trying. Black has the bishop-pair and a central majority with a nice f-file. On the other hand, White has a space advantage and Black's squares down the e-file are vulnerable, while at the same time White's knights are nicely cen tralized. Probably it's one of those many chess positions in which, if the owner of the two bish ops (Black) can stabilize the position and avoid serious weaknesses, Illscentre and bishop-pair will assert themselves in the long run. But White looks ready to use his knights and major pieces along the open e-file to prevent that. 6 iVe2 c6 Black can't stop e5, but this stabilizes the centre.

7 e5 dxe5 8 dxe5 llld5 9 .i.d2 .i.g4!

This gets rid of some pieces and puts real pressure on White's e-pawn at the same time. 10 h3 Not 1 0 O-O-O?! e6 1 1 h3 .i.xf3 1 2 gxf3 llld7 1 3 f4 iVh4. Then Black has real pressure on the f4-pawn and White's pawn-structure is bad. 10.. .i.xf3 11 gxf3 ( D) 1 1 'iVxf3 e6 1 2 iVe2 llld7 1 3 f4 iVh4+ 1 4 iVf2 'iVxf2+ 1 5 Rxf2 f6 1 6 exf6 .i.xf6 and Black has some attack even with the queens off, Serrnek-Nogueiras, Moscow OL 1 994.

[diagram]
Or 1 l ...lll xc3 12 .i.xc3 e6. Notice that we're now in another of those ...e6/ ...c6 restraint struc tures and White has no d-pawn. Wrute lacks a good plan.

12 f4 lll

d7 Very solid. Black has at least equalized. 12 ... iVh4 1 3 iVg4 ! would gain a tempo because Black doesn't want to straighten out White's pawns when he also has the advantage of two bishops. 13 h4!? Trying to break things open a bit for Ills bish ops.

13. ..

lllxc3 14 .i.xc3 lllb6 15 .i.b3 h5 16 .i.d2 a5 17 a3 llld5! 18 c4 lll e7 Black heads for the perfect outpost on f5.

19 O-O-O lllf5 20 .i.c3 'iYe7 21 .i.c2 l:i.fd8 22

l:i.xd8+ iVxd8 23 .i.xf5 exf5 24 iVe3 'iVe7 25 l:i.dl .i.f8 26 iVb6 l:i.e8! (D) 27 e6!?

328 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White wants to attack. Instead, 27 .i.xa5 .i.h6 28 .i.d2 iYxh4 29 iYxb7 .i.xf4 30 'iYxc6 l:i.xe5 is a mess - look at all those passed pawns! But White's king isn't safe.

27. .. fxe6

Not 27 ... 'iVxe6? 28 iYd4. 28 iYxa5 .i.g7 29 l:i.gl .i.xc3 30 'iVxc3 Rf7 31 iYg3 iYf6 32 l:i.dl l:i.d8 11z_11z A double-edged variation, but Black was positionally better out of the opening. Classical Variation

1 e4 d6 2 d4 ll:Jf6 3 ll:Jc3 g6 4 ll:Jf3 il..g7 5 il..

e2

O-O 6 O-O (D)

6. ..

.i.g4 This is Black's most logical and classically motivated development. With this move he pre pares to put pressure on d4 by ... .i.xf3 and a combination of ... ll:Jc6 and ... e5, when his knights may well be a match for White's bish ops. 6 ... .i.g4 also helps to clear his back rank (if Black waits for h3, his bishop often has no where useful to go), and discourages White from pressing too hard in the centre. a) You can get a feel for White's space ad- vantage after 6 ... ll:Jc6?!, which allows 7 d5. A funny line is 7 ... ll:Je5 8 ll:Jd4 ! ? (8 ll:Jxe5 ! dxe5 9 .i.e3 leaves Black looking for a plan) 8 ...c5 ! 9 dxc6 ll:Jxc6 1 0 .i.e3 with an exact transposition to a Sicilian Dragon. White can meet 7 ... ll:Jb8 with 8 h3, preventing ... .i.g4, when Black is pressed for space. Another good approach is 8 l:i.el e5 ! ? (8 ... .i.g4 9 .i.f4) 9 dxe6 ! .i.xe6 1 0 .i.f4 with a simple central advantage: 1 0. .. h6 1 1 ll:Jd4 .i.d7 1 2 iYd2 Rh7 1 3 e5 ! dxe5 14 .i.xe5

(D) .

White has a substantial advantage in this game between two ex-World Champions, and it surprisingly turned into a miniature following 14 ...ll:Je4? 1 5 ll:Jxe4 .i.xe5 1 6 ll:Jf3 .i.g7 1 7 l:i.adl 'iVc8 1 8 .i.c4 .i.e8 1 9 ll:Jeg5+! hxg5 ( 1 9. .. Rg8 20 ll:Je6 wins for White) 20 ll:Jxg5+ Rg8 2 1 iYf4 ll:Jd7 22 l:i.xd7 ! .i.xd7 2 3 .i.xf7+ 1 -0 Tal Petrosian, USSR Cht (Moscow) 1 974. 7 .i.e3 One disadvantage of 6 ... .i.g4 is that it has allowed this move without White having to bother about ... ll:Jg4. Instead, 7 h3 .i.xf3 8 .i.xf3 has never given Black serious problems after 8 ...e5. White has the two bishops but his posi tion is hampered by the knight on c3, which al lows Black to sink his knight in on d4 and exchange a bishop, or otherwise play a well timed .. .f5. The tempo lost by h3 is meaningful; otherwise perhaps White could reorganize and gain the advantage. Instead of 8 ... e5, Black also has the more ambitious move 8 ... ll:Jc6, again

PIRC DEFENCE 329

taking advantage of his extra tempo. Then 9 .i.e3 e5 1 0 dxe5 dxe5 l l llld5 is well-answered by l l...lllxd5 12 exd5 llld4, but of course there' s oodles of theory to look at. 7 . . . lllc6 (D) 8 iYd2 Logical: White connects rooks, contemplates .i.h6, and challenges Black to advance in the centre. The other important main line is 8 d5, and then: a) 8 ... lll b8 can lead to the characteristic ma noeuvre 9 llld4 .i.xe2 1 0 'iYxe2 c5 l l lll f3 iYb6 1 2 l:i.abl iYa6! , either exchanging queens in a position with no weaknesses or mobilizing the queenside pawns. This may be Black's best line. b) 8 ... .i.xf3 9 .i.xf3 lll e5 1 0 .i.e2 c6! (D). Black has to strike quickly before White consolidates the two bishops. His plan includes moves like ... iYa5, ... cxd5, a rook to the c-file, and perhaps ... lllc4. A typical line goes 1 1 a4! ? ( 1 1 f4! i s probably good, but some players may find it too loosening; one line among many is l l . ..llled7 12 dxc6 { or 12 .i.d4 } 12 ... bxc6 1 3 iYd3 'iVb8 1 4 a3 with a small edge; play what works !) l l...a5 ! ? ( l l ...iYa5 1 2 l:i.a3 aims for l:i.b3, but 1 2. .. l:i.fc8 1 3 iYd2 cxd5 14 exd5 lllc4 1 5 .i.xc4 l:i.xc4 1 6 l:i.b3 b6! is equal, and illus trates a common plan for Black) 12 .i.d4 llled7 1 3 iYd2 'iYc7 1 4 l:i.adl l:i.ac8 1 5 l:i.fel l:i.fd8 and White has difficulty playing for advantage be cause Black' s pieces are so well-placed, Rozen talis-Ftaenik, Manila OL 1 992. We now return to 8 iYd2 (D): 8 ... e5 8 ... l:i.e8 used to be played, a useful move that waits for White to commit before playing ...e5. But White has a more useful move in 9 l:i.fel ! a6! ? (to prevent lllb5 in view of the line 9 ... e5? ! 1 0 d5 .i.xf3 1 1 .i.xf3 llld4 12 .i.xd4 exd4 1 3 lllb5; note that 9 l:i.fel protected the e-pawn in this variation) 10 l:i.adl (every white piece is centralized) 10 ... e5 1 1 dxe5 dxe5 (1 l ...lllxe5 1 2 lllxe5 dxe5 1 3 iYcl iYc8 14 .i.xg4 'iYxg4 1 5 f3 'iVe6 1 6 iYd2 .i.f8 1 7 llld5 and White cap tures with pieces on d5, winning the d-file) 1 2 'iYc l 'iVe7 1 3 llld5 lllxd5 14 exd5 llld8 1 5 c4 f5 1 6 c5. White is in control of the game, Geller Pi'ibyl, Sochi 1984. 9 d5 The endgame 9 dxe5 dxe5 1 0 l:i.adl has given Black problems but a good line is 1 0. .. iYc8 ! 1 1 'iVc l l:i.d8 l 2 l:i.xd8+ lllxd8 ! followed by ... llle6, aiming at d4 and f4; e.g., 1 3 l:i.dl lll e6 1 4 h3 .i.xf3 1 5 .i.xf3 c6 1 6 lll e2 'iYc7 17 c3 a5 1 8 iYc2 .i.f8 ! intending ... .i.c5, Kaidanov-Wolff, USA 1 990 . ... .i.f8 is a nice move to remember, getting

330 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

rid of both White' s good bishop and Black's bad one! 9 ... !De7 (D) Now the question is whether White can make something of his space advantage. The exam ples seem to indicate that he can. 10 l:i.adl! Donaldson - Felecan Kona 1998 It's odd, but this position seems the least promising that we have seen thus far for White. He has made no progress on the queenside, Black still has his bishops, and with the knight on e7, the idea of ... f5 has gained force. How ever, White has achieved something that he hasn't been able to do in any other line. So far Black has always successfully traded White's d-pawn after ... c6, allowing him to take over good posts rapidly before White could reorga nize. With threats and piece activity, White's bishops didn't have time to find good positions. But here Black doesn't get ...c6 in because the d-pawn will fall. And .. .f5 is still to be dis cussed, but has its problems. This means that White has time to put his pieces on the appro priate squares and make a pawn-break, either with f4 or c5. 10 . .i.d7! Instead of waiting around, Black embarks upon a new idea: queenside expansion. A game of Spassky's is a model of how White should handle the exchange on f3: 1 0. .. .i.xf3 1 1 .i.xf3 ti:Jd7 12 g 3 ! ? (a little odd-looking, but the move is very flexible; White may be interested in h4-h5, @g2 and l:i.hl , or he may want to support the pawn-push f4, or he can do what he does in the game) 1 2. . .f5 1 3 .i.e2! ti:Jf6 14 f3 (that's the end of Black's kingside attack) 1 4. .. iYd7 1 5 .i.b5 'iVc8 l 6 l:i.f2 a6 1 7 .i.fl ti:Jh5 1 8 .i.h3 iYe8 1 9 !De2 @h8 20 c4 (after all that we get two bishops and a standard-looking queenside for mation) 20 ...b6 2 1 l:i.dfl iYf7 22 f4 and White had too much firepower in Spassky-Parma, Ha vana OL 1 966. An excellent positional demoli tion. 11 ti:Jel b5 Some noteworthy play follows l l ...!Dg4 1 2 .i.xg4 .i.xg4 1 3 f3 .i.d7, because Black has the two bishops but he isn't well organized to meet 14 f4! (D). This seems to grant Black an outpost on e5 but he can't get to it, whereas White will win more than his share of the centre. For example, 14 ... .i.g4 1 5 ti:Jf3 f5 ( 1 5. .. iYd7 1 6 fxe5 dxe5 17 .i.c5 f5 1 8 iYg5 .i.f6 1 9 iYh6 l:i.f7 20 d6, Gligo ric-Ptleger, Moscow Echt 1 977) 16 h3 ! .i.xf3 1 7 l:i.xf3 with the ideas l:i.dfl and l:i.del .

12 a3 aS 13 b4

The bottom line is that White has space and a better grip on the position. A different order is 1 3 tD<l3 iYb8 14 f3 c6! ? ( 14 ...b4 1 5 !Dbl ! bxa3 1 6 !Dxa3) 1 5 dxc6 .i.xc6 1 6 b4 d5 ( 1 6. .. axb4? 1 7 !Dxb4 ! l:i.xa3 1 8 !Dxc6 !Dxc6 1 9 !Dxb5 l:i.a2 20 .i.c4 and Black is in big trouble, Vogt-Ber nard, Wildbad 1 990; l 6 ... l:i.c8 ! ?) 1 7 .i.c5 l:i.e8, Kuczynski-Chemin, Budapest Z 1 993, and now White could play 1 8 exd5 !Dexd5 19 !Dxd5 !Dxd5 20 bxa5. It seems that White keeps the advantage in a number of ways, which is a good sign for 10 l:i.adl and his opening as a whole.

PIRC DEFENCE 331

[diagram]
1S ...

[diagram]

[diagram]

<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 2 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007)
FILENAME: 4. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 2 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2007)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 4
SHA256: b582c0daf6016f8eacdd07580982f419d99640e1710a1f523dec37e8985a3e3a
BYTES: 763680
Introduction to 3 lt:Jf3 164 Fianchetto Variation 165 The Classical 4... ilb7 166 The Modem 4 ... ila6 169 Petrosian System (4 a3) 173

[diagram]
Four Pawns Attack 188 Central Break 191 6 ... ltJa6 vs the Four Pawns 201 Classical King's Indian 204 Exchange Variation 205 Strongpoint Variation 208 The Classical Main Line with 7 ... lt:Jc6 216 9 ltJel 218 9 ltJd2 231 The Bayonet Variation 236 Averbakh Variation 238 Samisch Variation 240 Siimisch with ... e5 241 Siimisch with ... c5 244

[diagram]
Exchange Variation 249 7 i.. e3 with 8 'ii' d2 249 7 ilc4 and the Classical Exchange 253 Modern 7 ltJf3 System 268 Modern Main Line with '!:.bl 272 Russian System 280

9 Modern Benoni 290

[diagram]

BIBUOGRAPHY

Kmic, Z. (ed.); ECO D - 3th Edition; Sahovski Informator 1 998 Kmic, Z. (ed.); ECO E-3th Edition; Sahovski Informator 1 998 Lalic, B.; Queen's Gambit Declined: .i.g5 Systems; Gambit/Everyman 2000 7 Nunn, J., Burgess, G., Emms, J. & Gallagher, J.; Nunn 's Chess Openings; Gambit/Everyman 1 999 Nunn, J.; Grandmaster Chess Move by Move; Gambit 2006 Nunn, J. & Burgess, G.; New Classical King's Indian; Batsford 1 997 Nunn, J. & Burgess, G.; Main Line King's Indian; Batsford 1 996 Palliser, R.; Play 1 d4!; Batsford 2005 Palliser, R.; The Modem Benoni Revealed; Batsford 2004 Panczyk, K. & Ilczuk, J.; The Cambridge Springs; Gambit 2002 Pedersen, S.; The Meran System; Gambit 2000 Rowson, J.; Understanding the Griinfeld; Gambit 1 999 Sadler, M.; Queen's Gambit Declined; Everyman 2000 Shaw, J.; Starting Out: The Queen's Gambit; Everyman 2002 Vai:sser, A.; Beating the King's Indian Defence and Benoni; Batsford 1 997 Ward, C.; Starting Out: The Nimza-Indian; Everyman 2002 Ward, C.; The Controversial Siimisch King's Indian; Batsford 2004 Watson, J.; Secrets of Modem Chess Strategy; Gambit 1 998 Watson, J.; Chess Strategy in Action; Gambit 2003 Watson, J. & Schiller, E.; How to Succeed in the Queen Pawn Openings; Trafford 2005 Watson, J.; The Gambit Guide to the Modem Benoni; Gambit 2001 Watson, J.; The Unconventional King's Indian Defense; Hypermodern 1 999 Yakovich, Y.; Play the 4 f3 Nimza-Indian; Gambit 2004 Yermolinsky, A.; The Road to Chess Improvement; Gambit 1 999 Yrj6Hi, J. & Tella, J.; The Queen's Indian; Gambit 2003 Introduction This second volume of Mastering the Chess Openings investigates openings in which White plays 1 d4. As in Volume 1 , which examines 1 e4, I work from the ground up, starting with the very first moves of each opening to explain its elementary properties. Someone with only a modicum of playing experience should be able to master these fundamentals and use them as a basis for under standing the more sophisticated material that follows. For a primer on the rudimentary principles that apply to all opening play, please refer to Chapter 1 of Volume 1 . The next two chapters of that volume may also be useful, since they identify the ideas and themes most often referred to in the book as a whole. My philosophy is the same in both volumes, but a few points bear repeating. These books are not meant to cover all openings, much less all of their variations; such an undertaking would require scores of volumes. Instead, I have selected systems that I consider the most useful for the sake of explanation and instruction. In the main, these are the most 'important' openings, in that they have had a large following through the years and have a well-developed theoretical underpinning. Within these major openings I have picked a number of variations to study in some detail, based upon the belief that in-depth familiarity with several variations is better than superficial under standing of all. In order to place this selection in context, I leave signposts to indicate the direction in which alternatives may lead. While some of the games and analysis are recent, many classic examples are used to illustrate general points. This is not primarily a theoretical tome: some of the opinions that I venture about the value of hotly-contested individual lines will undoubtedly prove wrong or irrelevant. Instead, my goal is to provide a solid basis for the reader to play openings successfully, emphasizing positional features and techniques that extend to variations beyond those at hand. Notice that this differs from a full ex planation of an opening using concepts specific to that opening. We shall see that individual moves themselves express ideas, whether or not they fit into a general scheme that has previously been set forth. Accordingly, a certain level of detail is absolutely necessary to understand both the consis tent strategies and the anomalies that can render such strategies irrelevant. On a practical level, I have subjected readers to recitations about the niceties of move-orders; the associated issues can be confusing but bear a direct relation to real-world results. Assessments of variations can evolve very rapidly, but how one best arrives at the desired starting points tends not to change much. In the next chapter I examine the fundamental characteristics of 1 d4 and how it differs from 1 e4. You will find further comparisons between these moves in both volumes. The study of 1 d4 by itself will suffice to improve your chess understanding by leaps and bounds, but if you truly aspire to master the game you will want to know as much as possible about the e-pawn openings as well. I sincerely hope that these volumes will help you in both respects.

1 Introduction to 1 d4 and the

Closed Games At the most basic level, 1 d4 might seem to resemble 1 e4. It brings a pawn to the fourth rank to occupy the centre and frees a bishop for action. Very much as the main 'goal' of 1 e4 is to enforce a successful d4, it may be said that after 1 d4 White's goal is to achieve e4. Never theless, even from this most primitive stand point, we can see that 1 e4 only controls one central square (d5) and 1 d4 controls two (d4 and e5). This latter quality accounts for some immediate differences between opening with the queen's pawn and the king's pawn. For ex ample, when we look at the defences to 1 e4, some of them attack e4 directly: the Alekhine Defence (1 e4 tZ'Bf6) and the Scandinavian De fence ( 1 e4 d5). Others allow 2 d4 and then at tack e4 on Black's 2nd move: the Caro-Kann Defence ( 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5), the French Defence (1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5) and the Pirc Defence ( 1 e4 d6

2 d4 tZ'Bf6). But versus 1 d4, none of Black's

major defences attack the d4-pawn, and none even allow 2 e4, i.e., these defences all start with either l .. .d5 or l ...tZ'Bf6, fighting for con trol of e4. It doesn't take much thought to see how that difference arises: after 1 e4 White's e-pawn is unprotected, meaning that attacking it with tempo can bring significant rewards, or at least a temporary initiative. Since White' s d-pawn is already protected by his queen after 1 d4, the chances for Black to gain the initiative by tar geting it are correspondingly low. On the other hand, when he plays 1 d4, White has done nothing to contribute towards castling kingside. In fact, he often follows up with the moves 2 c4, 3 tbc3 and in some cases moves such as 4 .i.f4, 4 .i.g5 or 4 'ifc2, none of which clear the way for kingside castling. One might argue that in such situations White's prospects of queenside castling are enhanced, since early moves by the knight, bishop, and queen clear the road for castling queenside. However, apart from a few attacking lines such as the Exchange Queen's Gambit and the Samisch Variation of the King's Indian, White seldom avails himself of the opportunity to cas tle queenside. As is the case in most chess openings, queenside castling carries with it too many risks in terms of exposing White's king to quick attacks. Then the question becomes whether Black can gain anything from White's delayed king side castling. Can he put pressure on White that requires a degree of compromise in White's strategic plans? Before turning to 1 d4 d5, let's consider the Indian Defences that begin with 1 d4 tDf6. The answer to our question changes with each opening and in each variation. In the main line of the King's Indian Defence, for ex ample, Black puts very little pressure on White while he's getting castled, since his first five moves don't threaten anything or even directly challenge the centre. For example, the main line goes 1 d4 tDf6 2 c4 g6 3 tbc3 .i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 tbf3 O-O 6 .i.e2 with 7 O-O next. As in all major openings, Black's counterplay is based upon a central advance, normally the move ...e5. In that case White has great strategic leeway and

10 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

2 Queen's Gambit Declined

1 d4 d5 2 c4 (D)

[diagram]

12 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Although no longer holding such an exalted status, 2 ...e6 has remained the most important defence to the Queen's Gambit throughout the years and into the present. In some ways this is strange, because Black imprisons his bishop on c8 behind its own pawns. This is no trivial mat ter, since the bishop won't be able to participate in the struggle to control the centre nor in any active role. As usual, pieces condemned to stay ing on the first rank cause other problems, such as interfering with the connection of the rooks. The struggle to free the light-squared bishop and find a good spot for it is arguably Black's main problem in the Queen's Gambit De clined (a.k.a. 'QGD'). As Kasparov indicates, the theme of finding a role for this bishop per meates the theory of the opening, and even complex ideas can often be reduced to it. The obvious question, then, is why Black would subject himself to a potentially arduous task. What happens if Black doesn't block off his bishop? A superficial explanation concerns the two conventional alternatives. First, accepting the pawn by 2 ... dxc4 immediately cedes the centre to White. And in both Queen's Gambit Ac cepted theory and practice, it turns out that ...e6 is usually played within a few moves, before Black's c8-bishop is developed anyway ! For example, the traditional main line of the Queen's Gambit Accepted is 1 d4 d5 2 c4 dxc4 3 tl:lf3 tl:lf6 4 e3 e6 5 ..txc4 c5, when that bishop is left sitting on its original square behind the e6- pawn. By contrast, the Slav Defence with 2 ...c6 keeps the c8-bishop open for development, but it takes away the best square for Black's queen's knight. The move 2 ...c6 also foregoes ...c5, which is one of Black' s most effective ways to attack White's centre. Furthermore, Black's two main lines in the Slav Defence are hardly per fect solutions to the light-squared bishop prob lem. After 2 ...c6 3 tl:lf3, he can choose the extremely popular Semi-Slav by 3 ... tl:lf6 (or 3 ...e6) 4 tl:lc3 e6, in which case the bishop on c8 is still hemmed in, even more so than after 2 ...e6. The most favourable variation in this re spect is the old main line 3 ... tl:lf6 4 tl:lc3 dxc4 5 a4 ..tf5. While this develops the bishop quite actively, it comes at the cost of giving White a central majority. These variations and associ ated issues will be discussed in detail in the next chapter. Declining the Gambit: Other 2nd Moves After 1 d4 d5 2 c4, the argument for playing 2 ...e6 gains force when one investigates less played responses to 2 c4 which don't imprison Black's bishop on c8. This book is not encyclo paedic and I certainly won't analyse many side-variations in detail. But in this case it's ex tremely valuable to examine the ideas associ ated with those deviations from both 2 ... e6 and 2 ...c6, including their good points and the prob lems that accompany them. In each case, Black wants to keep the c8-bishop's path open and leave the c6-square free for his knight on b8. These lines are terribly instructive and hope fully useful. Marshall Defence

1 d4 d5 2 c4 tl:lf6 (D)

What could be simpler? Black develops a piece, defends the pawn on d5, and leaves the c8-bishop with a clear path to the outside world. It's interesting that if you show this posi tion to even fairly experienced players and ask how they would proceed, many will react by suggesting 3 cxd5 tl:lxd5 4 e4, which certainly is natural: White thereby forms the ideal centre with the gain of a tempo. Then if Black plays 4 ...tl:lf6, the obvious response is 5 tl:lc3 (5 e5 tl:ld5 leaves Black comfortably placed on the

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 13

[diagram]

(S ...

tl:lb6 allows 6 tl:lc3 with e4 to come next) 6 tl:lbd2. White has won the central battle. This time e4 cannot be stopped, as can be seen from an instructive line after 6 ... tl:lf6 (D):

7 e4 ! tl:lxe4 (7 ...

[diagram]

14 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

...c6) idea comes up in the Torre Attack (with j_g5), London System (with j_f4), the Veresov Attack ( 1 d4 d5 2 tl:lc3 tl:lf6 3 j_g5), several variations of the King's Indian Defence, and a host of other openings. The fact that 4 tl:lf3 was clearly superior to 4 e4 in this simple example illustrates that White needs to refrain from occupying the centre with his pawns until he is sure that those pawns can not be attacked to good effect. For instance, Black may be able to compel White's centre pawns to advance, or get the opportunity to ex change one or both of them. The problem is ob vious enough, but often White's decision is not an easy one to make. This basic situation will arise throughout the openings that we are study ing. Baltic Defence

1 d4 d5 2 c4 j_f5 (D)

[diagram]

[diagram]
pawn and the bishop-pair. The basic idea here is that unless some tactic by Black changes the overall dynamic of the game, White's centre

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECUNED 15

[diagram]

[diagram]

1 d4 dS 2 c4 e5!?

This is another counterattacking defence that refuses to acknowledge the need to defend against cxd5. It is a more serious challenge to the Queen's Gambit than the second moves of the preceding two variations. Black sacrifices a pawn following 3 dxe5 d4! and hopes that the cramping effect of his advanced pawn will limit White's pieces while giving him freer de velopment. There normally follows 4 tZ'lf3 tZ'lc6

Unlike the 2nd-move variations seen above, White has neither an ideal centre nor tactical threats. But he does have an extra pawn and good development. White has a choice between

5 g3 and 5 tZ'lbd2 (moves like 5 a3 are also

played but held in lesser regard). This is not a

16 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

O-O-O, ...

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 1 7

[diagram]

1 d4 d5 2 c4 tt:Jc6 (D)

[diagram]

18 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

10 a3 .ta5 1 1 .tc4 .td5 (Black keeps occupy

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 19

19. ..g6 20 .tc4+ followed by d5 White wins a

[diagram]

12 f4 J::i.

[diagram]

1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6. As an introduction to the main

lines analysed in this chapter, we'll walk through the first moves. 3 tl:lc3 (D) This is White's most obvious and natural continuation, increasing his control over the key squares d5 and e4.

20 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 21

Then he attacks the pawn on b7 and threat ens .i.xf6 to win the pawn on d5. So it seems as though the best move to get to the Exchange Variation is to play 3 lll c3. But about playing 3 lllf3 ( D )? Players frequently get to this and related po sitions via other move-orders. For example, the opening might go 1 d4 'll f6 2 c4 e6, and White may not want to play 3 lll c3 because he'll have to go up against 3 ... .i.b4, the Nimzo-Indian De fence. This is the feeling of many strong mas ters, whose solution is to play 3 'll f3. Then Black in tum may want to play 3 ... d5, transpos ing to a form of the Queen's Gambit below. No tice that if you're playing Black and you like the Nimzo-Indian Defence, this can be an effective move-order, because it gets White to commit his knight to f3, a move which is generally less feared if Black now plays 3 ... d5. But is there any drawback to that strategy? Let's see. After

1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 ll:lf3, Black will play 3 ...

lllf6 ( D) here most of the time. In the Move-Orders section at the end of this chapter, I've gone into a lot of detail about the differences between having played lllc3 or 'll f3. The most important thing to understand is that if you get to the Exchange Variation, it would probably be in the following way: 4 lllc3 .i.e7 5 cxd5 exd5 6 .i.g5 O-O 7 e3 c6 (D). White's knight is committed to f3. I'll refer to this as the 'Carlsbad Variation' (the corre sponding pawn-structure is called the 'Carls bad pawn-structure' or 'Carlsbad formation'). There's nothing wrong with this position, as we'll see, but having the knight on f3 has limited White's freedom of choice. We'll look at this po sition at great length in the Exchange Variation section later on. Many players as White prefer to develop their king's knight from g l to e2, and now they've lost that option. There's more to think about when White plays the order 3 lllf3 'll f6 4 lllc3; Black can even avoid the Exchange Variation altogether, without having to concede much. I've said a lit tle about that below. 3 . lll f6 (D) This is the move that we shall look at first. It has easily been the most common choice for Black over the years. 19th-century practice of 1 d4 d5 by the world's best players usually led to this position, and in fact to the positions stem ming from both sides' next few moves. The only other move that was employed fairly con sistently was 3 ... c5 (the Tarrasch Variation), al though it was put under a bit of a cloud for some time by 4 cxd5 exd5 5 lll f3 lllc6 and now Rubinstein's move 6 g3. That's still the line that most dissuades Black from the Tarrasch. Only

22 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

much later, particularly since the 1960s, was 3 ... lll f6 challenged in terms of effectiveness by 3 ... i.e7, an important variation called the 'Ala- tortsev' which is examined in its own section. 4 i.g5 White heads for the traditional main line, which goes 4 i.g5 i.e7 5 e3 O-O 6 'll f3. Instead 4 cxd5 exd5 5 i.g5 is finally the 'real' Ex change Variation, which we'll be looking at carefully later. As I described above, 4 lll f3 ( D) is an impor tant move-order for a couple of reasons. First, it arises via 3 lllf3 lllf6 4 lllc3 as well. Again I'll refer you to the Move-Orders sec tion at the end of this chapter for a lengthier dis cussion. But there are a couple of points that you might find useful: a) After 4 lll f3, Black can choose to play 4 ... dxc4. This introduces the Vienna Variation, which is a very complex opening. You may want to consider playing that as Black. As White, you can't avoid the V ienna V ariation if you play ll:lf3 and lllc3 on the 3rd and 4th moves. That probably means you'll want to put a little study time into it, as explained at the end of the chapter. b) I should also point out that Black can still prevent White from getting into any kind of true Exchange Variation by fiddling with move orders. For example, after 4 lllf3, Black can play 4 ... i.e7, and if 5 cxd5 exd5 6 i.g5, then Black plays 6 .. . c6 with the idea 7 e3 i.f5. That is probably easier for Black to play than the true Exchange Variation. On the other hand, by using that order (1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 'llc3 ll:lf6 4 lllf3 i.e7), Black does allow 5 i.f4, an important variation that I won't be covering in detail but will touch upon at the end of the chapter. So much for early move-orders. We can't avoid the transpositions from one line to an other, but at least you've got the basics. Now let's continue stepping through our main line -we return to 4 i.g5 (D):

4 ... i.e7 Black unpins the knight. We'll look quickly at some weaker moves: a) 4 ... h6? 5 i.xf6 creates serious problems for Black, who must either accede to the iso lated doubled pawns resulting from 5 .. . gxf6 6 cxd5 exd5, or lose a pawn by 5 ... 'iYxf6 6 cxd5 exd5 (6... c6 7 dxc6 lllxc6 8 ll:lf3) 7 'llxd5 'iYd6 8 e4, etc. b) Also favouring White is 4 ... c5?! 5 cxd5 cxd4 (5 ... exd5 6 i.xf6! gxf6 7 'llf3 and Black's pawn-structure is shattered while he's behind in development) 6 'iYxd4 i.e7 (6 ... 'll c6 7 i.xf6!

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 23

[diagram]

5 e3 (D)

[diagram]

D)

A funny position. This strongly resembles the Tartakower Variation that I shall discuss later, but with options for White that don' t exist in that sequence, because he hasn't committed his knight to f3. 1 1. .. .ltb7

24 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECUNED 25

[diagram]

26 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

exchanging pieces. Normally you'd think that the resulting position would be much more cramped than the original - certainly Black hasn't done anything to solve his problem with the bishop on c8, while the bishop on e7 was a pretty good piece. But it turns out that the combination of a queen on e7 and knight on d7 can enforce the freeing advance ... e5, which will finally give that light-squared bishop some breathing room. The drawback to all this is that it takes time, and there's no reason why White can't mount an attack when there have been only two sets of minor pieces exchanged. 8 iLxe7 'flixe7 9 .:!.cl White develops his rook so as not to lose time with 9 .ltd3 lbxc3 1 0 bxc3 dxc4 11 iLxc4. This is only one of several moves. a) For some time it was thought that White could gain some advantage after 9 cxd5 lbxc3 1 0 bxc3 exd5 1 1 'flib3, but his lead in develop ment has vanished and his extra centre pawn is easily restrained. The main line goes 1 l .. . .l:i.d8 1 2 c4 (1 2 .lte2 has several answers, including 1 2 ... lbc6, eyeing the light squares via . .. lba5, as in the game) 1 2. .. dxc4 1 3 .ltxc4 (D).

An instructive position, because White has two central pawns to Black's none, and even potential pressure down the c-file. But he hasn't castled yet, often an issue in openings stemming from 1 d4. Here Black will develop quickly to harass White's pieces before he can get orga nized: 1 3 ... lbc6! (this threatens ... lba5; time is more important than structure) 1 4 'flic3 (the old move, to cover a5 and keep the bishop on c4; not much better is 1 4 ile2!? b6! 1 5 O-O .ltb7, or here 1 5. .. ile6 1 6 'flic3 .ltd5 also has its points; after that move Black can even think about challenging White's kingside by ... .l:.d6-g6) 1 4. .. .ltg4 (rapid development!) 1 5 O-O (1 5 .lte2 .ltxf3 forces 16 gxf3 anyway in view of 1 6 iLxf3? lbxd4) 1 5. .. ilxf3 1 6 gxf3 'flif6 17 .lte2 .l:i.ac8 18 .l:.ab l b6 19 .l:.fc l lbe7 ! 20 @hl .l:.d5 and in Karpov-Y usupov, London Ct (5) 1989 Black had no problems and even a modest at tack. b) 9 'flic2 is certainly natural, intending to stop . . .e5 cold after 9 ... lbxc3 1 0 'iYxc3, but then Black can play 1 0 ... dxc4 (1 0. .. lbc6!? is worthy of consideration) 1 1 iLxc4 c5! , his al ternative freeing move. Then White finally catches up in development by 1 2 O-O, and Black has time to protect his centre by 1 2 ... lbd7 with ...cxd4 and/or ... b6 to follow. Theory rates this as equal, but perhaps it's a place for White to in vestigate further in the hunt for a small advan tage. We now return to the position after 9 .l:i.c 1

(D):

9 ... c6 It seems strange to put more pawns on light squares. But this time we can easily grasp the idea: Black wants to play ... e5, so he has to pro tect the pawn on d5 first. More important is the manner in which he does it. White must now try to find a useful move, and capturing the knight by I 0 lbxe4 dxe4 1 1 lbd2 e5 ! has long been known to be equal. Instead, 9 ... lbxc3 1 0 .l:i.xc3 dxc4? 1 1 iLxc4 would leave White a valuable tempo ahead of the game. 10 .ltd3 lbxc3 11 .l:i.xc3 dxc4 12 iLxc4 1 2 .l:.xc4 is sometimes played, but that's a different story.

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 2 7

1 2. . . 'lld7 1 3 O-O (D) At this point we'll look at two games, one a well-known classic of attack (with Black play ing 1 3 ... e5), and the other a typical old-style Queen's Gambit with positional manoeuvring (with Black playing 1 3 ... b6). Incidentally, Sad ler suggests 1 3 ... c5! ?. It's quite logical, and something to consider if Black's standard plans all come up short or you simply don't like them. Karpov - Yusupov London Ct (7) 1989 13 ... eS 14 .ltb3 (D) A multi-purpose move. The obvious idea is to avoid the potential sequence of ... e4 and . . . lll b6 with an attack on the valuable bishop on c4, followed by bringing out Black's c8-bishop, his problem piece. White also introduces a little threat. This can be seen by comparing the old line 1 4 dxe5 lllxe5 1 5 lllxe5 'iYxe5 1 6 f4 'iYe4, after which 1 7 j,,d3? ! allows 1 7. .. xe3+; then lengthy analysis shows that Black can escape with his extra pawn. But with the bishop on b3, White threatens 1 5 dxe5 lllxe5 1 6 tllxe5 xe5 1 7 f4, when l 7 ... e4 could be answered by 1 8 .ltc2 followed by 19 e4 and t o great effect, since White's central majority would be mobilized. Needless to say, Black won't wait around for that to happen. 14 ...exd4 There have been a few games since this one in which Black tried to delay opening up the po sition so quickly. These alternatives may be playable but they have led to some attractive wins for White:

[diagram]

20. . .

[diagram]

28 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1 7. .. ll:lf8 18 'flie7 'll e6 19 'flih4! 'flif4? 20 'f!Bxd8+! lllxd8 21 .l:.e8+ 'it>h7 22 .l:.xd8. Black can't de fend this. Zakharevich-Biriukov, St Petersburg 2000 continued 22 ... 'flic7 (or 22 ... b6 23 .l:.f8) 23 .l:i.f8 .l:.b8 (23 ... 'f!Bd6? loses to 24 .ltc2+ f5 25 .l:.xc8 ! ) 24 .l:i.xf7 'f!Bd6 25 .l:i.e3 ! .ltg4 26 .l:i.ee7 .l:.g8 27 llle5 'f!Bxd4 (on 27 ... .lth5 the nicest win is 28 .l:.e6!? 'f!Bxd4 29 .ltc2+ 'it>h8 30 .l:i.xh6+! gxh6 31 .l:i.h7#) 28 .ltc2+ 'it>h8 29 .l:.f4! 1 -0. 15 exd4 lll f6 16 .:!.el (D) In this position we have the familiar isolated queen's pawn trade-off: White's weak d-pawn versus Black's activity. There has been some simplification, which is probably why Yusupov was ready to enter this position. But simplifi cation shouldn't be one's only consideration; various situations arise in this book where ex changing pieces doesn't really hurt the owner of the IQP (see the Giuoco Piano chapter in Volume 1 for an excellent example). It' s a mat ter of piece placement and, in this case, attack. 16 . 'flid6 17 lll e5 lll d5 A natural defensive move, blockading the isolani. 1 7. .. j,,e6 18 .ltxe6 fxe6 19 .l:i.g3 is strong for White in view of 19 ... .l:.ad8 20 'f!Bb3! 'f!Bxd4 21 'flixb7; and worse is 1 7 ... j,,f5? 1 8 lllxf7 .l:.xf7 19 j,,xf7+ 'it>xf7 20 'flib3+ 'it>f8 21 'f!Bxb7, when Black is losing too much material while White's rooks are growing ever more active. 18 .l:.g3 (D) .. ,j,,f5 1 8 . .. .lte6 19 'flid2 ! attacks the h6-pawn; there may follow 19 ... .ltf5?! (but 19 ... 'it>h7 20 .ltc2+ is no good either) 20 j,,xd5 cxd5 21 'f/Jf4. 19 'flih5! i.h7 20 'flig4 g5 21 h4! f6 22 hxg5 hxg5 23 f4!? Also good are 23 'flih5 and 23 .l:i.h3. 23 ... .l:.ae8 24 fxg5! ( D) 24 ...fxe5 A wonderful variation is given by Karpov: 24 ... .ltf5 25 gxf6+ ! ! .ltxg4 26 .l:.xg4+ 'it>h8 27 ll:lf7+ .l:.xf7 28 .l:.xe8+ .l:i.f8 29 f7 'll f6 30 .l:.xf8+ 'flixf8 31 .l:.g8+ lllxg8 32 fxg8'f/J+ 'flixg8 33 .ltxg8 and White wins the pawn ending.

25 g6 j,,xg6 26 dxe5 'flie6 27 j,,xd5 cxd5 28

'flixg6+ 'flixg6 29 .l:i.xg6+ 'it>h7 30 .l:i.d6 White will emerge with a couple of extra pawns, sufficient to win the day. Kramnik - Kasparov Las Palmas 1996 13 ... b6!? (D) Oddly enough, after working so hard to play ... e5, it may be better to go in the other direc tion! Black calmly prepares ... j,,b7 followed by .. .cs . 14 .ltd3!

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 29

[diagram]

15.  

[diagram]

[diagram]
30 gxf4 .l:i.b8 31 .l:.xc5 .l:.xc5 32 .l:.xc5 .l:i.xb2 33 .l:i.c4 and Karpov went on to win versus Yusu pov in Baden-Baden 1995. There's something irritating about White' s small advantages in these lines: they don't seem to disappear com pletely.

16. ..

[diagram]

20 b4 e5

In this position, instead of 21 dxc5?, Dolma tov suggests 21 bxc5 ! exd4 22 exd4 bxc5 23 .l:.c4 with advantage. This theory will change, but the ideas are fundamental. Orthodox/Capablanca Defence

[diagram]

30 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

disadvantageous for Black. White can bypass the Cambridge Springs via 5 cxd5 exd5 6 e3 or 6 lbf3, entering the Exchange V ariation with out the hassles of ... .ltf5 variations. But if White has played 4 lbf3 (instead of 4 i.g5), then after 4 ... lbbd7, 5 cxd5 exd5 6 .ltf4 is a promising order which can lead in several directions; e.g., 6 .. . c6 7 e3 l2Bh5!? (7 ... ile7 8 h3 ! is a comfortable version of the Carlsbad Exchange Variation; refer to that section) 8 i.e5 ! ? (8 .ltg5 is the safer and rational course: 8 . .. ile7 9 .ltxe7 'J/i/xe7 1 0 .lte2! with O-O and ii'c2 next should favour White; but watch out for 1 0 .ltd3?! lbf4! ) 8 ... lbxe5 9 l2Bxe5 (hitting h5) 9 ... lbf6 1 0 .ltd3 .ltd6 1 1 f4! and White has a stereotyped attack on the kingside. Black may well want to avoid this line and not play 4 ... lbbd7 after 4 lbf3.

[diagram]
This move-order contrasts with 6 ... h6 7 ilh4 ll:Je4 above, although the same ideas may still anse. 7 .:!.cl (D)

[diagram]

1 6 ilg3 ! ? (Black is bringing his pieces to c4 while White in tum looks to occupy c5; for these purposes, Black's bishop on b7 is more suited than White's on g3) 1 6. .. lbb6 1 7 'J/i/b3 l2ifd5?! (a natural move, but because of the specifics,

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 31

1 7. .. ll'ibdS, 17 ... ll'Bc4 or l 7 ...d7 holds out more chance for advantage) 1 8 ..tf3? (a key juncture: White is doubtless afraid to play 1 8 ll'Be4! and leave his knight unprotected, but Black can't take advantage; e.g., 1 8. .. ll'Bxb4 1 9 ll'Bxe6; thus the idea of ll'Bc5 causes Black some discomfort) 1 8. .. l:.c4! 1 9 ll'Be4 (or 1 9 ..te2 l:.xc3 20 l:.xc3 ll'Bxc3 2 1 xc3 d7 with the idea ... l:.c8, and Black's pieces will settle in on c4) 1 9. ..c8 20 l:.xc4 ll'Bxc4 2 1 l:.cl a8 ! (D). Black increases his control over the light square colour-complex. This theme persists un til the end of the game: 22 ll'Bc3 l:.c8 23 ll'Bxd5 ..txd5 24 ..txd5 xd5 (with the exchange of White's bishop, the c4 outpost has become un assailable) 25 a4 ..tf6 26 ll'Bf3 ..tb2! 27 l:.el d8 28 axb5 axb5 29 h3 e5 30 l:.bl e4 3 1 ll'Bd4 ..txd4 32 l:.dl ll'Bxe3 ! 0- 1 , because 33 xd5 l:.xd5 34 fxe3 ..txe3+ wins the rook. A highly instructive game for players of the QGD. 8 ..td3 The standard move, but sometimes White tries to save a tempo (which is lost after 8 .il..d3 dxc4 9 ..txc4) by playing 8 c2, also covering e4. Then a great old example was Alekhine Rubinstein, Carlsbad 1923: 8 ...a6!? 9 a4!? (Ale khine tries to stop ...b5 directly, an unusual idea; both 9 ..td3 dxc4 1 0 ..txc4 b5 and 9 cxd5 are options) 9 ...l:.e8 10 ..td3 dxc4 1 1 ..txc4 tl'Bd5 12 ..tf4 ! ? ll'Bxf4 1 3 exf4 (D). A modern-looking position! These d4/f4 structures, although still infrequent, have be come accepted in a greater number of situations than was the case 20 years ago. If White's d pawn disappears, he'll have a doubled f-pawn formation that typically arises in the Dutch Defence Stonewall variation and in various openings where Black plays ... ..tg4 (or ... ..tb7) followed by ... ..txf3 and White recaptures with the e-pawn. From Black's point of view, we see the same structure occurring in the main-line Slav ll'Bh4xf5 variations, and the Nimzo-Indian with ... f5 and xf5, among other openings. One of the ideas of allowing ... ll'Bxf4 is that White's central pawns will clamp down on the freeing move . . . e5. So naturally, Rubinstein looks to his other central break and counts upon his bishop-pair: 1 3. ..c5 14 dxc5 (a key point for understanding the opening: White will either concentrate upon the centre or kingside, de pending upon Black's reply) 14. ..c7 ! ? (this is one of three ways to recover the pawn; by mov ing his queen, Black gets off the d-file, attacks the f4-pawn, and waits to see what White will do; other moves apparently fail to equalize; e.g., 14 ... ll'Bxc5 1 5 O-O c7 16 ll'Be5 f6 1 7 ll'Bd3 tl'Bxd3 1 8 ..txd3 f5 l 9 ll'Bd5 ! or 14 ... ..txc5 1 5 O-O tl'Bf6 16 ll'Be5 c7 17 ..td3, threatening ll'Be2) 15 O-O xf4 16 ll'Be4 ll'Bxc5 17 ll'Bxc5 ..txc5 1 8 ..td3 b6? ( 1 8. .. ..te7 ! 1 9 ..txh7+ 'iit f8 20 l:.fel ..td7 2 1 ll'Be5 ..txa4 22 c7 i s unclear) 1 9 ..txh7+ 'iit h8 20 ..te4 l:.a7 21 b4! ..tf8 (21.....txb4 22 xc8!) 22 c6 l:.d7 23 g3 b8 24 ll'Bg5 l:.ed8 25 ..tg6! e5 (25 ... fxg6 26 e4 with mate shortly) 26 tl'Bxf7+ l:.xf7 27 ..txf7 f5 28 l:.fdl l:.xdl + 29 l:.xdl xf7 30 xc8 'iit h7 3 1 xa6 f3 32 d3+ 1 -0. Nevertheless, Black has several al ternatives and this line is as yet unresolved. 8 .. dxc4 9 ..txc4 ll'Bd5 10 ..txe7 xe7 (D) We have arrived at the Capablanca (or 'Or thodox') Variation. It is characterized by solidity and strongly resembles the Lasker Variation, because Black will aim for the freeing move

32 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

. . . e5. One motivation for Capablanca' s Varia tion was to avoid certain orders in the Lasker Variation; for example, ones in which White exchanges on e4 after 6 ...h6 7 ..th4 tl'Be4, or the line in which White plays 8 ..txe7 Wixe7 9 cxd5 tl'Bxc3 10 bxc3 exd5 1 1 iVh3. See the section on the Lasker Variation to make sense of that ex planation. As it turns out, however, neither of those ideas is particularly effective for White, so the relevant difference between the two vari ations has to do with the h-pawn, which is ei ther on h6 (in the Lasker Variation) or on h7 (in the Capablanca Variation). You'll see what I mean in the discussion about 1 1 O-O below. At this juncture I'll concentrate upon the unique move 1 1 tl'Be4 (A), with a briefer look at

1 1 O-O (B).

A)

11 tl'Be4 (D) This was Alekhine's solution in his World Championship match versus Capablanca and later in a famous game versus Lasker. White's idea is to keep the pieces on and mobilize his centre later. It still has promise. 11 . tl'i5f6 Black retreats in order to challenge White's knight. He still intends . . . e5 if possible. It is the best-known move. Black shouldn't play 1 1 ...e5?! immediately, if only because 1 2 O-O! ( 1 2 ..txd5 !? cxd5 13 tl'Bc3 e4 14 tl'Bxd5 Wid6 1 5 tl'Bc7 exf3 !) 12. . . exd4 1 3 Wixd4 yields a position where he is struggling to equalize. Further more, 1 1 ...Wib4+ 1 2 Wid2 Wixd2+ 1 3 'iit xd2!, from Alekhine-Capablanca, Buenos Aires W ch (6) 1927, is a thankless position for Black. This queenless middlegame features White's cen tralized king and mobile centre pawns, whereas Black hasn't solved the problem of his queen's bishop. And of course, Black's weakness at d6 doesn't help matters. Nevertheless, Black's position after 1 1 tl'Be4 is fundamentally sound, so arguably he can keep things in hand by l 1 .. .b6 with the simple idea . . . i.b7 and ...c5. Then the natural move is 1 2 O-O ..tb7 1 3 tl'Bg3 ( 1 3 tl'Be5 ! poses more prob lems; at least White stops ... c5) 1 3. ..c5 14 e4 tl'i5f6 !. This knight attacks the centre, which White can't maintain: 15 l:.el cxd4 16 ..tb5 l:.fc8 1 7 Wixd4 .l:.c5 1 8 i.xd7 tl'Bxd7 1 9 b4 .l:.xc l 20 l:.xc l l:.c8 and Black had no problems in Alekhine-Maroczy, San Remo 1 930. After 1 1 ...tl'i5f6, we have two games. Topalov - Yermolinsky Erevan OL 1996 12 tl'Bg3 (D)

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECUNED 33

[diagram]

13 O-O exd4 14 tt:lf5

[diagram]

34 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

14 e4! exd4 15 'ixd4 'ixd4 16 ctJxd4 ctJe5 17 i.b3 (D) This is a difficult position for Black. White's kingside majority is about to march, and Black's bishop on c8 has no good squares. 17 .  . dS!? 18 l:.fdl i.d7 19 f4 ctJg6 20 f5! ctJe5 21 .Uc5 ! ctJg4 ( D) 2 1 . .. .Ue8 may be best, but White has the tac tical shot 22 ctJe6! i.xe6 23 fxe6 f6 24 l:.d7 ! with ongoing pressure.

22 h3 b6!?

The alternative 22. .. ctJf6 23 e5 ctJe4 24 .ll. cc 1 ctJg3 25 e6 isn't encouraging. 23 ctJxc6 ..txc6 24 .ll. xd8+ l:.xd8 25 l:.xc6 1-0 There might follow 25. .. ctJe5 26 l:.c7 a5 27 l:.e7 ! . White exploited every advantage in the position. 8)

11 O-O ctJxc3 12 l:.xc3 e5 ( D)

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 35

[diagram]

1 d4 dS 2 c4 e6 3 tl'Bc3 tl'Bf6 4 i.gS i.e7 5 e3 O-O

6 tl\f3 h6 7 i.h4 b6 (D) Now we are moving into a territory of more complex and usually more dynamic positions than we saw in the Lasker and Capablanca vari ations, which after all were aimed at exchang ing pieces and reaching some kind of simplified equality. After 7 ... b6 pieces tend to stay on the board longer, and the resulting unbalanced situ ation creates difficult and double-sided play. What is Black doing? It's not so mysterious, at least not to begin with. He'll play . . . i.b7, shor ing up d5. That allows him to play for the freeing move ...c5, often prepared by ... tl'ibd7. Notice that the move 7 ...c5?! straightaway would ex pose the unprotected status of d5 after 8 dxc5 i.xc5 9 cxd5 exd5 10 c l (for example), when Black will have to take up a passive position merely to hold on to his material. By playing ... b6 and . . . i.b7 first, the move ...c5 will defi nitely be on the cards, and ... tl'Be4 at the right moment can also be effective. White has a large number of strategies rang ing from simple exchanges to exertion of long term pressure by clamping down upon any free ing move by Black, especially ...c5. In almost all cases White restrains his own aggressive ness until Black's position is under control. It turns out that Black can answer this method of play in two very different ways. In many lines Black is the one trying to mix things up; he wants to do this before falling into some kind of static disadvantage. This can involve pawn sac rifices for activity and other tactical devices.

36 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

However, in a majority of variations he will gain the bishop-pair, so that gives him a choice: he can still look for energetic unbalancing moves but he also has the option of consolidat ing his position before slowly opening up the game on the bishops' behalf. In those cases it may be White who undertakes a vigorous ad vance before he loses the long-run battle. It is this unpredictability and potential dynamism that attracts players to the Tartakower Variation. In order to gain familiarity with the positions, and to achieve some depth of understanding, rll concentrate on just a few of both players' set-ups by looking at a series of games. Fortu nately, the ideas cross over into other lines of the Tartakower, and of the Queen's Gambit in general. The Older Exchange Line 8 cxd5 This is the older move, which received a lot of attention before it began to appear that White might get better chances by complicating the situation instead. Nevertheless, some players still use 8 cxd5, and very rich positions can re sult.

8...

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECUNED 3 7

many Tartakower variations (although there are usually more pieces on the board). As we discussed in Chapter 3 of Volume 1 , Black' s c5- and d5-pawns are called 'hanging pawns' . Whether they are good or bad depends upon how well protected they are, how mobile they are, and what activity can be generated around them. In this kind of position White wants to restrain the advance of the pawns for the mo ment and then target them, much as one fights against an isolated pawn. For this purpose he has pinned Black' s pawn on c5 and can in crease the pressure on it down the c-file. The move ...d4 isn't on the cards (yet), and an im portant idea (executed in the Fischer-Spassky game below) will be to force one pawn to ad vance so as to blockade both. Black's position has its own good points. The c5-square is well defended, and Black will normally play ... tl'Bd7 to reinforce its protection. Then the b-file can be a real asset. Black can ap proach the situation in two ways: a) he can try to attack White's b-pawn down the open file and provoke the move b3, after which ...a5-a4 or ...a5 and . . . 'ib7-b4 is possi ble; or b) he can simply play ...c4 without provoca tion because, although that permanently gives up the d4-square, it also discourages the move b3 and facilitates an attack down the b-file. You'll see these ideas in more than one line of the Tartakower Defence. 15 i.e2 as 16 tl'Bd4 Also a standard idea. The knight can go to b3 in order to put pressure on Black's c-pawn, or in some cases White will exchange the bishop on e6. Now Black plays a surprising move: 16 . tl'Ba6! 17 ..txa6 Else the knight comes to b4.

17. 

l:.xa6 18 O-O ..td7 19 tl'Bb3?! Kregelin-Trost, corr. 1 995 went 19 l:.fdl l:.b6! 20 tl'Be2 ig5 2 1 l:.d2? d4! (D). As explained in our discussion about hanging pawns, once Black can productively play ...d4 he will often stand better: 22 f4 id5 23 exd4 l:.g6 24 tl'Bc3 if3 25 tl'ibl 'ixf4 26 dxc5 ..tc6 with a very dangerous attack due to Black's un obstructed bishop.

19. .

[diagram]

[diagram]

13. ...l:.cS (D)

14 i.b5!? This prophylactic move, Furman's inven tion, was favoured at the time this game was played. It discourages ... tl'Bd7, while White can contemplate tl'Be5-d3 increasing his pressure on

38 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

c5. A simple alternative is 14 i.e2 'it>f8 ( 14 ...a5 ! is one of the better options here) 1 5 dxc5 bxc5

[diagram]
equality, Winants-Kasparov, Brussels 1987.

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 39

match, was happy with this position. It' s only natural for Black to recover his pawn by 1 7. .. a6, when he had analysed 1 8 i.d3 'ixb2, after which 19 O-O! ltJd7 ( 19 ... 'ixa2?? 20 tl'Bd4 and the threat of l2Jxe6 and 'ic8+ forces 20 ... tl'Bd7 2 1 'ic6 l:.d8 22 l2Jxe6 fxe6 23 'ic7) 20 'ic6 l:.b8 2 1 tl'Bd4 ! ? 'ib6 22 l:.cl yields a small but lasting advantage. But Geller found something better: . l2Ja6! 18 ..txa6 Now White can't castle, but he's trying to avoid 1 8 'ic6 'ixc6 1 9 ..txc6 l:.b8! ( 1 9. .. l:.c8 20 ..ta4), when the b-pawn falls in view of 20 b3? l:.c8. 18 'ixa6 19 'ia3 The best move, defending against . . . l:.c8 while threatening to exchange queens.

19. .

[diagram]

[diagram]

1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 tl'Bc3 lLlf6 4 ..tg5 ..te7 5 e3 O-O

6 tl'Bf3 h6 7 i.h4 b6 8 i..e2 ( D) White's modest bishop move is considered the main line of the Tartakower. First, he waits until Black commits his bishop to b7. 8 .. ..tb7 9 i.xf6 ..txf6 10 cxd5 exd5 (D) White's paradoxical idea is to take two moves (..th4xf6) to capture Black's knight instead of one. This has been played in hundreds if not thousands of games, including many from the Karpov-Kasparov world championship matches, in which both played the position with each

40 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

colour. What' s the point? Essentially it's that Black' s bishop is poorly placed for this pawn structure. It was actually better on c8, so the reasoning goes. And as we mentioned above, Black's bishop very often retreats from b7 to c8 and then (usually) goes to e6. So White in that case has gained one move by taking two moves to capture the knight! In the meantime, why is White giving up the bishop-pair? Essentially, he feels that it' s a sufficiently controlled posi tion that he can use his well-placed knights to make progress, probably with a pawn advance before Black' s bishops find good homes for themselves. Black on the other hand thinks that as long as his queenside pawn-structure can't be compromised by White (by means of b4-b5, for example), and as long as the advance e4 isn't effective, he will be able to open the game at his discretion and use the bishop-pair to his advan tage. It' s easiest to understand this by exam ples:

11 b4 (D)

The main line, which is now used by a large majority of masters. White tries to hold down . . .c5 and also prepares a minority attack by b5 in some positions. There are several fascinating alternatives ( I I ib3, for example) that you may find it interesting to research for yourself. I think that it is more useful, however, to see 1 1 b4 in depth.

11. ..

c6 Black tries the strategic approach; it is a more ambitious idea than l 1 ...c5, which has been seen in many grandmaster games (including those Karpov-Kasparov encounters mentioned above) with a high drawing rate, especially in the main line 12 bxc5 bxc5 1 3 l:.b 1 ..tc6 1 4 O-O tl'Bd7 15 i.b5 'ic7 1 6 'id3 l:.fc8 (or 1 6. .. l:.fd8), when the verdict ranges between equal and a bit better for White.

12 O-O (D)

From this archetypal position we shall ex amine some games and excerpts.

12. ..

aS!? Alterman - Pigusov Beijing 1 997 Black could also develop more slowly than this; however, he wants to force White's hand and perhaps free his bishops in the meantime. 13 bxa5!?

13 b5 is met by 13 ...c5, when 1 4 tl'Be5 exerts

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 41

[diagram]

D)

Perfect coordination. Black's pieces are well placed and he has no trouble defending his pawns. So he prepares . . .c5, but after that it' s still hard for either side to make progress. 18 .td3 c5 19 .th7+ '1ii> h8 20 .tf5 'iVc6 21 h3 .l:i.c8 22 .txe6 fxe6?! 2 2. .. 'iVxe6! is more active and a better move. As it happens, Black's d-pawn won't be a prob lem in that situation. 23 'iVg6 .l:i.aa8 24 'iVh5! 'iVd6 25 tt:'Bb5 'iVe7 26 .l:i.al e5!? 27 .l:i.el ?! 27 'iVf5 ! would give White some chances. But it's fair to say that the whole variation is balanced. 27 .. 'iVe6 28 tt:'Bh2 e4 29 .l:i.edl cxd4?! 30 tt:'Bxd4 .txd4 31 .l:i.xd4 tt:'Bf6 11z_11z

Karpov - Ki. Georgiev Tilburg 1994 12 . 'iVd6 13 'iVb3 (D) 13 .. tt:'Bd7 14 .l:i.fel White makes a slow but useful move. Given time, he will play e4. 14 .. .te7 Scherbakov offers the line 1 4. ..a5 ! ? 1 5 bxa5 .l:i.xa5 1 6 a4 .td8 ! 1 7 .tfl tt:'Bf6 1 8 g3 .tc7 with a satisfactory game for Black. Moving Black's bishop to the b8-h2 diagonal is a relatively common theme in these positions. Again the pawn on a4 prevents White from using that square, although that doesn' t hurt Karpov in the game that we're following: 15 .l:i.abl a5 16 bxa5 .l:i.xa5 17 a4 .l:i.e8 18 .tn White seems to be doing nothing. 18 . .tfS 19 'iVc2 g6 20 e4! dxe4 21 tt:'Bxe4 'iVf4 22 .tc4

42 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Suddenly Karpov's pieces are getting active and aiming towards Black's king!

22. ..

.tg7! 23 .l:i.e2 c5 24 d5 The attack is over for the moment. But no one can handle a passed d-pawn like Karpov. 24 ... .l:i.aa8 25 .l:i.bel .l:i.ad8 26 'iVb3 .ta8 27 g3 'iVb8?! 28 d6! .l:i.f8 (D) 29 .txf7+! A strong move that had to be precisely calcu lated. I'll skip the details.

29. ..

.l:i.xf7 30 tt:'ieg5 hxg5 31 tt:'Bxg5 .l:i.df8 32 .l:i.e8! 'iVxd6 33 'iVxf7+ '1ii> h8 34 tt:'Be6! 1-0 Alatortsev Variation

1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 tt:'Bc3 .te7 (D)

Black often chooses this move because he wants to avoid the Modem Exchange Variation (discussed forthwith). He still intends to play . . . tt:'Bf6 and usually doesn't mind entering the Classical lines that we have been analysing via 3 ... .te7 4 tt:'Bf3 tt:'Bf6 5 .tg5 O-O 6 e3, etc. What's more, Black may be willing to go into the type of classical Exchange Variation that follows 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 tt:'Bc3 .te7 4 tt:'Bf3 tt:'Bf6 5 cxd5 exd5 6 .tg5. This line, with the knight commit ted to f3, is sometimes called the 'Carlsbad Variation' . As we shall see in the Exchange Variation section, White' s modem set-up with .td3 and tt:'ige2 is the one that many players fear most, and that is bypassed by the sequence 3 ... .te7 4 tt:'Bf3. Originally this move-order 'trick' was only used by grandmasters, but now even moderately experienced players are familiar with it; the fact is that a lot of players who use the Queen's Gam bit Declined as their regular defence don't like facing the Modem Exchange Variation. Of course, White isn't forced to cooperate by playing 4 tt:'Bf3. He can exchange on d5 and then develop his pieces independently thereafter, as more than one World Champion has done. Kasparov - Short Thessaloniki OL 1988

[diagram]
(D)

There could hardly be anything more natural than to place a bishop on f4, especially when .ltg5 isn't available. White wants to play e3 next and develop his pieces. 5 ... c6 Undoubtedly the most subtle reply, and con sidered best by theory. Black wants to get ... .tf5 in as soon as he can, but 5 ... .tf5? loses to our old friend 6 'iVb3.

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 43

6 'iVc2 In the next two games we shall see 6 e3 .tf5. White sometimes develops the queen first in or der to stop ... .tf5. In turn, Black wants to get that move in so that he can develop (and per haps exchange) his bad bishop. Thus his next move.

6. ..

g6 This has to come before White can play e3 and .td3, preventing . . . .tf5.

7 e3 .trs 8 'iVd2!

White can exchange bishops by 8 .td3, but then Black has achieved his goal and isn't under the slightest risk of attack. The queen move in tends to preserve White's good light-squared bishop and take advantage of the position of Black's on f5. 8 .. tt:'Bf6 Kasparov was on the other side of the board and played 8 . . . tt:'Bd7 9 f3 tt:'Bb6 1 0 e4 .te6 in Karpov-Kasparov, London/Leningrad Wch (7)

1986. After 1 1 e5 White had an excellent posi

tion with a lot of space, although Kasparov drew in the end.

9 f3 (D)

White doesn't want Black's knight settling in on e4. What's more, f3 prepares g4 in some cases so as to gain space and drive away Black's bishop. 9 ...c5?! It's hard to believe that this move in combi nation with the next constitutes a positional mistake, but perhaps Black should be more pa tient. The straightforward 9 ... h5, stopping g4 (as well as .th6), was played ten years later in Topalov-Karpov, Wijk aan Zee 1 998. That game continued 10 .td3 .txd3 1 1 'iVxd3 tt:'Ba6 1 2 tt:'ige2 tt:'Bc7 1 3 O-O tt:'Be6 14 .te5 and it' s fair to say that White has some advantage; Topalov went on to win. Needless to say there have been other games in this line before and since. 10 .th6! (D)

White ignores his development to stop cas tling, and he prevents . . .h5.

10. .. cxd4?!

This exchange turns out to hurt Black badly, both on the e-file and on the kingside. Maybe moves such as dxc5 and .tg7xf6 or g4-g5 were becoming problems, but probably not with White still undeveloped. Therefore Black could try 10 ... tt:'Bc6; e.g., 1 1 dxc5?! ( 1 1 .tb5 ! a6 1 2 .txc6+ bxc6 1 3 tt:'ige2 gives White some ad vantage due to Black's castling situation; 1 1 g4 is well answered by 1 l ....te6) l 1 . ...txc5 (or l 1 ...d4 ! ?) 12 .tg7 .l:i.g8 1 3 .txf6 'iVxf6 14 tt:'Bxd5 'iVd6 1 5 e4 O-O-O with a lot of open lines for a pawn. 11 exd4 (D)

44 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This doesn't look good for Black. For start ers, White's queen protects his bishop on h6, so that it is ready to take over that square after a possible exchange. And in general White's de velopment is easy, while Black needs to untan gle his pieces. 11 .a6 1 1 ... Cllc6 1 2 .ltb5 l opens all the right squares for White's pieces; for example, 12. .. .l:i.c8 1 3 Cllge2 a6 1 4 .ltxc6+ .l:!.xc6 1 5 Cllg3 .lte6 1 6 O-O and Black still cannot castle. 12 g4! .lte6 13 lllge2 Cll bd7 Somehow Black can't get his pieces out or his king to safety. Kasparov has won another opening battle. An example is 1 3. .. Cll c6 1 4 .ltg2 Clla5 15 b3 .l:i.c8 1 6 O-O and Black isn't getting anywhere. For the rest of the game I can't see what he should do. 14 .ltg2 Cll b6 15 b3 .l:i.c8 16 O-O .l:i.c6 17 h3!? Cllfd7 18 Clldl!? Planning f4-f5. 18 ..l:i.g8 19 Cll f2 f5 20 .l:!.ael (

D)

There's that e-file.

20. .

gS 21 gxf5 .ltf7 Probably not the objectively best move, but then again 2 1 ....ltxf5 22 Cll g3 .lte6 23 f4l is un bearable.

22 Cll

g4 .lth5 23 Cllg3 1-0 A surprising game. The pawn-structure in particular bears notice. You will see it again. Kasparov - Karpov Moscow Wch (21) 1985

1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 Cll

c3 .lte7 4 cxd5 exd5 5 .ltf4 c6 6 e3 .ltf5 7 g4! (D) The stem game for this advance is Botvin nik-Petrosian, Moscow Wch ( 1 2) 1963. Gaining space is an enormous advantage in chess, so much so that in this case it more than balances out the resulting weaknesses. 7 . .lte6 8 h4 Clld7 9 h5 Cllh6! (D) Kasparov's successful use of the g4/h4 at tack (in contrast to g4/h3, as in the next game) inspired this ingenious solution. It's worth not ing that Karpov had trouble countering the set up with 5 .ltf4, losing games to Korchnoi (be low) while getting into trouble in this game. Yet we saw in a note above that as White he got the better of Kasparov in the same line. In Linares 1 989, he also used 7 g4 to defeat Portisch. Al though it's not fair to speak of a forced advan tage, Black has yet to prove that he can equalize completely against White's strategy. The games in this section show the love of space that the greatest players of the ex-Soviet Union had (and have). 10 .lte2!

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECUNED 45

Not 10 .th3?! g5 ! ; the most important point of 9 . . . tt:'Bh6 is 1 0 f3 f5 ! . 10 . . tt:'Bb6 11 .l:i.cl .td6 l l ...tt:'Bc4 would apparently have equalized, since Kasparov's 1 2 .txc4 dxc4 1 3 .txh6 gxh6 looks OK for Black. From here on out it's hard to suggest significant improvements. 12 tt:'Bh3 .txf4 13 tt:'Bxf4 .td7 14 .l:i.gl ! g5 Kasparov gives the exotic line 14 . . . 'iVh4 15 g5 tt:'Bf5 1 6 .l:i.g4! 'iVh2 (16. . . 'iVh l + 17 '1ii> d2) 17 .l:i.g2 'iVh4 18 '1ii> d2 with advantage. 15 hxg6 hxg6 16 '1ii> d2! The safest place for this piece!

16.  

[diagram]

[diagram]
c6 6 e3 .tf5 7 g4 .te6 8 h3 (D) This is the more conservative move. Great players have gone back and forth between 8 h3 and 8 h4. 8 .  . tt:'Bf6 9 tt:'Bf3 O-O 10 .td3 c5 1 1 @fl! Castling by hand. The problem with 1 1 O-O is nothing dramatic like 1 1 ...h5 !?, but simply l l ...c4 12 .tc2 tt:'Bc6, when the fl-rook won't participate in a kingside attack. 11 .. tt:'Bc6 12 '1ii> g2 .l:i.c8 1 2. .. cxd4?! 13 tt:'Bxd4 tt:'Bxd4 14 exd4 was a poor choice in Botvinnik-Petrosian, Moscow Wch ( 1 4) 1 963: 14 ... tt:'Bd7 1 5 'iVc2 tt:'Bf6 1 6 f3

You should commit this pawn-structure to memory: it's almost always better for White! Even without the move g4, the pawns will usu ally frustrate Black, who has difficulty finding places to attack in White's position, whereas his opponent has multiple ways to make prog ress. The game continued 16 ... .l:i.c8 17 .te5 .td6 1 8 .l:i.ael .txe5 1 9 .l:i.xe5. White's pieces are more active and his position is significantly better. 13 .l:i.cl l:.e8 14 dxc5 .txc5 15 tt:'Bb5 .tf8 16 tt:'ifd4 tt:'Bxd4?

46 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Now we can see why this is such a mistake: it gives White the very favourable pawn-structure that we just saw! Unzicker suggests 1 6. . . 'iVb6! 1 7 tt:'Bxe6 .l:i.xe6 ( 1 7 .. .fxe6 1 8 g5 tt:'Be4) 1 8 g5 tt:'Be4. 17 l:i.xc8 'iVxc8 Or 1 7. .. .ltxc8 1 8 exd4! a6 1 9 tt:'Bc7 .l:te7 20 'iVc2. 18 exd4! (D) 18 .. 'iVd7 19 tt:'Bc7 .l:i.c8 20 tt:'Bxe6 fxe6 Black loses material after 20 . . . 'iVxe6? 2 1 .ltf5. But now his pawn-structure i s weak and he's facing White's two active bishops. 21 l:i.el a6 22 g5 tt:'Be4 23 'iVg4 .ltb4?! Karpov launches a sort of desperate counter attack. It's not quite sound, but Black's position was rather a wreck in any case. 24 .l:i.e2 .l:i.f8 25 f3 'iVf7 26 .lte5 tt:'Bd2 27 a3! tt:'Bxf3 28 g6? 28 .ltg3 ! wins. 28.. hxg6 29 .ltg3 .lte7? 29 ... tt:'Bh4+! 30 '1ii> h2 tt:'Bf3+ 3 1 '1ii> h l tt:'Bh4! draws. 30 l:i.f2 tt:'iel+ 31 @hl 'iVxf2 32 .ltxf2 tt:'Bxd3 33 'iVxe6+ .l:tf7 34 .ltg3 tt:'Bxb2 35 'iVxd5 .ltf6 36 .ltd6 g5 37 'iVb3 .ltxd4 38 'iVe6 g6 39 'iVe8+ '1ii> g7 40 .lte5+ .ltxe5 41 'iVxe5+ '1ii> h7 1-0 Exchange Variation To introduce this extremely important topic, let me go over the beginning moves once more. There are multiple paths and obstacles for both sides to get to or avoid the main lines. Fortu nately, most of these were already discussed in the introduction to this chapter. Here I'd like to fill out some variations that we've missed.

[diagram]
Here 3 tt:'Bf3 tt:'Bf6 4 tt:'Bc3 .lte7 5 cxd5 exd5 6 .ltg5 is a possible path to the Carlsbad Varia tion, which is one of our two main lines in this section, but Black is not forced to play that way (as explained there, 6 ... c6 and . . . .ltf5 may avoid it). All major issues with an early tt:'Bf3 are gone over in the chapter introduction. There are more details at the end of the chapter. 3 .. tt:'Bf6 4 cxd5 ( D)

4. ..

exd5 4 ...tt:'Bxd5 can transpose to a line of the Semi- Tarrasch (the standard sequence for which is 4 tt:'Bf3 c5, when 5 cxd5 tt:'Bxd5 6 e4 tt:'Bxc3 7 bxc3 can follow). White's most aggressive approach (and Black's most confrontational reply) is 5 e4 tt:'Bxc3 6 bxc3 c5 7 tt:'Bf3 (this completes the transposition; 7 l:i.bl !? is interesting, to prevent . . . .ltb4+ in some lines; by targeting b7, White hinders the development of Black's queen's bishop) 7 ... cxd4 8 cxd4 .ltb4+ 9 .ltd2 .ltxd2+ 10 'iVxd2 (D). We've arrived at the starting point of many a famous battle. Most lower-ranked players don't like to concede the ideal centre to White, who can advance his central pawns to make a passed pawn or aim his forces at Black's king. But Black has no weaknesses and can think about taking over queenside light squares as he does in the Griinfeld Defence. The variation as a whole is probably more difficult for Black to play than for White. I won't discuss the line ex cept to show the famous example Polugaev sky-Tal, USSR Ch (Moscow) 1 969, in which

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 47

the main ideas show through: 1 0. ..O-O 11 .ltc4 lllc6 1 2 O-O b6 1 3 .l:i.adl .ltb7 14 l:.fel Clla5 ( 14 ... 'iVd6! ? would keep the knight in the centre and prevent 'iVf4; that looks like a good way to play it) 1 5 .ltd3 .l:!.c8 (D). Here White initiates the key manoeuvre 1 6 d5 ! exd5 1 7 e5 ! . For a pawn, he has blocked Black's bishop and freed his own, winning the d4-square for a knight while targeting Black's king. The last factor proved decisive: l 7 ... Cllc4 18 'iVf4! Cllb2 1 9 .ltxh7+! '1ii> xh7 20 Cllg5+ '1ii> g6 21 h4! (the star move of White's attack) 2 1 .. . .l:!.c4 22 h5+ '1ii> h6 23 Cllxf7++ '1ii> h7 24 'iVf5+ '1ii> g8 25 e6 'iVf6 26 'iVxf6 gxf6 27 .l:i.d2 .l:!.c6 28 .l:i.xb2 .l:!.e8

29 Cllh6+ ! '1ii>

h7 30 Cllf5 .l:!.exe6 3 1 .l:!.xe6 .l:!.xe6 32 .l:!.c2 .l:i.c6 33 .l:i.e2 .ltc8 34 .l:!.e7 + '1ii> h8 35 Cllh4 f5 36 Cll g6+ '1ii> g8 37 .l:!.xa7 1 -0. The threat is Clle7+ and if Black's rook strays, h6-h7 decides. Let's return to 4 ... exd5 (D): We've reached the Exchange Variation of the Queen's Gambit, written about in great detail in countless books and articles. One reason for this, perhaps even the main one, is that the im portant strategic ideas are so clear and defin able, and thus easy to write about. They can be presented in a relatively simple fashion or with more detail, depending upon the level of so phistication the writer wants to indulge in. The particular version of queenside minority attack that arises from the Exchange Variation, for ex ample, is the standard one given in almost ev ery textbook, with a host of well-known set-ups for both sides. However, the more carefully that you scrutinize the Exchange Variation, the more you appreciate the subtleties that inform its execution in practice. Right off, we see that in most variations none or only one pair of mi nor pieces is exchanged up to the start of the middlegame. Ordinarily, any opening with such properties allows for complex and original play. Most Tartakower Defence lines in the Classical Queen' s Gambit fit that description, and it is no coincidence that the Exchange and Tartakower are by far the two most popular QGD variations in modem grandmaster chess. We should start with the basics. Why would White free Black's light-squared bishop, his problem piece in the variations that we have ex amined thus far? Doesn't this negate the whole point of playing 2 c4? White gets the c-file, to be sure, but Black gets the e-file, arguably a more important one. I think the answers to this question are more accidental than logical. It turns out that in this precise position Black nor mally has no particularly good square for his liberated queen's bishop and must be satisfied with the passive move ... .lte6 (or - often worse - ...b6 and ... .ltb7). Why? In the first place White usually develops by .ltd3 and/or 'iVc2

48 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

and prevents ... i.f5, whereas ... i.g4 is either impossible, because one of the moves f3 or h3 has already been played, or undesirable, be cause the move f3 is extremely valuable even if Black' s bishop retreats to g6 via h5. The other strong point behind cxd5 is that now, if and when Black tries to attack White' s centre via . . .c5, he has to reckon with the idea of dxc5, isolating Black's d-pawn (this is especially true if White has occupied f3 with a knight and not a pawn). In most variations, the arrangement of Black' s pieces is not such that the isolated pawn is compensated for by his activity, as it so often is in other openings (in the Exchange Vari ation, for example, you will see a knight on d7 rather than the more active c6). Thus variables not already inherent in the pawn-structure, i.e., the particularities of piece dispositions, happen to favour White's otherwise illogical exchange on d5. Note that these are exceptional charac teristics that are not shared by other Exchange Variations, such as those in the French Defence ( 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 exd5 exd5) or the Slav ( 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 cxd5 cxd5). 5 i.g5 (D)

Actually, some writers call this the starting position of the Exchange Variation 'Proper' , because i.g5 is part of the standard set-up. At some point in the naming process, however, things become ambiguous and there's no point in fretting over subtleties. 5 ... i.e7 There are a number of other move-orders, but in this position the most significant alternatives tend to converge upon the positions and struc tures that follow. An important side-variation is 5 ... c6 6 e3 (6 'iVc2 prevents Black' s next, but that's another move that is associated with nu merous subvariations) 6 ... i.f5 7 'iVf3 ! i.g6 8 i.xf6 'iVxf6 9 'iVxf6 gxf6 (D). It looks ridiculous to allow White to get into an ending with Black having weak doubled pawns and no positive chances, but especially at master level there are players who don't nec essarily mind playing with a slightly worse po sition if they think they can ultimately achieve a drawn result. Fortunately most of us aren't like that; and anyway, in a real game there are al ways plenty of chances to win. The variation which seems to have the most promise for White at this point in time is 10 tt:'Bf3 tt:'Bd7 1 1 tt:'Bh4 (or 1 1 g3 followed by tt:'Bh4) 1 l ...tt:'Bb6 (Black in tends to play ... tt:'Bc8-d6 to protect the vulnerable f5-square) 1 2 g3; for example, 12 ... tt:'Bc8 1 3 f3 tt:'Bd6 14 '1ii> f2. This is a position in which Black will generally have to wait around while White can try several plans in order to make progress. An example with a different move-order but not radically different strategy is Van Wely-Short, Wijk aan Zee 2005: 1 0 tt:'Bf3 tt:'Bd7 1 1 tt:'Bh4 i.e7 1 2 g3 tt:'Bb6 1 3 f3 a5 14 @f2 a4 15 .l:i.c l tt:'Bc8 16 i.e2 tt:'Bd6 17 .l:i.hd 1 O-O 1 8 i.d3 .l:i.fe8 1 9 g4 i.f8 20 tt:'Be2 i.h6 2 1 f4 i.xd3 22 .l:!.xd3 i.f8 23 tt:'Bg3 .l:i.a5 24 .l:i.c2 .l:i.b5 25 tt:'ihf5 tt:'Bc4 26 b3 axb3 27 .l:i.xb3 .l:i.xb3 28 axb3 tt:'Ba5 29 tt:'Bh5 .l:!.e6 30 .l:i.a2 b6 31 .l:i.a4 1-0. Impressive, although naturally Black has alternatives. If he wants to enter into the 7 'iVf3 i.g6 line, Black should study what White's logical set-ups are and specifically how to respond to them. For his part, White has to decide whether to avoid the ending altogether in favour of more complex play.

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECUNED 49

We now return to the position after 5 ... i..e7

(D):

6 e3 6 'iVc2 can be played here, perhaps to prevent an early ... i..f5. It's worth noting that in some variations with 'iVc2 and O-O-O soon thereafter, Black's most dangerous idea is to play ...c5, hopefully quickly, in order to exert pressure down the c-file and in some cases to put his knight on c6, where it is a bit closer to White's king. And there are other problems for White when he plays an early 'iVc2, particularly (but not limited to) situations in which he has devel oped his knight to f3: Black can play ...g6, with the idea of ... i..f5, gaining a tempo or exchang ing a good bishop on d3. Also, Black's knight will sometimes develop via a6, irritating White because of the possibility of ... tt:'Bb4 but also leaving open the manoeuvre ... tt:'Bc7-e6, which has the same result as the conventional route ... tt:'ibd7-f8-e6. For all that, Black can only try one plan at a time, and White has ways of trying to counter each one, so 6 'iVc2 is certainly play able. The following game isn't the most pertinent example of 'iVc2 ideas, but at least it begins that way. I present it for those of you who think that the Queen's Gambit Declined is boring. The ac tual move-order of this game is slightly differ ent from the one we've been following. Guseinov - Magomedov Dushanbe 1999

[diagram]
exd5 6 i..g5 c6 7 'iVc2 (D) So far so normal: White plays 'iVc2 so as to prevent ... i..f5. He has also delayed e3 in order to retain the possibility of playing e4 without wasting time. 7 ... tt:'Ba6 Black develops his knight to the side of the board. As noted, this combines the idea of . . . tt:'Bb4 with that of ... tt:'Bc7-e6, a standard cen tralization in the Exchange Variation. 8 a3 Before undertaking central action, White an ticipates Black's planned attack by ... g6, ... tt:'Bb4 and . . . i..f5. By stopping ... tt:'Bb4, however, he uses up a precious tempo.

8...g6 9 e4 tt:'Bxe4! 10 tt:'Bxe4 tt:'Bc7! ! (D)

Amazing. Black remains a piece down for a moment in order to regain it favourably. This isn't just a clever move, but a necessity if Black wants to avoid the significant disadvan tage that would follow both 1 0. .. i..f5 1 1 i..xa6 i..xe4 1 2 'iVc3 and 1 0. . .dxe4 1 1 'iVxe4. 11 'iVcS!?

50 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This move prevents Black from castling but works out badly. Both sides have options on al most every move, and strategy has to some ex tent been superseded by tactics. But there are a few points at which the game is informative in a positional sense. 11 .. dxe4 12 'ii' e5 .l:i.f8 13 'ii' xe4 .ltf5 14 'ii' e3!? It's not clear whether this i s objectively best, but notice that 14 'ii' xe7+ 'ii' xe7+ 15 .ltxe7 @xe7 (D) is the kind of position strong players will do almost anything to avoid: White's d-pawn will ultimately be lost (for example by exchanging off White's knight on f3), and with accurate play the game will end in Black's favour. Hence the retreat of the queen, which at least leads to complications.

14.  .tt:'Bd5 15 ii'

d2 .lte4!? This is based upon a nice combinative idea, but Guseinov points out that Black could achieve a large and safe advantage following 1 5. .. .ltxg5 ! 16 tt:'Bxg5 (or 16 'ii' xg5 'ii' xg5 17 tt:'Bxg5 f6 1 8 tt:'Bf3 O-O-O) 16 .. .f6 17 tt:'Bf3 ii' d6! with a superiority based upon the moves ... tt:'Bf4 and ...O-O-O. 16 .lth6? White plays a natural move which fails tac tically. He could keep his disadvantage to a minimum by 1 6 .ltxe7 ! 'ii' xe7 17 O-O-O .ltxf3 ( 1 7. .. O-O-O 1 8 .l:!.el ) 1 8 .l:!.el ! .lte4 1 9 f3 f5 20 .ltd3 O-O-O 2 1 fxe4 fxe4 22 .ltxe4 ii' d6 23 @b 1 . 1 6. .. .ltxf3! 1 7 .ltxf8!? After 1 7 gxf3 .l:!.g8 1 8 O-O-O ii' d6, White's pawns are shattered while even ...g5 is a threat.

17. ..

.ltg5! (D) This is Black's point. White's king is trapped in the centre. 18 'ii' c2 1 8 ii' d3 loses to 1 8. . . ii' b6!; for example, 1 9 ii' xf3 .ltd2+! 20 @xd2 'ii' xb2+ 2 1 @el 'ii' xal+ 22 ii' d l ii' xdl + 23 @xdl @xf8.

18. ..

@xf8 19 gxf3 'ii' a5+ Black is an exchange down, but it's not even close. The rest is for your enjoyment: 20 @dl .l:i.d8! 21 .lte2 tt:'Bf4!? 22 'ii' c3 'ii' e5! 23 ii' e3? .l:i.xd4+ 24 @c2 ii' f5+ 25 @b3 ii' d5+ 26 @c3 tt:'Bxe2+ 27 'ii' xe2 .l:i.d2 28 ii' e4 .ltf6+ 0-1 Fantastic. Now let's return to 6 e3 (D) and the sanity of 1 50 years of experience:

6 ... O-O

6 ...c6 usually transposes to the lines that we are exploring, but Black can try to delay it. See, for example, Kasparov-Short below. Also, watch out for the tactical mistake 6 ... .ltf5? (D). 7 .ltxf6 .ltxf6 8 ii' b3 and White picks off ei ther the b- or d-pawn. I hate to bore you with the same advice for the umpteenth time, but the first thing to look for if a bishop moves from c l

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 51

[diagram]

[diagram]
j,,e7 6 e3 O-O 7 i..d3 tZ:lbd7 (

D)

8 tbge2 White announces that he's going with the Modem Exchange Variation formation. 8 tbf3 would be the Carlsbad Variation. 8 . l:.e8 9 O-O tbf8 Black skips ...c6. As you get used to Ex change Variation theory, you'll realize how nice it would be for Black to gain a tempo in order to beat White to the punch on the kingside. 10 b4! (D) But he's not allowed to! White exploits Black's omission of ... c6 to get his minority attack rolling early, without having to worry about preparatory moves such as a3 or l:.bl . Since ...c6 will only encourage b5, and . . . c5 has been stopped, White stands better both on the queenside and in the centre. This all depends, of course, upon whether Black can't simply grab the unprotected b-pawn.

[diagram]

52 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

queenside pawns from advancing and then im prove the positions of his pieces. If Black doesn't allow White's knight to f4, it may even make the journey tbg l -e2-g3-f5 to Kasparov's favourite square for a knight. The key for White is not to exchange pieces. With the two rooks and two minor pieces each remaining, the op posite-coloured bishops will favour the side with the superior position. Incidentally, there was no profound incon sistency or logical error in Black's strategy of gaining time by omitting ...c6. The specifics of the situation, expressed by the tactic 10 b4!, was an unfortunate accident of the position. In the event, Black had to make an extra queenside pawn move after all ( 1 0. ..a6), and yet another follows:

[diagram]
It's important to know that one of Black's standard freeing moves is . . . tbe4, whether White's knight is on f3 or e2. Here the simplest answer to 1 2. .. tbe4 is 1 3 i..f4 !, keeping pieces on the board. This is a move that comes up in similar Queen's Gambit positions and should always be considered.

13 f3 (D)

[diagram]

There it is. White has won the opening battle so I'll show the rest with minimal details, al though of course it's never easy to win against a leading grandmaster. 19 ... l:.c8 20 i..a2 l:.d7 21 tZ:lf4!? A perhaps unnecessary tactic.

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 53

21. 

[diagram]

32 e5 (D)

32. ..cS?

[diagram]

8. ..

tt:Jbd7 (D) In this position, still following the main line of the Exchange Variation, White makes a con sequential decision. Where he puts his king's knight will determine the nature of further play. First, we look at putting it on f3 (the Carlsbad Variation), and then on e2 (the Modem Ex change Variation). Carlsbad Variation 9 ll:Bf3 (D) As explained more than once, the move tZ:lf3 may not actually be a decision now, but one already made at an earlier stage. Because so many players use move-orders with an early tZ:lf3, even 1 d4 d5 2 tZ:lf3, the Carlsbad Varia tion is more important in practice than the Modern Exchange Variation. It is as strategi cally rich as any other QGD variation. By putting his knight on f3, White gives up the plan of f3 and e4 for the time being. But the knight controls e5 and can go there at the right moment, and then there can follow either f3 or the ambitious f4. Apart from that there are an array of other choices including playing e4, by which White takes on an isolated pawn in order to attack (usually after placing rooks on d l and el). The most famous strategy of all is the mi nority attack by b4-b5. When one includes other variations in which it occurs, thousands of games have been played using the minority

54 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

attack and thousands of pages written about it. As indicated before, the ideas behind the attack are relatively simple and easy to understand. Not surprisingly, actually putting them into practice is an art that depends upon profound understanding of the timing and therefore feasi bility of each plan. The interesting thing about the Carlsbad Vari ation is that White can mix and match these plans, switching from one to another in mid stream! That factor makes it one of the most strategically complicated lines in chess and, I think, a much more difficult variation than the Modem Exchange with i..d3 and tbge2. Black needs to react to all this and can do so by knowing the major themes. As is the situa tion with White's ideas, the relevant manoeuv res have to be timed according to circum stance. Black's most rudimentary freeing plan is ... tbe4, which White avoids in certain lines and allows in others. Another favourite idea is to try to get some sort of kingside attack. This includes the move ... i..d6 in a majority of such cases. For example, White will often play i..xf6 in order to divert Black's bishop to f6 and speed up his minority attack by b4. Then, even at the cost of two tempi, Black will use the time for ...i.. e7-d6. Another standard idea is to chal lenge White on his own turf on the queenside. That can involve an early ...a5, or ...a6 with ...b5 (perhaps with ... tZ:lb6-c4 to follow). 9 . . . l:.e8 This is almost always played. Black takes over the e-file in preparation for an eventual ... tbe4 and clears the way for ... tbf8 in order to protect h7. It's also very useful to play ... tbg6 or ... tbe6 in many variations. 10 o-o tt::i rs (D) At this point White has many reasonable moves. Let's see some games. 11 l:.abl Karpov - Ljubojevic Linares 1989 We'll start with one of the oldest moves, pre paring the direct b4-b5. Karpov plays White, which is interesting because he was the most prominent player to begin using 1 1 h3 (as played in the next few games). After you see this game you'll wonder why he switched!

11. . . tt:Je4 (D)

This is the traditional anti-Carlsbad proce dure. Essentially, Black wants clarification and a strong central presence to counteract White's on the queenside. A good alternative is the queenside restraint plan by 1 1 .. .a5, usually followed up by some sort of kingside attack ( ... tbg6, ...i..d6).

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 55

12 i.xe7 "fJ/xe7 13 b4 a6 14 a4 Not only to prepare b5 but to play a5 and tba4 under some circumstances.

14. .

i.f5 15 tbe5!? Typically creative of Karpov, if a little odd looking. In his notes, he analyses the obvious approach as follows: 15 b5 axb5 16 axb5 tbxc3 (or 16. .. l:.a3) 1 7 "fJ/xc3 l:.a3 1 8 l:.b3 l:.xb3 1 9 fJlxb3 i.xd3 20 fJlxd3 c 5 with equality. Hence he tries another strategy. 15 ... l:.ad8 Henrichs suggests that 1 5. ..f6 is better, when Karpov's continuation 16 i.xe4 i.xe4 1 7 tbxe4 fxe5 1 8 tbg3' ! ?' is unconvincing after 1 8. .. exd4 ( l 8 ... tbd7 is equal) 1 9 tZ:lf5 fJlf6 20 tbxd4 tbe6. Instead, Henrichs thinks that 1 6 tbf3 produces only an "academic advantage". 16 l:.fcl tZ:lg6 17 i.xe4 i.xe4 18 tbxe4 dxe4 19 tbxg6 hxg6 20 b5 (

D)

The ultimate minority-attack position. It looks like one of those skeleton pictures that they give in the textbooks, not something that was actu ally played! Henrichs mentions that it helps White to have the minor pieces off, although rm not so sure. A knight might actually help to make direct threats against Black's weaknesses. With some exceptions, simplification makes White's task more pleasant in the minority at tack if only because he can't be attacked on the kingside. 20 ... cxb5 20 ... axb5 2 1 axb5 l:.d6 22 fJla4 l:.c8 23 fJla7 .:.c7 24 l:.c5 ! would leave Black in a mess. A position like that may be salvageable with per fect defence (or it may not be), but in any event White has a clear advantage. 21 axb5 l:.d6 22 bxa6 bxa6 (D) Henrichs gives 22 ... l:.xa6 23 l:.b5 ! l:.c6 24 fJlb2 l:.xc l + 25 "fJ/xc 1 l:.a8 26 fJlb 1 with a large advantage. It's funny how such a simple posi tion can be so good. I should note, however, that Black's pawn on e4 is the deciding factor in this position. Without this extra weakness it's un clear whether White could win. 23 "fJ/a4 fJld7 24 fJlxd7! l:.xd7 Now we get a little Rubinstein-like instruc tion from one of the all-time greats. 25 l:.c5 l:.a7 26 l:.a5 @rs 27 l:.b6 l:.ea8 28 h4! In this book I keep emphasizing the second front. One would think that White's king might head to the centre, but it's on the kingside that he' ll make inroads. Black's exposed pawn on e4 makes his situation worse, but at this point a central advance supported by White's king would do the trick anyway. 28 ... @e7 29 @h2 @d7 30 @g3 @c7 31 l:.b2!

(D)

56 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White protects his second rank against inva sion. The rest is pretty clear, although not nec essarily easy. 31 .. l:!.b7 32 l:!.cS+! @b8 33 l:!.a2 l:!.e7 34 @f4 @b7 35 l:!.b2+ @a7 36 l:!.c6 l:!.h8 37 l:!.a2 as 38 l:!.xa5+ @b7 39 l:!.ca6 l:!.xh4+ 40 @g3 l:.hS 41 l:!.a7+ @c6 42 l:!.5a6+ @bS 43 l:!.xe7 l:.g5+ 44 @h2 @xa6 45 l:!.xf7 1-0 Superb. 11 h3 Djuric - Pfleger Yugoslavia 1984 This unassuming move has become White's most popular continuation. Yermolinsky de scribes it as a "useful waiting" move, noting that the 'useful' designation applies to covering g4, providing a retreat on h2 for White's bishop (following its common redeployment to f4), and "[underlining] how Black's 'liberated' c8- bishop suddenly finds itself deprived of activ ity".

11.. 

tbe4 Again Black plays the classical freeing move. We'll see other schemes below. 12 i..f4 tZ:lgS 13 i..xg5 i..xg5 14 b4 i..e7 15 b5 (D)

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 5 7

2 1 l:!.tbl l:!.xb7 2 2 l:!.xb7 l:!.b8 23 l:!.xb8+ i..xb8 (DJ The presence of minor pieces for the de fender isn't necessarily an improvement over what we saw in the last game, when there were only rooks left; what counts is their relative ac tivity (the rooks were passively tied down). I think that practice shows how difficult it is to make some kind of general principle about piece combinations with this pawn-structure. Further more, Black's pieces are more actively placed here than we are used to, with the knight, bishop and queen all potentially covering c5. Presumably both of White's knights should be better than Black's bishop in this semi-closed position, but I suspect that it's defensible. 24 tZ:la4 (DJ 24  .bS? An unfortunate placement for the queen. Black should play 24 ...a6 ! 25 tbc5 tbxc5 26 dxc5 h6 with good defensive chances; e.g., 27 'iVb3 (27 tbd4 i..e5) 27 ... i..c7 28 tbd4 g6. Per haps we shouldn't make too much of White's success with his minority attack here. 25 tt:Jc5 g6? After 25 ... tbxc5 26 dxc5 Bartashnikov says that 26 ...g6 27 tbd4 gives a large advantage; that could certainly be argued after 27 ...a6 with the idea of ... i..e5. Still, the basic idea is right, because 27 b3 ! is strong. Note that it's Black's lack of a back-rank escape-square that makes things difficult here, in a sequence such as 26 ...a6 27 bl ! c8. And is 26 ...b4 27 b3 a5 tenable? For example, 28 g3 i..a7 29 tbd4 i..xc5 30 tbxc6 xb3 (again, only the lack of an escape-square even makes this nec essary!) 3 1 axb3 i..b4. See also 24 ... a6 in stead of the unfortunate 24 ...b5. The point is that Black's sole weakness on c6 probably isn't fatal in this pawn-structure, and that relative piece placement is almost always the deciding factor. 26 a4! This, however, does the trick since Black has to destroy his pawn-structure to avoid loss of material.

[diagram]
@fl i..d6 30 tbe5 c3 31 @e2 c5 32 @d3 cxd4 33 exd4 @g7 34 @xc3 White went on to win. A thought-provoking game. Portisch - Larsen Rotterdam Ct (4J 1977

10 h3 (DJ

White makes this useful little advance a move earlier than in the previous game, which brings in the possibility of him not castling king side. Black responds in traditional fashion.

10. .. tt::i

[diagram]

58 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

28 i.. d3 i..g5 29 exf4 l:.f8 30 IYVe5+ i..f6 3 1 l:.g7 ! l:.f7 3 2 IYVf5 1 -0. Quite a picture at the fin ish! 12 i..h2 i..d6 13 i..xd6 IYVxd6 14 O-O-O (D) OK, White took three extra moves just to ex change his dark-squared bishop, but that got rid of Black's good bishop. And it's actually better for White to have 'lost' the tempo to ... tbg6 be cause g4 and h4-h5 can follow.

14. .

IYVe7 15 g4 i.. e6 16 g5 tbe4! An excellent anti-queenside-castling pawn sacrifice, but here White still has an attack and extra space for Black to deal with. So perhaps we can call this 'dynamically balanced' . 17 i..xe4 dxe4 18 IYVxe4 b5 1 9 h4 b4 20 tba4 IYVd6!? Larsen foregoes 20 ... i..d5 ! 21 'IYVxe7 tbxe7 22 l:.h3 i..e6! 23 l:.g3 (23 l:.h2 i..g4) 23 ...tbf5 24 l:.ggl i..d5, when White's h-pawn falls, leav ing an equal position.

21 h5 i..d5 22 IYVg4 tZ:lf8 23 b3 IYVe6!? (D)

24 IYVf4 Not 24 'IYVxe6? tbxe6 25 l:.h3 i..xf3 26 l:.xf3 tbxg5. Black tries to show what he's gained by this unexpected trick in the next two moves.

24. ..

tt:Jd7 Versus tbc5. 25 l:.hel i..xb3!? 26 axb3 IYVxb3 I don't know how sound this sacrifice is, but we've covered the opening, so let's just look at some more moves: 27 tZ:lb2 IYVa2!? 28 IYVf5 c5!? 29 IYVxd7 cxd4 30 l:.xd4 l:.ac8+ 31 l:.c4 l:.xc4+ 32 tbxc4 'IYVxc4+ 33 @d2 IYVa2+ 34 @dl :rs 35 IYVd2 IYVa5 36 @e2 l:.d8 37 tbd4 IYVxg5 38 IYVxb4 IYVxh5+ 39 tbf3 White has obvious technical difficulties in this position, but he did win in the end. f4 M. Gurevich - Akopian Barcelona I992

11 h3 i..e6 12 tbe5 tb6d7 13 i..xe7 'IYVxe7 14

Yermolinsky calls this the 'post-up'.

14. .f6 15 tbf3 i..f7 16 l:.ael c5! (D)

This is the natural counterattack against any such d4/e3/f4 structure; it should equalize. 17 IYVf2 tZ:lb6 18 tZ:lh4 Or 1 8 dxc5 'IYVxc5 19 tbd4 tbc4 with equality. 18 .. cxd4 19 exd4 IYVc7 20 l:.cl IYVd8 21 tZ:lb5!? Dautov offers up 21 f5 l:.c8 22 g3 with the idea of tbg2-f4; by then ... tbc4-d6-e4 will be fine for Black. 21 ... tbc4! 22 b3 a6! 23 bxc4 dxc4 24 i..xc4 i..xc4 25 l:.xc4 axb5 26 l:.c5 White can't be passive or Black will play ... l:.e4 and ... tbe6.

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 59

26. ..

[diagram]

60 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

15. ..exf3 16 tZ:lxf3 .Be6 17 e4 fxe4 18 l:.xe4

(D)

White has a lot of nice squares in this posi tion, with pressure down the e-file and potential moves such as tbe5 and d5. The question is whether that makes up for the weakness of his isolated pawn. 18 . .h6 Short preemptively stops tbg5 and prepares to move his queen to, e.g., c7. 19 l:.fel l:.ad8 (D) 20 .l:.e5

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 61

[diagram]

62 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

11 f3 (D)

[diagram]

[diagram]
Black tries to swap bishops. He may want to attack the dark squares, notably White's weak

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 63

[diagram]

[diagram]

23 e4 lLig3+ ! 24 lLixg3 fxg3 is awfully risky

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

(D)

[diagram]
64 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

51..Jhb8??

[diagram]

11 f3 lLig6 (D)

12 e4!? White has to be careful not to play this too early. More sensible is the patient 12 l:tadl .i.e6 13 @hl (he gets off the dangerous g l-a7 diago nal) 13. .. :i.c8 14 lLig3 ! lLih5 ! ? 15 .i.xe7 lLixg3+ 16 hxg3 xe7 17 @gl (another waiting move; he can play for either the minority attack via b4 or slowly prepare e4) 17. ..c5? (D) (a positional mistake, as is soon evident). 1 8 xg6 ! hxg6 1 9 dxc5 ! xc5 20 l::t d4 b5 2 1 a3 b6 2 2 l::t fdl c4 2 3 @f2 a6 24 e2 xd4 25 l::t xd4, Tukmakov-Miladinovic, Burgas 1995. We have a good knight versus a bad bishop in an IQP position, although Tukmakov failed to win after encountering tough defence. White certainly won the opening, but without the mis take 17 ...c5 things weren't so clear; probably he had a small advantage in any case.

[diagram]

[diagram]

17 g3 l::t

[diagram]

[diagram]
QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 65

Now Black is simply better. 19 lZJf4 c4 20 'it>g2 lZJ4e5 21 d6! White attempts to activate his pieces with this pawn sacrifice; otherwise he's in terrible positional shape due to his bad bishop and inac tive knights, whereas Black retains his outpost on e5.

21...i..xd6 22 lZJcdS?

[diagram]

D)

24. ..

[diagram]

25 b3 lZJxf4+ 26 gxf4 h3+ 27 @bl lZJd3

The game is effectively over: Black is win ning more material. Kasparov - Beliavsky Moscow (Tv, rapidplay) 1987

11 a3 (D)

[diagram]

[diagram]

66 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]
Before getting to more complicated mate rial, let me repeat what I said about the immedi ate exchange of pawns, 3 cxd5 exd5 (D ), in the introduction to this chapter, adding some de tails. The sequence actually called the Exchange Variation goes 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 lLic3 lLif6 4 cxd5 exd5, generally with 5 .i.g5. But if White tries to get to that position by 3 cxd5 exd5 4 lLic3, Black doesn't have to reply 4 ... lLif6. He can play 4 ...c6. Then 5 .i.f4 is outside the realm of a true Exchange Variation and anyway, Black can equalize easily by 5 ... .i.d6, or go for more by 5 ... .i.f5. Notice that this differs from the important Alatortsev Variation, which goes 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 lLic3 .i.e7 (which has its own section above). In that case, after 4 cxd5 exd5 5 .i.f4, Black would have to use up an extra tempo to play 5 ... .i.d6, and the move 5 ... .i.f5? is simply bad after 6 'tfVb3. Conclusion: even though the Alatortsev order doesn't permit White to play an Exchange Variation, there is no automatic equalizer for Black after the moves 4 cxd5 exd5 5 .i.f4.

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 6 7

[diagram]

[diagram]

2 c4 c5 3 d5 e6 4 lll

[diagram]

(D):

There are probably more serious negatives than positives for White with lLif3 already hav ing been played, but let's look at a few bene fits for him first. Please remember that this is the complex and confusing version of the move-order presentation in the beginning of the

68 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

chapter - I'm trying to fit in as much informa tion as I can ! Those who are experienced in the Queen's Gambit (or who have read this chapter) will see that this move-order avoids the main-line posi tions in which Black delays ... ctJf6 in favour of 3 ... .i.. e7, that is, 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 tLlc3 (instead of 3 ctJf3) 3 ... j,e7, the Alatortsev Variation mentioned above. Notice also that if 1 d4 ctJf6 2 c4 e6 is Black's move-order, then 3 ctJf3 j,e7?! is no longer logical as a substitute for 3 ...d5; apart from the answer 4 ctJc3, White could play

[diagram]

10. ..j,d7) 1 1 j,xf6 'tfVxc3+ 12 @fl gxf6 (D)

[diagram]

QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED 69

White's knight committed to f3. This is the Carlsbad Variation, given its own section. The only problem for White is that he' s lost the op tion of placing the king' s knight on e2, which is the favourite development for a majority of players. 2d) Black can still try to avoid the Carlsbad Exchange variation altogether by means of 4 lZJf3 j,e7, and if 5 cxd5 cxd5 6 j,g5, then 6 ... c6

(DJ.

[diagram]

3 Slav and Semi-Slav

1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 (

D)

In this chapter we'll be investigating the Slav complex, embracing all variations of the Queen's Gambit that begin with 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6. The Slav Defence is long-established as one of Black's most solid and effective answers to 1 d4. Max Euwe famously used the opening in his world championship matches versus Ale khine in the 1930s, and in the last two decades various forms of it (including the Semi-Slav, discussed in this chapter) have grown tremen dously in popularity. Chess professionals in particular have found that the Slav's solidity is complemented by the dynamic counterattacks which can arise if White plays aggressively for an advantage The Slav move 2 ...c6 reinforces Black's d5- pawn and it therefore begs comparison with the Queen's Gambit Declined (a.k.a. 'QGD': 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6). In the QGD, Black's second move 2 ...e6 blocks off his own bishop on c8, making development of that piece difficult. That is not true of the Slav Defence, although 2 ...c6 uses up the c6-square, which in most openings is the best square for Black's queen's knight. This elimination of a possible ... lLic6, Black's 'ideal' development, is considered to be a prime draw back of 2 ...c6. A comparison of these two open ings' respective disadvantages, however, would seem to favour the Slav over the Queen's Gam bit Declined, since after 1 d4 d5 the move ...lLic6 tends to be fairly ineffective anyway. A much more important consideration is that in the Slav, Black has wasted a tempo if he wants to play the important move ...c5, so often a key move (or positional threat) in the QGD. It's also revealing to compare the respective Exchange Variations of these two openings. In the Queen's Gambit Declined, I d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 lLic3 lLif6 4 cxd5 exd5 gives White a 2- 1 central pawn-majority (a desirable feature for him); whereas in the Slav, I d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 cxd5 cxd5 leaves the central pawn count the same. Super ficially that would seem to favour the Slav ver sion over the QGD. Again, things are not so easy. First, there are many players who prefer such imbalanced structures, and in the QGD Exchange, some would argue that Black's open e-file is more useful than White's open c-file. In addition, the QGD move 2 ...e6 affords Black the opportunity to develop his king's bishop quickly and thus enables the desirable move ...O-O in short order. In the Slav Defence, by con trast, Black will take some time to play ...

O-O

because he has to find a place for the f8-bishop, and trying to do so by a speedy ...e6 would seem to contradict the main advantage of 2 ...c6, i.e., to be able to develop the c8-bishop quickly. I shall use the name 'Slav' for lines in which Black doesn 't play ...e6 before bringing his queen's bishop out, or at least doesn't eliminate that option within the first few moves. By con trast, 'Semi-Slav' denotes a variation that be gins with both ...e6 and ...c6 on the first few moves; for example, I d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 lLic3 e6, or here 3 ...lLif6 4 lLif3 e6, or 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 lLic3 c6, etc. This will include the Meran Varia tion, described in its own section. Although the most common lines in the Slav and Semi-Slav include ...dxc4, Black can also play moves such as ...a6 and ...g6. The latter moves hold the d5 point and emphasize the fundamental solidity of this defence.

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 71

Solidity tends to indicate lack of ambition, but that's not necessarily so in the Slav, since most of the main lines are unbalanced. It is true, however, that Black will seldom be playing for an early initiative or tactical chances unless White provokes him. A reason for this can be seen by the picture after the second move. Black is certainly not ready to waste a move on the pawn-break ...c5, but the only other way to challenge the centre would involve ...e5, a move unlikely to happen soon in view of the fact that White will almost always play lllf3 on this or the next couple of moves. Nevertheless, Black's second move has a po tential dynamism that will express itself in spe cific situations. For example, in most variations of both the Slav and Semi-Slav, Black will play ... dxc4 at a fairly early stage. Then, although it may seem trivial, White needs to pay serious at tention to recovering his pawn, because Black may play simply . . .b5 and hang on to it (com pare the Queen's Gambit Declined or Accepted, where this is a rare occurrence). Should this possibility require the move a4 on White's part, he has used up a tempo and weakened his b4- square. Already on his third move, then, White has a limited choice of continuations that avoid the forced loss of a pawn and yet still contain some punch. His candidates for the job are 3 cxd5 (the Exchange Variation), 3 lllc3, and the main move 3 lllf3. In the right situation White might prefer to gambit his c-pawn for compen sation elsewhere, leading of course to unbal anced play. You have seen or will see that all major openings have move-order issues. The Slav is no different but the majority of important deci sions come on very early moves and mostly comprise independent set-ups rather than trans positions. The description that follows is a re source to which you can return after you gain some experience. 3 t2Jf3 Although 3 t2:lf3 is the main move, White sometimes uses 3 lll c3 ( D) in order either to by pass certain lines or to play independently. Two of the most frequent continuations are 3 ... lllf6 4 cxd5 cxd5 5 .1i.f4, which is considered in the Exchange Variation section, and 3 ...e6 4 e4, the Marshall Gambit, discussed in the Semi Slav section. A couple of unique move-orders to watch out for as White, or to use as Black, are: a) 3 ... dxc4, which is quite complex after 4 e3 b5 5 a4 b4 6 lllbl (6 llla2 e6 protects the pawn on b4; there usually follows 7 .1i.xc4 lll f6 8 lll f3, again considered equal) 6 ... .1i.a6 7 'iVc2 t2:lf6 8 .1i.xc4 .1i.xc4 9 'iVxc4 'iVd5. All this is the ory that I won't pursue; it's simply good to know it exists. Or White can play 4 e4 (D). This is somewhat more ambitious: 4 ...b5 (or 4 ...e5 5 lllf3 exd4 6 'iVxd4 'iVxd4 7 lllxd4 with prospects of a small edge for White) 5 a4 b4 6 t2:la2 (6 lll ce2!?) 6 ... lllf6 7 e5 llld5 8 .1i.xc4, af ter which Black has various set-ups involving ... .1i.f5, ... .1i.a6, or simply ...e6. White would like to get in the moves .1i.d2, lll c l -b3 and l::t c l . b) 3 ...e5 !? is the Winawer Counter-Gambit, about which a lot has been written. Obviously if Black can get away with this move unpunished he will have freed his game entirely. I'll just give a skeletal structure of the main lines and refer you to theory to get the details: 4 cxd5 (4

72 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

SLA V AND SEMI-SLAV 73

can't exploit the b5 outpost; for instance, 7 lllc3 (7 cxd5 lllxd5 and White still needs to take no tice of ... lll b4; e.g., 8 lll e5? lll b4! ; also ineffec tive is 7 lll e5 .. !i.f5 8 lllc3 e6 with equality) 7 ...e6 8 cxd5 exd5 9 .1i.e2 .1i.d6 10 O-O b5 ! ; note that White' s bishop on c l is bad in these lines. b) 4 ... .1i.f5 and now: b l ) After 5 lllc3 e6 6 lllh4, both 6 ... .1i.g6 7 lll xg6 hxg6 and 6 ... ..te4 ! 7 f3 .1i.g6 8 lllxg6 hxg6 have been tested in high-level grandmas ter play, with and without the insertion of it'b3 and ... li'h6. This has generally resulted in bal anced play, especially after 6 ... .1i.e4. White has two bishops, but neither one is as good Black's bishop, and Black's open h-file can come in handy, often in conjunction with ... .1i.d6 and the aggressive move ... g5 to disturb things early on and force a change of structure that accommo dates the knights. b2) 5 cxd5 cxd5 6 it'b3 (D).

In this position Black must choose how he wants to defend the b-pawn. 6 ... it'b6 is possible but the more ambitious set-up is 6 ... 'fic7, in tending 7 .1i.d2 lllc6 8 .1i.b5 e6. White's plan is to weaken Black's pawn-structure by .1i.xc6 (when ...bxc6 is normally best), trade dark squared bishops by .1i.b4, and then mount pres sure down the c-file. He might, for example, play a rook to c 1 and occupy c5 with a knight after the preliminary llla4. From Black's per spective (after .1i.xc6 and ...bxc6), he will have two bishops and pressure down an open b-file, with prospects of ...c5 after, say, the moves ... 'i'Bb6 and . . . llld7. At the moment White seems to be getting very slight advantages in this type of position, but even those may well prove to be illusory. The whole line is quite playable for Black in any case. c) 4 ...g6 5 lll c3 .1i.g7 is a hybrid Grtinfeld/Slav variation that is known as the Schlechter Slav. This position can also arise via 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 g6 3 lllc3 d5 4 lllf3 .i.g7 5 e3 c6. After, for ex ample, 6 .1i.d3 O-O 7 O-O ..llg4 8 h3 .1i.xf3 9 'i'Bxf3 e6 10 l::t d l lll bd7 (D) White wants to use his two bishops and space advantage and slowly make progress on the queenside, whereas Black is happy that White's dark-squared bishop is re stricted and will strive for . . .e5. An ultra-solid position has arisen. Some times Black can consider ... dxc4 followed by ...e5 but that brings White's light-squared bishop to an aggressive diagonal. At the moment the desirable move ...e5 is difficult to implement because Black's d-pawn requires defence. As a general rule, the player with two bishops will have some advantage unless the opponent's knights already have an available outpost or he can create one by means of a forcing attack. Here, since Black cannot do so, White probably retains a small edge. Still, these positions are very resilient and one could also argue Black's bishop on g7 is so much superior to White's on c 1 that he can claim full equality. Note that it doesn't help White to open the game immedi ately because that would activate his opponent's knights: 1 1 e4! ? e5 ! 12 dxe5 ( 12 exd5 exd4 1 3 dxc6 llle5 14 it'e2 lllxd3 15 l:!.xd3 bxc6 with an equal position; 12 .1i.e3 dxe4 13 lllxe4 lll xe4 14 .1i.xe4 'fih4 15 d5 f5 16 dxc6? fxe4 17 'fig4 "it'xg4 1 8 hxg4 lll f6 and Black has the advan tage) 12 ... lll xe5 13 'i'Be2 lllxd3 14 l::t xd3 l::t e8 with dynamic play that appears evenly balanced.

74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Slav Main Line Now we move into the realm of the Slav proper, leaving the Semi-Slav (4 ...e6) for later. Black begins with:

4. ..

dxc4 This is a rather strange-looking move, at least to the inexperienced player. With his first three moves, Black has carefully maintained his pawn on d5 and prevented e4. Now he sur renders his control of that square and grants White a central majority to boot! Perhaps that might make sense if 4 ... dxc4 won a pawn, but White can regain the pawn on c4 fairly easily. As is often the case, Black's motivation fol lows from a combination of the goals and the specifics of the position. He would like to de velop his pieces, and since 4 ... e6 cuts off the queen's bishop, it would be nice to place that piece on f5 to be followed by ... e6 and kingside development. However, the immediate 4 ... i.f5?! is one of those cases in which the bishop comes out a bit too early, because White has played tbc3 instead of e3 (that is, as opposed to 3 t2:lf3 t2:lf6 4 e3 .1i.f5 above). Play can continue 5 cxd5 ! and now: a) 5 ...cxd5?! 6 'i'Bb3 ! ( D). 6 ... 'i'Bb6!? (6. .. .1i.c8 is an admission of failure but perhaps best; 6 ... b6 is always weakening in such positions - White can take advantage of Black's vulnerable light squares by 7 i.f4 tbc6

[diagram]
with the idea l::t d l ) 7 'i'Bxb6!? (White can also grab a pawn by 7 t2:lxd5 t2:lxd5 8 'i'Bxd5 e6, and return it advantageously by 9 'i'Bb3 'i'Bxb3 10 axb3 i.c2 1 1 .1i.d2 t2:lc6 12 l::t c l .1i.xb3 13 e4)

7 ... axb6 8 .1i.f4 e6 9 e3 .1i.b4 10 .1i.b5+ and White stands better because Black's pawns are vulnerable. b) 5 ... t2Jxd5 also seems to fall short of equal ity; e.g., 6 'i'Bb3 (6 t2Jd2 !? is strange-looking, but e4 can't be stopped so it probably produces some advantage; the benefit of the central ma jority outweighs White's loss of time) 6 ... 'i'Bb6! 7 t2:lxd5 (or 7 'i'Bxb6 axb6 8 t2:lxd5 cxd5 9 e3 tbc6 10 .1i.b5 .1i.d7 1 1 .1i.d2) 7 ... 'i'Bxb3 (7 ...cxd5 8 'i'Bxd5 ! ? e6 9 'i'Bb3 'i'Bxb3 10 axb3 .1i.c2 1 1 e3 i.xb3 12 i.b5+ tbc6 13 t2:le5) 8 t2:lc7+ @d7 9 axb3 @xc7 10 .1i.f4+ @c8 1 1 tlJd2! e6 12 e4 i.g6 13 .1i.d3 i.b4 14 @e2 l::t d8 15 t2:lc4! with the twin ideas of t2:lb6+ and t2:le5. Instead of 4 ... dxc4 or 4 ... .1i.f5?!, 4 ... a6!? (D) is an ultra-sophisticated attempt that asks White what his plan is while preparing to develop his queen's bishop to f5 or g4. I won't go into theory, but a few features of this position are easily explained. In variations without ...a6, the usual response to ... i.f5 or

SLA V AND SEMI-SLAV 75

... .1i.g4 involves the move 'ii' b3, attacking the b-pawn. But after 4 ... a6, Black can play ... .1i.g4 or . . . i.f5 and answer White' s 'ii' b3 by either ... b5, which forces a resolution of the centre, or the remarkable ... l:!.a7! ?. One point of the latter move is that Black needn't devote his queen to defence of b7 and thus it is less exposed to at tack. To clarify that a bit you might want to compare the lines after 4 t2:lc3 .1i.f5?! 5 'ii' b3 'J/i/c7 or 5 ... 'J/i/c8, which expose Black' s queen to potential attack down the c-file. It's also worth noting that the move 4 ...a6 is a very useful one in the Exchange Variation after 5 cxd5 cxd5, since it prevents t2:lb5 as well as White' s stan dard move .1i.b5. In fact, we shall look at a line that comes from 4 ...a6 in the Exchange Varia tion section below. 5 a4 The Geller Gambit 5 e4 b5 6 e5 attempts to use White's broad centre for attacking purposes and mix in some tactical opportunism. In the process there arise positional features involving the struggle for light and dark squares by both players. To give a taste of this complex gambit, let's take a brieflook at the old main line, which goes 6 .. . t2:ld5 7 a4 (D). 7 ... e6! (securing d5; other moves are risky for instance, 7 . . . .1i.b7 8 e6 ! shatters Black's pawn-structure) 8 axb5 t2:lxc3 9 bxc3 cxb5 10 tl:Jg5 (threatening both 1 1 'J/i/f3 and 1 1 t2:lxf7)

I 0 ...

[diagram]

76 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

here Black's bishop is outside the pawn-chain, but in real danger of being cut off, whereas Black's knight on b4 is a definite plus) 9 ... .1i.g6. At this point let's break off in order to explore an idea that many of you must have been won dering about: 10 .1i.xa6 ! ? bxa6 (D ). White captures the knight on a6 to double and isolate Black's pawns on a7, a6 and c6 (the latter on an open file). He also has two central pawns and a nice support point on e5 for his knight, so that moves like lll e5 and iVf3, per haps followed by h4-h5, are potential threats. What are the downsides? First, he has given his opponent the two bishops, which happen to have attractive open lines available. Second, he has weakened his light squares, a serious issue with this particular pawn-structure. Black has also gained the b-file along which his rook can attack the backward pawn on b2. Finally, White has lost a move capturing the knight and will have a difficult time organizing an attack down the c-file before Black plays ...c5 and puts pres sure on White's centre. Thus we have a typical trade-off between static and dynamic factors. White needs to respond firmly; for example, 1 1 llle5 .1i.d6 ( l l ...c5 !? 1 2 a5 ! .1i.d6?! 1 3 'it'a4+ @f8 14 'it'c6!) 12 lll xg6 (12 'i'Bf3 l:tc8 ! 13 e4 .1i.b4! 14 lllxg6 hxg6 15 .1i.e3 c5 16 l:tdl 'i'Ba5 and the dynamic side is getting the better of it) 12 ...hxg6 13 g5 with some kind of dynamic equilibrium after 13 ... lllh5 14 lll e4 or 13. .. llld5

14 e4 lllxc3 1 5 bxc3 c5 16 dxc5 i.xc5 17

'it'xd8+ l:txd8. In fact, this trade of bishop for doubled a pawns arises repeatedly in chess openings. For example, there are several variations of the King's Indian Defence in which Black plays ... llla6 and White bites with .1i.xa6. One such is

1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 g6 3 lllc3 .1i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 .1i.e2 O-O

6 .1i.g5 llla6 7 'i'Bd2 e5 8 d5 c6 9 f3 cxd5 10 cxd5 .1i.d7 1 1 i.xa6!? bxa6 12 lllge2 'i'Bb6 13 i.e3 'i'Bb7 14 O-O llle8, pitting Black's static weak nesses against two bishops and a potentially dynamic ... f5 thrust. Or the Glek Variation with

1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 g6 3 lllc3 .1i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 lllf3 O-O

6 .1i.e2 e5 7 O-O llla6, when an early c5 and .1i.xa6 occurs in at least one of the main lines. Some other examples: the Pirc Defence with

1 e4 d6 2 d4 lllf6 3 lllc3 g6 4 f4 .1i.g7 5 lllf3 O-O

[diagram]
1 d4 dS 2 c4 c6 3 lll

f3 lll f6 4 lllc3 dxc4 5 a4 i.fS 6 e3 e6 7 .1i.xc4 The lines are drawn. Both sides are reason ably well developed and White has the central majority. Black's task, then, is to make sure that it can't advance (i.e., e4 cannot be played) until he is ready to snipe at the centre and force White into some undesired change of struc ture. From White's point of view, Black's pawn-structure is super-solid and will only be completely broken down by e4 and d5 . Alter natively, White has the option of e4-e5, seek ing attacking chances. 7  . .1i.b4

SLA V AND SEMI-SLAV 77

Black indirectly increases his control over e4.

8 O-O (D)

A basic position. We can see some general features of the game developing. White has a central majority (2: 1 ), and Black has a restraint formation with the light-squared bishop in front of the pawn-chain (see Chapter 3 in Volume 1 on pawn-structures for an explanation of the various types of restraint centres). In the situa tion before us, Black is not waiting for e4 but preventing the advance of the e-pawn by piece play. He has two pieces attacking e4 and a third ready to exchange off a piece defending that square. Whether or not that situation persists, he will try to gain time for the characteristic pawn-breaks ...c5 and ...e5. Note that Black's bishop is on an outpost on b4 and cannot be expelled by pawns; therefore White may need to retreat his knight or divert resources to drive the bishop away. As a first plan, White would like to play f3 in order to get e4 in, but that would require either a knight re treat or advance to e5, and both moves will al low an early ...c5 . This leaves White with two basic approaches: a) He can support a central advance with his pieces, the classical approach. In that case, White wants to pose Black the challenge of confronting an ideal centre; b) He can chase down Black's bishop on f5 by a variety of methods, including the direct 6 tt:lh4. In that case, should White decide to cap ture the bishop on f5 he will have to forego e4 for some time, but that may not be a bad trade off. These goals can operate in tandem. The more specific decision about whether and when to try to expel Black's bishop on b4 will vary according to circumstance. The 6 e3 variation is probably the most in structive one in traditional Slav practice. It produces games permeated by strategic and positional themes that will be usable in many contexts. 8 ... lllbd7 Black will normally choose between this move and 8 ... O-O. The decision comes down to one's goals and some tactical assessments. Depending upon your goals and who you're playing, a practical drawback of 8 ... lllbd7 is that it opens up some possibilities for an imme diate draw. White can play 9 'it'b3, when Black has to choose between the following: a) 9 ...a5, allowing a draw by 10 llla2 (D). 10 ....1i.e7 (10. ..'iVe7? 1 1 lllxb4 'iVxb4 1 2 'iVxb4 axb4 13 .1i.d2 really isn't acceptable for Black) 1 1 'it'xb7 l:tb8 12 'iVa6 l:ta8 13 'iVxc6 l:tc8 with a draw by perpetual attack. After 9 ... a5, Black can't really avoid this draw, but White can, and often does, playing either 10 llla2 .1i.e7 1 1 lllh4 or 10 lllh4. The last move can lead to, for example, 10 ... .1i.g6 (10. .. .1i.g4 1 1 f3 i.h5 is a good alternative) 1 1 g3 ! ?, not just protecting the knight but also in tending the exotic idea lllxg6, l:tdl and .1i.fl g2. b) 9 ... 'it'b6 is an extremely risky variation that most players would like to avoid even though it may be survivable for Black: 10 e4 (10 lllh4 is still possible) 10 ... .1i.g6 1 1 .1i.xe6!? fxe6 1 2 a5 ! .1i.xa5 13 'iVxe6+ @d8 14 e5 and as I

78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

customarily say about such random positions, please consult the books ! Black may stand sat isfactorily, but you should commit the tactics to memory if you want to live long against a strong player. Instead of 8 ... t2:lbd7, 8 ...O-O solves that prob lem, because now 9 'ib3 'ie7 ! (protecting b7 as well as b4) is considered fine. On the other hand, Black loses some flexibility and time in some variations (compare the ... .1i.g4 lines below, in which Black delays castling). Furthermore, he may not want to allow t2:le5 ; e.g., 8 ... O-O 9 'ie2 .1i.g6 10 t2:le5 t2:lbd7 1 1 t2:lxg6 hxg6, and here 12 t2:la2 is interesting. What is the solution to this quandary? Just come prepared! 9 'ie2 (D)

This is White's traditional and most popular plan, simply trying to enforce e4 while clearing di for a rook. We'll examine it in some detail via games beginning with:

[diagram]
.1i.g4; and

B: 9 ...O-O.

A)

9 ... i.g4 Black has a simple idea: to eliminate White's f3-knight and then temporarily restrain White's pawns with his own on c6 and e6. I talked about this structure in Chapter 3 of Volume 1 . As usual, ...c5 and/or ...e5 are Black's long-term goals. Lugovoi - Kovalevskaya St Petersburg 2000 10 l:tdl 'iYaS Black wants to gain a tempo to implement his plans. Sensing no immediate attack, he doesn't feel that ...O-O is necessary for the mo ment, and may even play ... O-O-O later. 1 1 e4 'iYhS (D) You will see this idea in several lines: Black wishes to cripple White's kingside pawns. But in doing so he gives White the bishop-pair and an even stronger centre. Instead 1 1 ...O-O trans poses to a normal position, and l l .. . .1i.xc3 ! ? 12 bxc3 'ixc3 13 l:ta3 ! ? or here 13 .1i.b2 i.xf3 14 gxf3 'ia5 1 5 d5 ! ? gives White a lot of compen sation for a pawn. Regardless of the exact as sessment, taking on that kind of position seems impractical for Black. 12 l:td3!? This interesting move avoids having doubled pawns on f3. One alternative is to force Black to carry out his plan by 12 h3 ! ? .1i.xf3 13 'ixf3 'ixf3 14 gxf3; e.g., 14 ... O-O 1 5 a5 (gaining space) 15 ...a6 16 i.e2 (16 .1i.f4!?) 16 ... l:tfd8 17 l:ta4 .1i.e7 (the position should be equal; White's structural immobility detracts from his two bishop advantage) 1 8 f4 t2:le8 19 .1i.e3 l:tac8 20 .1i.f3?! (20 .1i.d3 looks better) 20 ... t2:ld6 (20 .. .f5 ! and one prefers Black) 21 .1i.e2 g6 22 l:taal 1h-1h Khalifman-Ki.Georgiev, Burgas 1 994. The characteristic interaction of bishop-pair and doubled pawns leads to unpredictable play, as in many openings in which Black plays ... .1i.xf3.

12. ..

eS 13 h3!? White expends a whole tempo on this move but he wants to attack. 13 d5 !? would be nor mal, when 1 3. .. tbc5 14 l:te3 O-O ! needs to be met, probably by 15 dxc6 bxc6 1 6 t2:la2. It's refreshing that so much unexplored territory

SLA V AND SEMI-SLAV 79

remains in these older lines. That tends to be true when a variation is less tactical and/or forcing. 13 ... i.xf3 ( D) 14 l::t xf3 White's attempt to drum up chances by sac rificing are typical but unless followed up pre cisely he can easily fail against Black's good development and solid structure. Instead, 14 t'Vxf3 'i'Bxf3 15 gxf3 keeps the pawn with a bal anced position. Here's a well-played example:

15. ..

O-O 16 f4 exd4 17 l::t xd4 c5 18 l::t d l l:.fd8 19 e5 ctJb6 20 l::t xd8+ l::t xd8 21 i.b3 i.xc3 22 bxc3 tZ'Be4 23 .1i.e3 lbxc3 24 .1i.xc5 ctJe2+ 25 @fl -1Jxf4 26 a5 lbc8 27 .1i.e3 lbe6 28 l::t c l and the bishops provide at least enough counterplay for a pawn, Hillarp Persson-Hector, Malmo 2003. Having faith in the bishop-pair comes as you gain more experience. ... exd4 15 g4 'i'Bc5 16 l::t f5!? 'i'Be7 (D) 17 g5? This kind of overextension is often how Black wins in the Slav. Such an attack is un likely to succeed without the cooperation of White's dark-squared bishop and centre pawn. It's much better to count upon the two bishops for compensation by l 7 ctJa2 ! O-O ! ? (17. ..h6 ! is a helpful preventative move) 18 e5 tl:ld5 19 .1i.g5.

17. . dxc3 18 gxf6 gxf6!?

Or 18. .. tl:lxf6 with the idea 19 bxc3?! i.xc3 20 .1i.a3 .1i.b4 ! . 19 bxc3 i.d6 There seems to be nothing wrong with play ing 19 ....1i.xc3; Black does have two extra pawns and good squares ! 20 l::t bl lbc5 (D) Perhaps 20 ... O-O-O was even better. Black has a nice advantage in any case. 21 i.a3 l::t g8+ 22 @hl 'i'Bxe4+ 23 'i'Bxe4+ tl:lxe4 24 l::t xb7! O-O-O! 25 .1i.a6 i.xa3 26 l::t e7+ @b8 27 l::t xe4 l::t dl+ 28 @h2 l::t dgl? 28 ... .1i.d6+ 29 f4 l::t c l is simple and strong, with the idea 30 l::t xf6? .1i.c5. 29 l::t e8+! 1/z-1/z Black won the opening, but White had his chances to influence that situation between moves 13 and 17, so the verdict is unclear. Khalifman - Anand Linares 2000 10 l::t dl 'i'Ba5 11 e4 tl:lb6!? (D) As above, Anand delays castling in order to get all of his other desired moves in. 12 .1i.b3!? 1 2 .1i.d3 makes it more difficult to grab the pawn: 12. .. i.xc3 (not 12. .. O-O? 13 e5 ! ctJfd5 14

80 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

21...lllb6 22 .i.b3 lf2.lf2

The knights have reasserted themselves just in time. White can probably win another pawn, but at the cost of any winning chances. The re sult fairly reflects the opening. Illescas - L. Dominguez Dos Hermanas 2005

10 h3 i.xf3 11 iVxf3 (D)

11 .O-O 12 .l:i.dl l:tc8 13 lll e4!? One would think that simplifying would make Black's life easier, and in fact it's rare for White to forego central expansion and attack. But when you think about it, many if not most

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 81

endings in which one side possesses the bishop pair are won for their owner, as long as there are pawns on both sides of the board.

13. . 

[diagram]

[diagram]

D)

[diagram]

82 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
B)

9 ...O-O 10 e4 g6 (D) From g6 Black's bishop keeps pressure upon White's centre and protects his king. Now Black is threatening ... xc3 followed by ... lllxe4. We'll look at several games from this position. Bacrot - J. Gustafsson Bundesliga 200314 11 d3 h5 This funny move is quite popular and makes the game more like the lines with 9 ...g4 above. Black would like to play ...e5, since the knight on f3 is pinned. Black feels that White's bishop on d3 is to his advantage because it no longer controls d5. 12 e5 The only logical plan left.

12. .. llldS 13 'll

[diagram]

[diagram]
We see that the move 17 lll c2 has come in handy. In what follows Black fails to react well.

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 83

[diagram]
(D)

[diagram]

12. ..

l:te8 is also played here, to enforce ...e5 if possible.

13 h3 eS?!

[diagram]

19. ..xc3 20 bxc3 'fixc3 21 l:tacl 'fid4+

84 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 85

[diagram]

86 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Modern Line with 6 'Des

[diagram]

This is the starting point for truckloads of theory. White will usually recover the c-pawn and the game will move into an endgame with a piece versus three pawns. The resulting vari ations are engrossing and will repay study. Nevertheless, their theory is worked out to an exceptional depth; reluctantly, I'll refer those who are interested to specialized books and databases.

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 8 7

7 lllxc4 (D) 7 . 'fic7 This is really the most logical move, prepar ing ...e5. Otherwise f3 and e4 will again pose difficulties. A lesser option is 7 ... tLlb6, intend ing 8 lLle5 e6 (8 ... 'll bd7 9 'fib3 !) 9 f3 'llfd7. We won't go into that one, for which recent games are the best resource. Even Moroze vich's 7 ... llld5 !? can be played, when 8 f3 is most interesting, or 8 g5 (8 ...h6?? 9 lLld6+ !). 8 g3!

[diagram]

1 O .. J:td8 1 1 'fie 1 has been considered favour

[diagram]

This position has been a fruitful source of strategic chess ideas, with the opponents com peting for superiority in terms of activity, out posts, bishop-pairs, weaknesses, space, and king safety. Tactics are as always critical, but you will find that, even more than is usual in openings, the tactical and combinative ele ments flow from superior play in the positional and strategic realms. The play now divides into two paths. The Established Move

11. .. f6 (D)

This is the obvious and traditional line. Black simply defends everything. The only problem is that White can get a space advantage on the queenside and along with other projects he may attempt to break down Black's structure on that wing. Anand - Morozevich Wijk aan Zee 2000

12 O-O lllcs

[diagram]

88 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1 6. ..bxa6? ( 1 6. .. b6 1 7 c2! "would hold Black under constant pressure" according to Kaspar ov) 1 7 lll xe5 lll xe5 1 8 lllc5 xc5 1 9 xc5 g5? (Kasparov suggests 1 9. .. b6) 20 e3 d5 2 1 l:ha6 xg2 22 xg2 l:tf7 23 l:tfal d6 24 xd6 l:txd6 25 l:txa7 l:txa7 26 l:txa7 ctJc4 27 c5 l:te6 28 d4 l:txe2 29 xf6, Euwe-Alekh ine, The Hague Wch ( 1 ) 1937. With an extra pawn and bishop versus knight, Euwe was able to win fairly easily. We now return to 12 ... lllc5 (D): 13 ctJe3! Certainly logical, since White aims at the weakened f5. In any event, Morozevich won games (as Black) that continued 1 3 'll xe5 fxe5 14 g5 a5 !, and 1 3 e4 g6 1 4 xe5? fxe5 15 f4 l:td8 ! . 13 ...e6 The idea behind 1 3 ctJe3 is 1 3. .. l:td8 14 lllcd5 ! .

[diagram]

D)

[diagram]

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 89

[diagram]

[diagram]

28. ..

[diagram]

[diagram]
32 a5 .l::i.

[diagram]

[diagram]

13. .

[diagram]

90 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

14 . tLlg4 A logical move which went out of favour once it appeared that Black's kingside pres sure wasn't quite enough. Hiibner's sugges tion 14 ...b4 hasn't caught on. lS aS!? rxg3

15. ..c5 1 6 O-O fxg3 17 hxg3 threatens lLle4,

[diagram]

18. ..

[diagram]

[diagram]

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 91

[diagram]

16. . .fxg3 17 hxg3 (D)

[diagram]
Black holds up two of White's good moves, a5 and b4. But it turns out to be slow, and even weakening. Ftacnik-Sundararajan, Pardubice 2004 continued with the better l 7 .. . l:tg8 (more active than 1 7. ..a5; still, Black has nagging po sitional problems) 1 8 l:i.adl l:txdl 19 l:txdl i.c5 20 'Vh4 lt:Jg6 (Black goes tactical - what else?) 2 1 'Vf6 (not 21 'ii xh7?? l:i.h8, but 21 'Vh5 ! would prepare e3 and l2Be4, and after 2 1 . . .l2ief4 22 'Vh6 lt:Jxg2 23 @xg2, the knights are very strong) 2 1 . . .'ii eS !? (D). 22 'Vxf7? (White shouldn't be afraid of sim plification; after the superior 22 lt:Je4 ! 'ii xf6 23 lt:Jxf6 l:i.d8 24 l:txd8+ @xd8 25 l2Bxh7 Black will find it hard to recover his pawn without losing another) 22 .. . l:tf8 ! 23 'ii d7+ @b8 (all at once White has to defend) 24 e4 l2Be7 ! 25 'ii d3 ! ? l2Bxf5 26 exf5 l:txf5 27 l2Be4 'ii xb2 28 l:i.d2 'ii al+ 29 l:td l 'ifu2 30 l:td2 'ii a l + 3 1 l:i.d l 11z_1h. 18 lt:Jb5! (D) This time it's Black's queenside that comes under attack (a consequence of playing 1 7. .. aS). Whether or not the earlier play actually estab lished an advantage for White, one can't be happy with Black's position.

18. ..cxb5 19 axb5 lt:Jc5!?

19 ... lt:Jd7? 20 l:txa5 ! and l:i.fal is too much for Black's position to bear, but Scherbakov's 19 ...b6! is a brilliant defensive try. Black real izes that the attack via l:txa5 is even worse than that along the diagonal. Still, one feels that he will have a difficult time gaining full equality against 20 f4 i.c5+ 21 e3. 20 'ii e3 lt:Jg4 21 'ii c3 'ii e5 White was attacking a5 and h8. 22 'ii f3! (D)

92 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Always hold on to f5 ! Faced with many threats, Black returns the piece.  'ii e4 23 'ii xe4 lt:Jxe4 24 ii.xe4 So the whole game came back to the weak ness created by ...g5. Now Johannessen has a substantial advantage but fails to bring home the point, perhaps because he is playing against one of the world's top defenders. We'll just look at the moves. Needless to say, White had improvements: 24 .. ii.b4 25 l::tfdl @c7 26 @g2 @b6 27 l:tacl h5 28 e3 lt:Je5 29 ii.d5 l:td7 30 f4 l:thd8

31 e4 lt:Jg4 32 @f3 @xb5 33 lt:Je3 lt:Jxe3 34

@xe3 1h-1h Here 34 ...fS ! would just about equalize. Kramnik - Morozevich Monaco (Amber rapid) 2002 12 l2Bxe5!? (D) Since Black's resources may be sufficient after 12 lt:Je3 (see especially the note about 1 5. . .fxg3 ! in the previous game), White has also tried this simple move. 12 .gxf4 13 lt:Jxd7 O-O-O!? It's going to be two bishops for a pawn again! 1 3. .. ii.xd7 has been played in several games and seems to equalize. Also of interest would be 1 3. .. 'ii xd7, which in principle is the same idea as 1 3. ..O-O-O. However, the queen re capture is less risky since Black's bishops bene fit from simplification and White's knight is restricted. 14 'ii d4 (D) 14 .. 'ii xd7! Now this sacrifice is forced because of the threat to a7. 15 'ii xf4 1 5 'ii xh8?! 'ii d2+ 1 6 @fl 'ii xb2 1 7 l:tel ii.b4 isn't worth playing around with.

15. .

ii.d6 (D) Black sacrificed a pawn but has obtained reasonable compensation thanks to the strong bishops and the lead in development.

SIA V AND SEMI-SIA V 93

16 'ii cl I'm sure that Kramnik is happy with his ex tra pawn, but Morozevich has some dynamic chances. Jobava-Khalifman, Bled OL 2002 seems to have a philosophy similar to that ex pressed in my description of 1 3. .. 'ii d7. It con tinued 16 'ii h6 @b8 1 7 O-O 'ii e6 ! 1 8 'ii xe6 i.xe6 and the exchange of queens had helped Black. Khalifman had no problems equalizing and went on to win. 16   as Perhaps 1 6. ..h5 ! ? 17 a5 a6 was worth trying.

17 O-O ii.es? (D)

Scherbakov prefers 17 . . .@b8 ! . The idea is to challenge White to find a way to his king while pursuing an attack against White's. 18 lt:Jb5! White threatens 'ii c5 and l2Ba7+ followed by lt:Jxc6. It's already impossible to defend with out conceding something else. 18 .  'ii e7? Not 1 8. ..@b8? 19 'Vc5 ! cxb5 20 'ii xe5+ @a8 21 axb5; but 1 8. .. ii.b8 would hold on for a while. 19 lt:Ja7+ @b8 20 lt:Jxc6+! bxc6 21 'ii xc6 Here White's attack is too strong, especially with more pawns to add to the three already captured. He won shortly. 12 ii.xe5 Jobava - Carlsen Warsaw Ech 2005 In a manner typical of chess theory, we find White returning recently to a move originally condemned as harmless at best.

12. .

lt:Jxe5 13 'ii d4 f6 14 O-O-O (D) The starting position for many recent battles, in part because 1 l ...g5 has successfully met other challenges.

14. .

[diagram]

15 f4 gxf4 16 gxf4 lt:Jxc4 17 'Vxf6

This time White snatches the material. We'll skip over the next few theoretical moves.

94 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

17 ... i.f7 18 'ii xh8 'ii xf4+ 19 @bl ii.g6+ 20 @al! lt:Je3 This is virtually forced in view of a rook coming to fl .

21 Md2!? (D)

21...lt:Jc2+?

White was greedy and now Black should be: 21.. .lt:Jxg2 ! was analysed by Scherbakov in great detail, concluding that after 22 Md4! iVf5 ! 23 lt:Je4 @e7 ! 24 Mhdl l2Be3 25 Md7+ @e6 ! 26 l\!Vg8+ @e5 27 iVh8+, the game could be drawn by repetition, but Black could also get ambitious and try 27 ...@f4!?. As he points out, there's a good chance that White (or Black?) can im prove !

22 Mxc2 ii.xc2 23 Mfl 'ii

d6 24 ii.e4! ii.b3 (D) 24 ... ii.xe4? is clearly hopeless after 25 l2Bxe4. 25 lt:Jb5! It's typical of these high-theory battles that once the players are truly past their analysis there are wonderful moves still to come. 25 .. cxb5 26 ii.xb7 Mb8 27 ii.c6+! @d8 28 'ii xf8+ @c7 29 'ii g7+! @xc6 30 ifc3+ @b6 30 ... ii.c4? 3 1 Mf6. 31 iVxb3 All that White got out of his spectacular play was a pawn! But he still has threats. The game concluded: 31 .. @a5 32 'ii c3+ 'iib4 33 'ii c7+! Mh6 34 ifxa7+ Ma6 35 ifc7+ Mb6 36 Mf4! 'ii b3 37 ifa7+ Ma6 38 iVc5 l:tg6 39 axb5 1-0 Exchange Slav

[diagram]
7 Mc 1 e5 ! 8 lt:Jxd5 ! ? (8 dxe5 ii.b4 9 lt:Je2 lt:Je4)

8 ... ii.d7 ! . It all seems to work out. 3 . cxd5 (D) The Exchange Variation has traditionally been a slight disincentive to the Slav Defence and over the years some big names used it effec tively as White. One basic idea is that White no longer has to worry about . . .dxc4. These days Black has enough ways to defuse the resulting positions that it's not as much of a problem. Since the heavy pieces may be exchanged on the open c-file there can be drawish tendencies,

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 95

[diagram]

1993. Black's handling of the opening was ex

emplary. 6 tt'lf3

6 e3 tt'lf6 7 ii.b5 e6 8 'ii

a4 can be met surpris ingly by 8 ... 'ii b6! 9 tt'lf3 ii.e7 ! 10 tt'le5 O-O l l ii.xc6 l:tfc8! (1 l ...iVxb2 12 O-O!) 1 2 ii.b5 a6 13 O-O axb5 14 ifxb5 'ii xb5 15 tt'lxb5 l:tc2 and Black is already ahead, Vera-Hector, Istanbul

OL 2000.

[diagram]

96 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

tL'la4 and tL'ldl are threats) 10 ...a6 1 1 ii.xc6 l:hc6 12 l:tfc l , Ki.Georgiev-Khalifman, Plov div 1986; now 12 ... 'iYb6! equalizes. 10 tL'lh4 ii.e4 11 O-O-O! (D) An unusual move in the Slav, indicative of how the play can heat up. Now that d4 is pro tected, f3 and e4 ideas will work better.

11. . l:tcS

1 1 ...ii.e7 1 2 f3 g6 1 3 tL'lxg6 hxg6 14 e4 gave White an obvious advantage in Naumkin Tan, Formia 1994.

12 f3 ii.g6 13 tL'lxg6 hxg6 14 @bl a6 15

ii.d3 ii.b4! 16 l:tcl O-O 17 a3 ii.xc3 18 l:txc3 e5! 19 dxe5 tL'lcxe5 20 'ii c2 l:txc3 21 'ii xc3 tL'lxd3 22 'ii xd3 tL'lc5 23 iVd4 ( D) At first sight White has a theoretical edge be cause of the IQP and threats like l:tc l . On the other hand White's bishop is of the wrong col our. 23 ..gS! This clears g6 for a check by Black's queen and thus gets out of the pin. 24 ii.es l:td8 25 l:tcl iVg6+ 26 @a2 tt:Je6 27 'ii b6 l:td7 28 l:tc8+ @h7 29 g4 'ii d3 30 f4 'ii e4 31 'ii b3 l:td8 112-1/2 The alternative was 3 1 ...gxf4 32 exf4 tL'lxf4 33 ii.xf4 'ii xf4 34 'ii d3+ ! 'ii e4 35 'ii h3+ @g6 36 'ii h5+ @f6 37 'ii h4+ @g6 38 'ii h5+ with a draw.

[diagram]
tL'lf3 tL'lf6 6 ii.f4 a6!? (D) The move . . .a6 is customary in contempo rary Slav play; it can arise by means of 1 d4 d5

2 c4 c6 3 tL'lf3 tL'lf6 4 tL'lc3 a6, for example.

Black avoids all the many lines in which White plays ii.b5. An important benefit of the ...a6 systems is that if Black now moves his c8- bishop to f5 or g4, he can more easily answer White's 'iib3 by either ... b5 or even . . . .l::t a7 ( ... tt:Ja5 can also be more effective under some circumstances). Of course ...a6 also uses up an important tempo for development, a fact which White will try to exploit. We'll look at two games after 6 ...a6.

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 9 7

7 tbeS e6 Kamsky - Short Linares 1994 Here the unconventional 7 ...b6! 8 tbxc6 bxc6 9 'iVd2 lbh5 ! looks equal.

8 e3 ii.d6!? (D)

8 ...lbxe5 9 ii.xe5 ii.e7 10 d3 ! O-O 1 1 O-O ii.d7 12 c2 ! h6 13 f3 gives White an edge; a future e4 can cause trouble. 9 g3 9 l2lxc6 bxc6 10 xd6 xd6 looks great at first (open file versus a backward pawn with the dark-square defender missing), but Black has the moves ... l:tb8 and ...e5 at the ready, and even a well-timed ...c5 might rid him of weak nesses. 9 ... ii.xeS 10 dxeS tbd7 11 f4 O-O 12 ii.e2 bS 13 l:tcl ii.b7 14 O-O l:tc8 IS ii.d3 e7 16 ii.bl l:tfe8 17 c2 g6 18 f2 fS 19 exf6 l2lxf6 20 ii.h4 g7 With mutual weaknesses the game is proba bly about equal; it was eventually drawn. Illescas - Topalov Dos Hermanas 1999 7 l:tcl ii.rs 8 e3 e6 9 b3 l:ta7!? (DJ This strange-looking rook move has be come a standard idea in the ...a6 lines! Black condemns his rook to temporary passivity to avoid making other concessions and to de velop quickly. 10 tL'leS ii.e7 11 tt:Jxc6 bxc6 12 ii.e2 l2ld7! Now ...c5 is unstoppable.

[diagram]

(D)

23 lbb4!? 23 l:tc l ! ii.xf4 24 exf4 with lbb4 next seems even better, stopping ... lbe5. But White stands much better anyway, a pawn up for nothing. Semi-Slav

[diagram]
We're going to be looking at the position that arises after 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 tbf3 l2lf6 4 tbc3 e6 (the Semi-Slav) 5 e3 lbbd7. Both sides should be familiar with the various options that arise

98 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

along the way, including move-orders that lead to the same endpoint. First, the move-order 2 ...e6 (D) is often used to get to the Semi-Slav, if Black wants to delay ... lt:Jf6 on the third move. That is, Black can get to the desired Semi Slav position by playing 2 c4 e6 3 lt:Jc3 c6 4 lt:Jf3 l2Bf6 5 e3 lt:Jbd7. Why would he want to play 2 ...e6 first, and then 3 ...c6? Because once White is committed to 3 l2Bc3, Black has gained in several ways: a) He has eliminated any line in which White plays lt:Jd2; b) He has helped himself in certain varia tions with ... dxc4 and ...b5, because ... b4 will then attack the knight on c3 with tempo. c) Finally, Black may be happier playing the unbalanced pawn-structure that results from 2 c4 e6 3 cxd5 exd5 than the symmetrical one af ter 2 c4 c6 3 cxd5 cxd5. All that sounds good, but there's always a trade-off. One drawback to this order is that it allows the Marshall Gambit, 4 e4. See the note on that below. A further move-order that avoids both the Exchange Slav and the Marshall Gam bit is 1 d4 l2Bf6 2 c4 e6 3 l2Bf3 d5 4 lt:Jc3 c6. The trade-off then is that Black needs to be willing to play a Nimzo-Indian. 3 lt:Jc3 3 lt:Jf3 might discourage the idea of delaying ... lt:Jf6 because White can try 3 ...e6 4 ii.g5 ! ?, a rather obscure but interesting option. This would also not be possible with the 2 c4 e6 3 lt:Jc3 or der. I'm not going to give you the details about all these choices, but want to make you aware of what's out there so that you can reflect upon what suits you best. 3 ...e6 3 ...l2Bf6 4 l2Bf3 e6 transposes to the main po- sition of the Semi-Slav. Other options are con sidered in the introductory notes to 3 l2Bc3 at the beginning of this chapter. 4 lt:Jf3 An alternative is the Marshall Gambit, 4 e4 ! ?

This usually leads to the gambit 4 ...dxe4 5 l2Bxe4 ii.b4+ 6 ii.d2 'ifxd4 7 ii.xb4 'ifxe4+, when Black is a pawn up but has lost the dark squares. This is a sharp variation to which a very large amount of concrete theory has been devoted; it should probably be learned by heart. I won't go into the details here, but so far it has not deterred top players from using this move order as Black. On the other hand it seems that White is always coming up with new ideas, and the gambit may suit players who enjoy specula tive attacks. There is also a positional way to answer the Marshall Gambit, namely, 4 ... ii.b4 (D).

SLAV AND SEMI-SLAV 99

The resulting play is very instructive and will often bear a resemblance to variations of the French Defence. A few of many possibili ties: a) S eS tb.e7 (S ...cS is more open but also a sound move) 6 a3 ii.xc3+ 7 bxc3 b6 ! ? (7 ...cS ! ?) 8 tt'lf3 ii.a6 with a complex game. b) S cxdS exdS 6 eS is another pawn-chain approach, when play can go 6 ... tb.e7 (or 6 ...cS 7 a3 ii.as; or 6 .. . ii.fS) 7 tb.f3 cS (or 7 ... ii.fS 8 ii.e2 O-O) 8 a3 ii.xc3+ 9 bxc3 0..bc6 10 ii.e2 ii.g4. It's fair to call this position dynamically equal. White has space, dark squares, and the bishop pair. Black can either put pressure on the d pawn (by ... cxd4, ...

0..fS and ...

ii.xf3) or play for the queenside light squares (by, for exam ple, ...

0..aS and .. Jk8).

[diagram]

4. .

0..

f6 (D) The combined moves ...e6 and ...c6 give us what is called the Semi-Slav Variation. It has become one of the most fertile areas for investi gation in modem chess play. But what is going on here? First Black denies c6 to his knight and then blocks the open diagonal for his bishop on c8! Why? Obviously the answer cannot be rapid development, because he's making pawn moves. And although Black has a strong point at dS (every one of his moves, including 1 . . .dS, has increased control of that square), White has more space and better control of the centre as a whole. In general Black's position has to strike one as passive. And yet the Semi-Slav is associ ated with extraordinarily exciting play. Let's see why. In the first place, Black has a threat:

S ...

dxc4, after which his pawn on c4 can be de fended by ...bS. To see that this is actually a threat, take a look at the move S g3 below, which turns into a gambit (not a terrible one, but still not to most people's taste). So White needs to do something that prevents, neutral izes, or compensates for the capture on c4. The obvious move for that purpose is: 5 e3 This is the main line that we shall explore. I'll get to S ii.gs in a short note below. Other moves have their disadvantages which are en lightening to look through, especially to under stand why the main lines are main lines. Here are a few that may be of value in that respect: a) S a4 (to prevent . .. bS should Black decide upon ...dxc4), when Black can simply develop by, e.g., S ...

0..bd7, or exploit the new hole on b4

by S ... ii.b4 (with ... tb.e4 and perhaps . . . 'WiaS in mind) 6 i.d2 O-O (or 6 ... cS) 7 e3 cS. This ex ploits White's passively-placed bishop on d2, which is disconnected from the defence of d4. Black intends to play ... tb.c6 and capture on d4, whereas 8 dxcS tb.c6 takes over the centre; e.g., 9 cxdS exdS 10 ii.e2 ii.xcS 1 1 O-O l:te8 with ideal activity for an isolated queen's pawn posi tion. b) S 'Wib3 defends the c-pawn with the hope of developing via ii.f4 or ii.gs. It can be met by simple development such as ...

0..bd7, but the

forcing sequence S ... dxc4 6 'ii xc4 bS ! is sur prisingly effective and has more or less elimi nated S 'Wib3 as an attempt to gain the advantage (the same applies to S 'Wid3 dxc4; in that case Black has another good option in S 'ii d3 b6!). The play can proceed 7 'ii d3 b4! ? 8 tb.e4 tb.xe4 9 'Wixe4 ii.b7 10 e3 tb.d7 1 1 ii.c4 ii.e7 12 O-O O-O with equality, Korchnoi-Tischbierek, Zu rich 1 999. c) S g3 dxc4 6 ii. g2 (D) can tum into a real gambit. 6 .. .

0..bd7 (Black stops 0..eS before he plays

...bS ; the immediate 6 ...bS 7 0.. eS 0..dS is a good

100 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

This is one of the most thoroughly played and analysed variations in modem chess. It is characterized by lengthy tactical and sacrificial sequences, with play in which half a tempo changes the entire nature of the game. Many fans and specialists devote their time to study ing and extending Botvinnik Variation theory, and it would do you no good for me to rehash a selected fraction of it, since to master these lines on either side of the board requires a great deal of playing experience and very specific study of tactical sequences. The Anti-Moscow above (S ...h6 6 ii.h4 gS 7 ii.g3 dxc4 8 e4 bS) is of the same nature, being extremely theoretical. It's not yet worked out to the outrageous extent that various Botvinnik lines are (30+ moves), but it's still dependent upon hoards of posi tion-specific tactics. Neither variation is within the scope or intent of this book, but that should not discourage a lover of fascinating chess the ory. 5 . . . lt:Jbd7 (D)

SIA V AND SEMI-SIA V 101

The natural 5 ... lbbd7 introduces the stan dard Semi-Slav lines that we'll examine. It is very flexible, allowing for Black's bishop on f8 to go to e7, d6 or b4. In the meantime, Black de velops a piece and supports either ...c5 or ... e5 should the opportunity arise. Before moving to what White plays next, let's examine the Semi-Slav from another per spective. Take the moves 1 d4 d5 2 lZ'Bf3 lZ'Bf6 3 e3 e6 4 c3 c5 5 lZ'ibd2 lZ'Bc6 6 i.d3 (D). Do you recognize this position? It's the Clas sical Colle System, considered one of White's dullest variations in d-pawn chess! The Classi cal Colle is sound enough, but grandmasters rarely play it, and indeed I'm not sure that a top-ten player has tried to play this form of the Colle in decades. Ironically, the Colle System with the move b3 (omitting c3) has attracted a number of strong grandmasters over the last 15 years or so. But when one looks at the reversed Semi-Slav position, Black has forgone this pos sibility ...b6. So how can a notoriously dull opening be so popular with colours reversed, played a full tempo down? We'll discover some concrete reasons shortly, but more general is sues apply. The nature of reversed openings is such that Black' s goals can differ from White's in the same position. Obviously Black is usu ally satisfied with equality in a system where a dynamic imbalance cannot be achieved by force. Then, too, White has to commit himself to a specific 6th move versus the Semi-Slav set-up, giving Black some extra information with which to respond flexibly by choosing the appropriate counter. Let's continue with our Colle example (from the diagram after 6 i.d3): sometimes Black plays 6 ... i.d6 (6 ... Wi/c7 7 dxc5 i.xc5 8 b4 i.d6 is a better version for Black, but we're continu ing with the analogy) 7 dxc5 i.xc5 8 b4 i.d6

Here it might be useful to jump ahead and glance at the first few moves of the Meran Vari ation main lines below. In this position (after 8 ... i.d6), Black, who is a tempo down on the Semi-Slav lines, will not play ambitiously with . . .e5 as White does in the Meran Variation. Rather, he will play something like ... lbe5, or ... a5, answering b5 with . . . lbe5. Such a strat egy is certainly dull, but it should equalize. That's the difference between a counterattack whose basis is the opponent's aggression (in the Meran, White usually plays for advantage with e4-e5 and exposes himself to attack), and Black's willingness to play more solidly in or der to equalize in the reversed position. Now we return to the subject of this section,

5 e3 lZ'ibd7. At this point White has two moves

102 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

Here are two relevant games:

8. ..

i.b7 Hubner - K. Muller Bundesliga 199819 8 ...a6?! invites 9 e4, with greater effect than in what follows. With 8 ... i.b7, Black places his bishop on b7 with the faith that he will be able to achieve the move ...c5 and employ the bishop upon the long diagonal. White's next move seems overly optimistic. 9 e4!?

9 O-O is seen in the next game.

9 ... b4 10 e5 bxc3 1 1 exf6 lZ'Bxf6 Safe and sound, unlike the crazy alternative 1 1 ...cxb2 12 fxg7 bxal 1 3 gxh8 (D). This is the 'Four Queens Variation' , which not surprisingly is theoretically unresolved! A critical line goes 1 3. .. a5+ 14 lt:Jd2 !? f5 !? 15 O-O O-O-O (Vidoniak analyses 1 5. .. xa2 ! 16 lbc4 O-O-O 17 i.d3 f6 1 8 xh7 and now Pedersen suggests 18. . . xd4) 16 b3 lbc5

SIA V AND SEMI-SIA V 103

(16. .. .i.e7 ! is equal) 1 7 'iVb4 'iVc2? ( 17 ... lt:Jd7 with equality) 1 8 'iVf6 ! 'ifcc3 19 'iVxc3 'iVxc3 20 lbf3 lt:Je4 2 1 'iVxf7 c5 22 .i.f4 .i.d6 23 'iVxe6+ '.tib8 24 .i.xd6+ lt:Jxd6 25 'ife7 'iVa5 26 dxc5 lt:Jc8 27 'iVe5+ 'iVc7 (27 ... @a8 28 c6!) 28 'iVxc7+ '.tixc7 29 .l::t dl l:!.e8 30 .i.b5 .l::t g8 3 1 .l::t d7+ @b8

32 c6 .i.a8 33 lbe5 a5 34 .l::t

xh7 1-0 Sadler Kaidanov, Andorra 1 99 1 . Crazy stuff that I just had to mention, regardless of its marginal in structional value. 12 bxc3 .i.d6 13 O-O O-O (D) Black stands quite well here, because . . .c5 is coming and his bishops will be especially ac tive. 14 c4?! 14 .i.g5?! 'iVc7 ! (now ... lbe4 is an issue, but doubling pawns by .i.xf6 only helps Black's kingside ambitions because White gives up the bishop-pair and opens himself to attack along the g-file) 1 5 .i.d3 !? c5 gives Black a small edge, Potapov-Galkin, St Petersburg 1998. Per haps a modest continuation such as 14 h3 (to protect against ... lt:Jg4) 14. ..c5 1 5 .i.e3 is called for. 14 ...cS 15 .i.a3 lbe4 16 dxc5 .i.xc5 17 .i.xc5 lt:Jxc5 18 'iVxd8 .l::t fxd8 (D) With White's isolated pawn, and Black's better knight and bishop, Black has a substan tial advantage. Notice how the ideal blockade on c5 keeps White's bishop out of play. Now for our second game with 8 .i.e2: Lputian - Anand New Delhi FIDE KO 2000 8 . .i.b7 9 O-O .i.e7 A solid move, and perfectly adequate. 9 ... a6 is more popular; in that case Black plays di rectly for ...c5. Compare the 8 .i.d3 lines.

10 e4 b4 11 e5 (D)

Already we see the shortcomings of ..lile2: if the knight on c3 moves, the pawn on e4 falls. Of

104 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

course White could have played more slowly, but he' s hoping that forcing the pace will fa vour him. 11 . bxc3 12 exf6 i.xf6 13 bxc3 O-O 14 .l::t bl Wi/c7 15 i.f4! Otherwise ...c5 will follow. 15 .. Wi/xf4 16 .l::t xb7 lZ'Bb6 17 g3 Wi/f5 18 i.d3 Wi/a5 19 Wi/c2 1h-1h Returning to the main move 8 i.d3, there are three principal continuations, often transpos ing. I'll examine 8 ...a6 and 8 ... i.b7. 8 ... Wi/c7 is a good transpositional tool, but it's easier to present the material via the other two moves. Classical Meran 8 ... a6 (D) This is the traditional move, preparing ...c5. White can try to take advantage of Black's lack of development by attacking with his central majority. 9 e4 Pedersen gives a 'rule of thumb' that ...a6 in the Semi-Slav should be met by e4. Oddly enough, White already gives up all chances for advantage after 9 O-O c5, when 1 0 Wi/e2 is a sort of Queen's Gambit Accepted with a harmless reputation and 10 a4 b4 at best transposes to the next note but also gives Black options of ... i.d6 instead of ... i.e7.

9. ..

c5 (D) 9 . . .b4? ! 1 0 lba4 transposes to a Modern Meran (which we'll be looking at below) ex cept that Black has spent a move on . . .a6, which is less than optimal for that variation. You' ll have to bear with me on these compari sons and transpositions. It isn't necessary to know them, but you might want to return here after you have played some games and want to make sense of them. We come to a crossroads. White can play 1 0 d5 or 1 0 e5. Reynolds Attack 10 d5 This introduces the wild Reynolds Variation, ideal for specialists or for anyone who thinks that his opponent won't be prepared for it! The move d5 is always critical in such positions be cause it opens lines for White's pieces to work with. The positional basis for d5 also stems from the fact that if White waits for ...cxd4, both Black's bishop on f8 and knight on d7 will have active posts, whereas now they are lim ited by their c-pawn. Variations stemming from 1 0 d5 constantly interact with those beginning with the moves 8 ... i.b7 and 8 ... Wi/c7, so I'll mix the material. 10 . 'ifc7 The most 'flexible' move. Unfortunately, it's hard to decide upon which move should be played first. For example, White can toss in the exchange of pawns dxe6 and . . .fxe6 just about anywhere. Fortunately we're more concerned with the resulting positions than the details of how to get there. Of course there are alterna tives, such as 1 0. .. c4, which very often trans poses to 1 0. .. Wi/c7. But 10 ...e5 is independent. Then 1 1 b3 ! prevents ...c4 and prepares a4. Black usually disturbs things by 1 1 ...c4!? 1 2

SIA V AND SEMI-SIA V 105

bxc4 i.b4 1 3 i.d2 'V/J/c7 14 O-O bxc4; e.g., 15 i.c2 O-O 1 6 lZ'Bh4 ! lZ'Bb6 17 'V/J/f3 with some ad vantage to White, Krasenkov-Moroz, Lubnie wice 1994.

11 O-O i.b7 12 dxe6 fxe6 (D)

Black's pieces are active and his majority on the queenside is threatening. Given a few moves, the combination of ... c4, ... O-O-O and ... lbc5 will give Black a terrific game. But in the mean time White can organize for e5, play against Black's e-pawn, and/or attack via a4. A high profile game follows. Kasimdzhanov - Kasparov Linares 2005 13 i.c2 After 1 3 lbg5?! 'V/Jlc6 14 i.f4 c4 15 i.c2 i.c5

16 b3 lZ'Bb6 !, as in Al.Panchenko-Dreev, Kazan

ECC 1 997, Black will gain even more activity down the f- and d-files. He stands better. In fact, White now retreated with 17 lZ'Bf3, not a good sign! 13 .  c4 14 lZ'Bd4 lZ'Bc5 15 i.e3 e5 Black must take care not to get too greedy. Capturing the e-pawn by any means exposes him down the e-file and lets White have time to pile up on e6. 16 lZ'Bf3 i.e7 17 lZ'Bg5 (D)

17 . O-O!

Typical Kasparov. He gets two bishops and an attack in return for sacrificing the exchange - not such a surprising decision, in fact. 18 i.xc5 i.xc5 19 lZ'Be6 'V/J/b6 20 lZ'Bxf8 .i::i. xrs Apart from Black's superior development (see the rook on a l , for example) and attack on

f2 (by ... 'V/J/e6 and ... lbg4, for example) he has moves such as ... i.d4 and ...b4 to look forward to. All this is hardly decisive, but very difficult to defend against in practice. 21 lbd5 Kasparov gives analysis to suggest that 2 1 @h l and 2 1 a4 lead to roughly equal and/or un clear play.

21...i.xd5 22 exd5 (D)

22 .   i.xf2+! 23 @bl Not 23 .i::i. xf2? lbg4! with the idea 24 'V/J/xg4?? 'V/J/xf2+ 25 @hl 'V/J/fl + and mates. 23  e4! 24 'V/J/e2? A real mistake. Kasparov suggests that both

24 a4 and 24 d6 were playable.

24 . e3 25 .i::i. fdt 'V/J/d6 26 a4 g6! Now the idea is ... lbh5-f4. These notes are hardly comprehensive, of course. 27 axb5 axb5 28 g3 lZ'Bh5! 29 'V/J/g4 i.xg3! 30 hxg3 lbxg3+ 31 @g2 .i::i. f2+ 32 @h3 lZ'Bf5! 33 l:!.hl h5! 34 'V/J/xg6+ 'V/J/xg6 35 .i::i. hgl 'V/J/xgl 36 l:!.xgl + cJi;f7 0-1

106 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Classical with 10 eS

10 e5 (D)

[diagram]

16. . 

[diagram]

SIAV AND SEMl-SIAV 107

19 'iVel .l:!.d8 20 i.d2 'iVd6 21 i.b4! d3 22 'iVc3 'iVb6?! 23 'iVd2! White threatens a5 and i.xd3 and clearly has the upper hand. The Modern Meran 8   b7 (D) By these means Black saves the move ...a6 in some lines and gets more active play. 8 ... i.b7 also signals that Black's main freeing move will be ...c5 rather than . . .e5. Play may easily trans pose into the previous section; however, it does so in lines that Black is clearly satisfied with. Therefore it's the positional continuations that take the centre stage and White will turn his at tention there. With Black's pawn still on a7, ...c5 will not be available until ...b4 is played. Then White still has the advantage that after ...c5, b5+ will be worrisome. Playing ... e7 and ... O-O before counterattacking is generally too slow. Finally, an early ...b4 allows White to play tba4 and fight for the c5-square. Remem ber that if White provokes ...b4 by playing a4, that square will be occupied and his knight will have to retreat. 9 e4 In other lines Black will just shoot for ...c5; for example, 9 O-O a6 10 e4 c5 1 1 e5 cxd4 1 2 tbxb5 looks like one of our previous Classical lines, but in this case Black has the extra option 12 ... xf3 1 3 'ifxf3 tbd5 ( 1 3. .. tbxe5?! 14 'iVxa8! 'iVxa8 1 5 tbc7+) 1 4 tbxd4 tbxe5 1 5 'iVe2 tbxd3

16 Wixd3 i.c5 with equality, Piket-Kramnik,

[diagram]

10. . cS (D)

11 e5 This is the only serious try for advantage. White's pawn on e4 is attacked and he needs to keep the initiative. In the meantime he sets his eye on the dark squares.

11. ..

tt:JdS (D)

108 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

You can see how powerful this knight is on the d5 outpost. The question is whether White can use his central space advantage and squares such as e4, c4 and g5 to launch an attack on Black's king or otherwise compromise Black's position.

12 O-O

[diagram]

SIA V AND SEMI-SIA V 109

[diagram]

20 h5 .i::i.

[diagram]

110 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
47 a4 .l::t

bl + 48 @h2 g4 49 a5 f4 50 a6 .l::t b2 51 a7 1-0 Anti-Meran (6 'iVc2)

[diagram]
6 c2 (D) With this move White covers the critical e4- square, begins to clear the back rank, and dis courages Black's plan of ... dxc4 and ...b5.

6.  .

[diagram]

SIA V AND SEMI-SIA V 111

[diagram]

112 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

games. The same old story: Black' s active pieces around the isolated pawn make up for the potential weakness. b) 12 .l:!.dl a6 1 3 lll c3 "V/ii c7 14 g3 lll eg4 1 5 3l.d2 3l.e6 1 6 .l:!.ac I "V/ii e7 1 7 lll d4 h5 ! 1 8 llla4 3l.d6 I 9 lllf5 3l.xf5 20 "V/ii xf5 g6 2 1 "V/Jif3 "V/ii e6 22 .tel .l:!.ac8 23 .l:!.xc8 .l:!.xc8 24 lll c3 3l.b4 ! 25 3l.d3 lll e5 26 "V/ii e2 "V/ii h3 27 f3 3l.c5 28 3l.c2 .l:!.e8 with a winning attack, Granda-Illescas, Pamplona 1 99 1/2. An entertaining game. Finally, 8 ... "V/ii e7 and 8 . . . .l:!.e8 are the other common options, intending to play ... dxc4 and ... e5, but at a time of Black's choosing. If White tries to play e4 against either move he gets lit tle; e.g., 8 ... .l:!.e8 9 e4 dxe4 IO lll xe4 lll xe4 1 1 "V/ii xe4 e5. 9 3l.xc4 "V/ii e7 (D) 10 a3 White's is a prophylactic strategy, specifi cally aimed at thwarting Black's intentions. First, he secures a place for the bishop on a2, both to avoid a tempo loss after . . . lllb6 and to neutralize ...b5-b4. IO 3l.b3 is another way to pursue this strategy, and over time it has become favoured over I O a3. White also has tactical motivations, in that Black's ...e4 and ... 3l.xh2+ is not to be feared in that order. 10 ... es 11 h3! A good idea anyway, directed against the move . . .lllg4. Here it also prevents the tactical idea of ...e4 followed by . . . 3l.xh2+, and allows White to maintain the central tension. In tum, Black is challenged to find a useful move. Inci dentally, this is precisely what is considered one of Black's best ways of playing against the main-line Colle System that runs I d4 d5 2 lll f3 lllf6 3 e3 c5 4 c3 e6 5 lllbd2 lllc6 6 3l.d3 3l.d6 7 dxc5 3l.xc5 8 O-O O-O 9 e4 "V/ii c7 I O "V/ii e2 h6. 11   3l.c7 l 1 ...exd4? ! 1 2 exd4 (D) gives White an iso lated queen's pawn: But as always he gets great piece activity, especially with his lead in development and rooks connected on the first rank. For exam ple, 1 2. . . lllb6 1 3 3l.a2 3l.e6 1 4 .l:!.el lllbd5 1 5 3l.g5 with very good attacking chances. 12 .ta2 h6 13 lll h4! Periodically throughout this entire book we see how important and effective a knight on f5 can be. Of course before that it threatens to go to g6. 13 . .l:!.e8! 14 lll fS "V/Jif8 (D) 15 lllb5!? Tricky, although simply 1 5 3l.d2 might have been better, maintaining the positive points in his position and threatening lllb5 for real. 15 ... 3l.b8 16 3l.d2!

SIA V AND SEMI-SIA V 113

Now l 6 ...cxb5? loses after 17 .tb4. Still, Black's next move stops these ideas and leads to a reasonable game. 16aS 17 dxe5 .txe5?! (D) Anand gives 1 7. .. .l:!.xe5 1 8 lll c3 lll c5, which looks OK for Black. 18 f4! Trying to mobilize his 4:3 majority. Imagine the effect of e4-e5. We are entering the middle game. White's opening has been fairly success ful, but nothing that would forever dissuade Black from playing the variation.

18. ..tb8

[diagram]

4 Introduction to the Indian Defences

The Indian Defences to 1 d4 are at the heart of modem chess theory. The Indian systems that I shall be covering all begin with 1 ...lll f6. This de velopment of the knight stakes out a claim to e4 and forestalls White's intended occupation of that square. Other first moves such as 1 . .. c5 and l . ..d6 may lead to forms of lndian Systems, and the Dutch Defence with 1...f5 is another method of impeding 2 e4. I feel that it belongs in its own category, with the exception of an infrequent side-variation, sometimes called the 'Dutch In dian', which involves 1 . . .e6 and ... .tb4+ at an early stage. After 1 ... lllf6 we see the move 2 c4 (D) in the clear majority games by masters. By this move White inhibits 2 ... d5 and prepares 3 lllc3 with out blocking his c-pawn. The second most pop ular move 2 lll f3 will often be followed by c4 on one of the next few moves, sharing the same basic idea. Experience has shown that 2 lllc3 lacks the punch to threaten Black's position, mainly because it isn't possible to enforce e4 after 2 ... d5. However, I should say that this is a result of specifics and not of inviolable princi ples. The idea that one shouldn't block the c pawn in 1 d4 openings has its exceptions; a cou ple occur as early as the second move, as in the Dutch Defence variation that goes 1 d4 f5 2 lll c3 and the Chigorin Defence, 1 d4 d5 2 c4 lll c6. At this point (following 2 c4), White would like to play e4, establishing a broad centre and laying claim to central space. Black must de cide upon a strategy. He can directly thwart that advance by, for example, controlling the e4- and d5-squares; e.g., 2 ...e6 3 lll c3 .tb4 (the Nimzo-Indian Defence) or here 3 lllf3 b6 and ...3l.b7 (the Queen's Indian Defence). Alterna tively, he can allow White to play e4, setting up his strong pawn-centre. The establishment of an ideal centre would seem to be the goal of all openings and therefore advantageous for White. But for White's centre pawns to give him the advantage two things must hold true: a) The pawns must actually control the cen tral squares, which is usually the case against the Indian Defences. b) They must be secure against dissolution, which may or may not be the case in the Indian Defences. Thus Black plans to attack White's centre and/or to arrange things such that any advance by White backfires. Even in the latter case he must eventually attack and compromise White's centre or suffer under a cramped and probably untenable situation. The strategy just described is usually introduced by ... g6 in conjunction with either ...d6 (the King's Indian Defence), ... d5 (the Griinfeld Defence) or ...c5 (the Ben oni). The latter is a sort of hybrid solution, since 2 ...c5 (threatening to impair White's centre by ...cxd4) already allows the incursion of White's pawn to d5, and e4 will follow if White wishes. Whether White's centre has been strengthened or weakened thereby is open to dispute. Let's take a quick look at how the major In dian defences unfold in the first few moves. The King's Indian Defence ( 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 g6 3 lllc3 3l.g7; e.g., 4 e4 d6 5 lllf3 O-O) is in one sense the most radical one: it doesn't put a piece or pawn on the fourth rank for the first five moves ! That phenomenon doesn't usually continue further, although we have some funny lines in the KID like the Panno System with 4

INTRODUCTION TO THE [ND/AN DEFENCES 115

ctJf3 d6 5 g3 O-O 6 j_g2 tll c6 7 O-O a6 followed by 8 ... .l::t b8 and often 9 ... j_d7, in which case Black has gone 9 moves without placing any thing beyond his third rank. When Black in stead plays his usual ...e5 at an early stage, he blocks off his own bishop, but creates a di lemma for White about how to react. At first sight the Griinfeld Defence ( 1 d4 ctJf6 2 c4 g6 3 tllc3 d5) is superior to the King ' s Indian in vi tal respects: the move ... d5 directly challenges White's centre, so that Black gains some space to work with. His bishop on g7 will be un blocked and remain so indefinitely, sometimes well into the endgame. In conjunction with the moves ...c5 and ... tll c6, for example, the queen on d8 and the bishop on g7 exert strong pres sure upon the key d4-square (the move ... 3l.g4 can also come in handy in that respect if White has a knight on f3). In reality, White is compen sated due to some specific features of play. If White plays 4 cxd5 tllxd5 and then makes the principled move e4, then either Black' s knight must retreat, giving White time to bolster his ideal centre, or the knight has to exchange on c3, when of a sudden White has shored up d4 with a pawn and is able to fight for control of that square. The outcome of that engagement, combined with some other factors, produces a competitive balance which attract players on both sides of the Indian Systems. The Nimzo-lndian was the first of the In dian openings that really caught on among the world's top players, and it's easy to see why, The Nimzo-Indian combines rapid develop ment with central control, to the extent that Black may even be said to be on equal footing with White in the centre proper (depending upon the variation, of course). Furthermore, he faces only rare situations like those in the King's Indian and Griinfeld in which White has a formidable set of pawns on e4 and d4. One might complain that Black therefore has no particular target, but the main action results from the exchange . . . 3l.xc3, which cedes the bishop-pair to White but often saddles him with doubled c-pawns. The Queen's Indian Defence also deploys Black's forces so as to control e4 and d5. Black receives a bit of a break in that regard because White's 3 ctJf3 not only fails to control e4 and d5, but interferes with potential central occu pation that might follow from White's moves f3 and e4. Thus the Queen's Indian has been considered a safe and solid defence. You should keep in mind, however, that White con trols more space, and surprisingly dynamic play can result from the natural imbalance that entails. The Modem Benoni involves a different set of issues. On the positive side, Black has the quasi-permanent advantages of a powerful, un obstructed bishop on g7 and an open and very useful e-file. But unlike practitioners of the other Indian Defences, he faces a powerful and almost irremovable pawn on d5 that restricts his mobility and development. Of course there is much more to say about the Indian Defences in general, but the real dif ferences and similarities are best shown in their individual contexts.

5 Nimzo- lndian Defence

1 d4 lll

[diagram]

[diagram]

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 117

[diagram]

118 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black threatens discovered check and the knight can't be captured. Still, White can try 6 a3 (6 'V//i xg7? tlle4+ 7 '>t>e2 'V//i f6 and Black re mains a piece ahead), when the trap that Black has to avoid is 6 ... 3l.a5? 7 'V//i xg7 tll e4+ 8 b4 and after Black defends his rook, his bishop will be captured. Instead, 6 ... 3l.e7 ! 7 bxc3 O-O leaves Black with an extra pawn and a great position. Thus 4 e4 deserves a '?' after all. These moves are good to play through if you are inexperi enced in the opening phase of the game. Similar ideas can arise in other openings including the Sicilian Defence and French Defence. Let's return to 3 ... 3l.b4. Apart from prevent ing e4, this move fights for control of the cen tral light squares. All three of Black's moves have directly or indirectly helped him control d5, and two of them have done the same for e4. This emphasis on light squares is characteristic of most Nimzo-Indian variations, at least for the first five or six moves. For example, Black will frequently play ...b6 and ... 3l.b7 next, also watching over the d5- and e4-squares. That's not all. Whether or not Black chooses to play ...b6, he has other light-square themes. The move ... d5 is a part of many variations, staking further claim to e4 and adding the queen to the mob of pieces defending d5. In addition, occupation of the light squares by ... tll e4 is common, followed by .. .f5 to cement control of e4. Chess being what it is, of course, this delight fully simple picture proves deceptively com plex as Black may later tum to moves such as

[diagram]
tllc6, ...d6 and ...e5 in order to challenge or defend dark squares ! Still, the abundance of light-square themes lends a distinctive charac ter to Nimzo-Indian play that often extends well into the middlegame. One of the most obvious features of 3 ... 3l.b4 is that it introduces the possibility of ... 3l.xc3+, giving White doubled pawns. As we discussed in the introductory chapters of Volume 1 , those doubled pawns are particularly bad because the forward pawn on c4 is incapable of being de fended by pawns, and it can easily be attacked (see below). The better part of Nimzo-Indian variations have one or more points at which ... 3l.xc3 is the best move. However, that capture usually comes at the cost of giving White the bishop-pair. In some cases White also takes command of the centre, although if embarked upon too early, the occupation of the centre may have drawbacks, such as queenside weak nesses, overextension, or simply the inability to exploit extra space. Another advantage that Black has is speedy development in the first few moves. After his third move he is already ready to castle, whereas White has quite a few moves to go, perhaps e3 followed by 3l.d3, tllf3 and O-O. In the meantime, he may throw in moves such as a3 and 'V//i c2, which don't con tribute much to getting White' s pieces out. Thus White's policy in most variations is a cautious consolidation of his position involving protection of his centre and development. Black would like to disturb the position's balance in his favour, usually combining piece-play with one or more pawn-breaks. White almost inevi tably has to make pawn-structure concessions, either the aforementioned doubled c-pawns, an isolated pawn, weak light squares on the queen side, or loss of space in the centre as Black ad vances. The issue becomes whether the situation stabilizes enough for White's bishop-pair to ex ert itself, in which case Black can be in real trouble. The bishops' merits vary from position to position; we'll see both how ineffectual they can be in some of the variations that follow, and how devastating in others. Samisch and Related Lines Under this heading we shall be covering lines where White plays an early a3, and Black cap tures on c3, doubling White's pawns. There are several forms that this can take, depending on whether White plays a3 immediately, or after 4 f3 or 4 e3, often waiting until Black has played ... d5 before playing a3. The traditional form of the Samisch is as follows:

1 d4 ctJf6 2 c4 e6 3 tllc3 3l.b4 4 a3!? 3l.xc3+

5 bxc3 (D) The Samisch Variation is in many ways the most instructive of all Nimzo-Indian lines. It seems odd to force Black into ... 3l.xc3+, a move that he is likely to play anyway, and thus to ac cept the weak doubled c-pawns while losing time. For some rather subtle reasons, however, it turns out that there are advantages to forcing Black to commit to a strategy before he can

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 119

react to White' s. Indeed, 4 a3 was one of the earliest methods of play versus the Nimzo Indian and many of the best players of the time, including the long-time World Champion Bot vinnik, were infatuated with possession of the bishop-pair. Remember that having two bishops versus a bishop and a knight, or two bishops versus two knights, is generally advantageous, although you have to assess each case individu ally (especially in this opening). White ' s idea is to compel Black to part with his bishop before he changes his mind and retreats, something that occurs in other lines. In contemporary chess, both 4 a3 and its cousin 4 f3 have once again become quite popular. Similarly, White can follow up the move 4 e3 with 5 a3, or even 5 3l.d3 and 6 a3, often producing the same basic structure. As mentioned above, the motivation for this is often to wait for Black to commit him self to playing ...d5. The reason for this is that some of the most challenging lines at Black' s disposal against the 4 a3 move-order involve him avoiding ... d5 and attacking White's c4- pa wn with his pieces. The Samisch Variation is the ideal starting point for discussing the Nimzo-lndian because it contains a majority of the fundamental themes that arise from the opening. On a simple level, we may say that the strategies resulting from 4 a3 can usually be characterized as one of the following: a) White undertakes to gain ground with his central and kingside pawns, creating threats or forming a basis for a direct attack by pieces. Typically this involves ideas such as f3 and e4 (or g4, which also grabs space), e4-e5 and/or f4-f5-f6. For his part, Black attempts to block those pawns with his own, usually with moves like ...e5 and/or .. .f5. b) White tries to activate his bishop-pair, which requires line-opening pawn advances or exchanges. Black endeavours to restrict White's bishops to passive roles behind their own pawns. c) Black wants to win White's weak for ward c-pawn or expose his weaknesses on the key queenside light squares. He tends to ex change pieces in order to neutralize White's kingside efforts. White can either strain to pro tect his weak c4-pawn with pieces, or sacrifice it for activity. d) Alternatively, Black will play moves to contest the centre: either ... d5, or some combi- nation of ... d6, ...e5 and ... c5. Then he can even think about initiating play on the kingside. I shall devote an exceptional amount of space to exploring these schemes. They will play out in the following variations: A: Systems with ...d6 and ...e5; B : Systems with ... d5; C: Systems with ...c5 and/or ... b6. As this is a book of ideas, the latest theory will not always be covered (the last section is exceptional in that respect), and I'll be using some classic games that throw the strategies and set-ups into relief. Before moving ahead I shall very briefly mention a curious move: 5 . . . llle4 (D) This received several tests in the 1 96 1 World Championship match between Tal and Botvin nik, the latter playing White. Black attacks White's c3-pawn but this ad vanced knight is subject to being driven back

120 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

with gain of time by f3. Tai is trying to make way for the move .. .f5 (emphasizing light-square control). The immediate 6 f3? fails to 6 ... 'iVh4+, when Black wins major material, and the at tempt to prepare f3 by 6 lll h3 allows 6 ...c5 ! in order to answer 7 e3 or 7 'iYc2 with 7 ... 'i!Ya5. Af ter trying a variety of moves, Botvinnik found a fairly effective one:

[diagram]

O-O

[diagram]

9 f3 lll

[diagram]

1 d4 lll

[diagram]

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 121

from his d-pawn. Now he hasn't time for .i.d3, and 8 d5 li:Jb8 ! 9 .i.d3 li:Ja6 (D) (or 9 ... li:Jbd7) lets Black take over the inviting c5-square for his knight. Indeed, the c5-square is a 'true' out post, in that it can't be attacked by enemy pawns: In this position it will prove difficult for White to organize any pawn-breaks, since f4 will be met by ...exf4 with additional Black firepower along the e-file aimed at the back ward pawn on e4. Furthermore, the a4-square is an inviting target for Black, who can play . . . .lld7 and ... 'iVe8 at some point, complement ing a knight on c5. Another theme that we shall see throughout this chapter concerns the possi- ble move ...c6. Here Black may play ...c6 and . . .cxd5 to open the c-file for his rook ( ... l:!.c8), which puts considerable pressure on White's pawns on that file. This all stems from the inac curacy 6 'iVc2. Of course White's position isn't hopeless. He can still play for lt:Je2 and lt:Jg3 or f4 at some point. But the timing of all this is delicate. After 6 'iVc2, Ragozin actually played 6 .. .O-O?! 7 e4 e5 8 .ll d3 ! c5 ! ? (now 8 ... lt:Jc6 9 lt:Je2 ! holds the centre together nicely) 9 li:Je2 lt:Jc6 10 d5 lt:Je7 1 1 f3 li:Jd7 1 2 h4 (here's the problem: left to his own devices White will launch his pawns for ward to take over as much space as he can; then he can mount an attack) 1 2. . . li:Jb6 1 3 g4 ! (D). Compare this with the last diagram: Black has lost his outpost on c5 and can't play ...c6 to create pressure on the queenside. Staking out as much space as possible is a key element of White's strategy in the Samisch. The game con tinued 1 3. . .f6 14 lt:Jg3 <;t>f7 ! 15 g5 lt:Jg8 16 f4 <;t>e8 1 7 f5. Black' s king has escaped but his pieces are confined to the first few ranks and he stands poorly. 6 ...O-O 7 e4 e5 8 .i.d3 c5!? Black's choice is important. He tries to force things in the centre and on the queenside but it's nice to have ...c6 in reserve; for example, 8 ... lt:Jc6 9 li:Je2 h6 (versus .i.g5) 10 d5? ! lt:Ja5 1 1 .i.e3 b6 1 2 lt:Jg3 .i.a6 1 3 'iVe2 c6! 1 4 O-O l:!.c8

In that case Black can attack along the c-file by exchanging pawns to control the c4-square. Had he played ...c5, he would have run out of pieces able to attack White's pawn on c4. Of course, l 0 d5 wasn't forced. 9 lt:Je2 lt:Jc6 10 O-O ! ? An intentional pawn sacrifice.

[diagram]
The question is whether Black should stand pat or win a pawn and liquidate White's centre. If you play either side of the Samisch or another Nimzo-Indian variation involving e3 and ...c5,

122 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

12.  .

[diagram]

15. .

[diagram]

[diagram]
bxc3 d5 (D)

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 123

Black plays what may seem the most natural move on the board (though is not so common via this precise move-order), staking out terri tory in the centre to neutralize White's usual advantage in space. True, White can and usu ally will 'undouble' his pawns by cxd5, but that has some drawbacks after the simple reply . . .exd5: a) it frees Black's bad bishop on c8; and b) gives his king's rook good scope along an open central file.

6 e3 (D)

This move reaches a position that is more of ten seen via the move-order 4 e3 d5 5 a3 .i.xc3+ 6 bxc3. In that sequence, White doesn't play a3 until Black is committed to ... d5. Instead of 6 e3, it's tempting to bring the queen's bishop out before shutting it in by e3. That brings us to our first example of ...d5 in the Samisch, an illustration of how White can go fundamentally wrong. Botvinnik - Kotov Groningen 1946

[diagram]
bxc3 d5 6 cxd5!? Now White could have achieved the normal position by 6 e3. See the next game.

6. ..exd5 7 .i.g5?! (D)

The strongest player in the world at that time shows us what not to do when playing his own system! White's logic is to place his dark squared 'bad' bishop outside the central pawn chain that will be formed by e3 and d4. How ever, this slows down the important development of his kingside and weakens White' s queenside dark squares.

[diagram]
A dynamic response. Black has ... 'iVa5 in mind, hitting the c3-pawn and unpinning the knight on f6. 7 ... h6 is also not a bad move, be cause if White plays 8 .ll xf6 'iVxf6, he loses his most important asset, the bishop-pair. Never theless, Black would have used the extra tempo ...h6 to achieve this and the position would be objectively equal, with a technical battle in store. By the way, the obvious alternative after 7 ...h6 is 8 .llh4, but that is even worse for White be cause it allows the direct attack 8 ...g5 9 .llg3 tt'Je4, when Black is attacking the c3-pawn and would like to threaten the g3-bishop by . . .h5 or play . . .c5 followed by ... 'iVa5. The point to re member here is that the rapid exertion of queenside pressure definitely outweighs the weaknesses created by ... h6 and ...g5. A useful old saying is "Weaknesses aren't weaknesses unless they can be attacked". This may not be 1 00% accurate, but is a good rule of thumb. 8 f3!? White tries to stop ... tt'Je4 and may have ideas of playing e4 later. The move f3 is always dangerous (great reward but great risk). The problem is that after the natural 8 e3, 8 ... 'iVa5 forces some awkward defence like 9 'iVc2 tt'Je4 10 .llf4 cxd4 1 1 exd4 tt'Jc6. Then Black is threatening ... tt'Jxd4 !, and 1 2 tt'Jf3 .i.g4! can be followed by ... .llxf3 and/or ... l:tc8, putting pres- sure on White's backward c-pawn. 1 2 tt'Je2 i.f5 is a perfect picture of light-square domination. 8 ... h6 9 .i.xf6 But now the dark squares are in trouble (look at that weakness on e3) ! Retreat isn't attractive

124 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

19 a4 .i:r.ae8 20 .i:r.el c4!

One of those paradoxical moves that grand masters are good at finding. Releasing the pres sure on d4 in this way is generally bad but here it stops .i.d3 and tt'Jd3 while containing the ter rible threat of ...g5. The rest of the game is short and sweet:

[diagram]

6 e3 (D)

6 ... c5 Now for an important move-order issue. The position after 6 . . .c5 could also have oc curred via the common move-order 4 e3 d5 5 a3 .i.xc3+ 6 bxc3 c5 or 4 e3 c5 5 a3 .llxc3+ 6 bxc3 d5. In the move-order here, however, Black isn't already committed to . . .c5 and he doesn't have to play it yet (the trade-off, of course, is that in the 4 a3 move-order, Black is not committed to playing . . . d5). For example, he can insert 6 ...O-O, when 7 cxd5 exd5 8 .i.d3 b6 9 tt'Je2 .i.a6 tries to get the light-squared bishops off the board immediately. The obvi ous continuation for White is 1 0 O-O .i.xd3 1 1 xd3. Then Black might play 1 1 . . .c8 ! ? 1 2 f3 a6, winning light squares like c4. But that simplification doesn't solve the problem of the centre after 1 3 xa6 tt'Jxa6 1 4 tt'Jg3 (D). Then the advance e4 will follow, emphasizing the su periority of the white bishop over the poorly placed knight on a6. For example, 14 ... l:!.fe8 15 l:!.el c5 16 e4 dxe4 1 7 fxe4 cxd4 1 8 cxd4 l:!.ad8 1 9 .i.b2 tt'Jb8 20 l:!.ac l tt'Jbd7 2 1 l:!.c7 and White clearly has the upper hand. In general, space and mobility are

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 125

[diagram]

126 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
23 f4 f5 (this appears to block White's attack

[diagram]

12. . .

l:!.eS (D) Without counterplay down the e- and c-files, Black would have nothing to do but wait for White's attack. This position has occurred scores of times in master play, normally via 4 f3 or 4 e3. We' ll follow a game that is instructional because we get to see White's plans in pure form, and also a straightforward strategy for Black. Tisdall - Bjarnason Reykjavik 1989 13 tt:Jg3 'iVd7! As in Botvinnik-Capablanca, Black takes aim at the light squares, in this case a4 and b5. Even ... 'iVb7 might operate against the e4 push.

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 12 7

14 l:.a2! ( D) Strange to say, this manoeuvre of the queen's rook to the centre may be the only way to play for advantage. Not only does White swing over to support the e4 push, he does so while still pre venting ... 'iVa4 and keeping his queen's bishop free to go in either direction. The idea of l:!.a2- e2 (or l:!.e2-f2) followed by e4 in this type of po sition goes back to the 1 940s and early 1 950s (at least in terms of consistent usage) and has become a standard part of White's weaponry in this and even a couple of other openings, notably Queen's Gambits. Sometimes l:!.a2 is played with the knight still on e2, in which case White has the new idea of g4 and tt'Jg3 with g5 and e4 to follow. Naturally Black has his own re sources, and in spite of most writers' and play ers' mistrust of his position he hasn't scored that much worse than in other variations. 14 ...l:.acS! (D) 15 'iVd3!? Perhaps more accurate is 1 5 l:!.e2, which has indeed played in a few games. Then Black's most successful idea has been 15 ...cxd4 16 cxd4 l:!.c4! (D) with double-edged play. White will have to place his bishop pas sively on b2 to enforce e4. Lutsko-Kveinys, Tallinn 2001 continued 17 'iVd3 b5 1 8 .i.b2 tt'Jc7 ! 19 e4 tt'Je6 (this standard defensive move hits f4 and d4) 20 l:.d2 tt'Jf4 2 1 'iVe3 tt'J6h5 22 tt'Jxh5 tt'Jxh5 23 g4? ! tt'Jf6 24 e5 'iVc6 25 l:.g2 tt'Jd7 with advantage to Black. 26 f4 would be met by 26 ... tt'Jf6 and ... tt'Je4, and 26 'iVd3 by 26 ... tt'Jb6! 27 f4 tt'Ja4. In lines like these White's bishop on b2 really is a bad bishop! But his play is fairly easy to improve upon. 15 ... 'iVa4 16 l:!.e2 tt'Jc7!? The logical follow-up t o Black's play is

16. .. cxd4 17 cxd4 'iVc4! 18 'iVxc4! .i:r.xc4. After

1 9 .i.b2, White has a mobile centre. Still, Black can play 1 9. .. tt'Jc7 intending 20 e4 dxe4 2 1 fxe4 tt'Jb5 ! and gain counterplay.

17 e4 (D)

128 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

17. .

li:Jb5 Black's plan is logical and appropriate to the position, but a tad slow. Of course, his defence is extremely difficult. Notice that if 17 ...cxd4 1 8 cxd4 li:Je6, White's bishop can now settle in on e3, whereas if it were already committed to b2, he would have to deal with ... lt:Jf4. From here on things proceed thematically, and typi cally easily, for White after e5 is achieved:

18 e5 lt:Jd7 19 .i.b2 cxd4 20 cxd4 li:Jf8 21 f4

[diagram]

[diagram]
10 O-O .i.a6 11 f3 l:.e8 12 li:Jg3

[diagram]

20. ..

[diagram]

21 e4 dxe4 22 fxe4 l:!.de8 23 .l:i.del (D)

[diagram]

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 129

on the kingside, both for the sake of attack there and to drive Black' s pieces away so that he can play e4 after all. In the meantime Black has a greater emphasis on preventative measures against attack by White. Many such variations arise via the move 4 f3; for example, 4 f3 d5 5 a3 .i.xc3+ 6 bxc3 O-O 7 cxd5 exd5 8 e3. Then the position may reach a standard Botvinnik variation if White plays .i.d3, lt:Je2 and O-O while Black is playing ...

O-O,

...b6 and ... .i.a6. But Black has a lot of alterna tives. For one thing, he can choose 6 ... c5 ! instead of 6 ... O-O, and if White plays 7 cxd5, respond with 7 ... lt:Jxd5 ! . Currently, at least, White's ex tensive and varied efforts to gain an advantage in that position have proven fruitless, although a robust middlegame may ensue. There are also independent moves for Black within the basic Botvinnik structure, as in this game: Gheorghiu - Fischer Havana OL 1966

[diagram]

D)

11 h4! White still only has one piece out and it's his queen! 1 1 h4 accrues more territory while pre venting counterplay by ... 'iVh4+.

[diagram]
130 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]
Finally, there's the case where Black sets up 'normally' by ...c5, . . .tbc6 and ....i:r.e8. One prob lem that arises is where to put the c8-bishop. Kacheishvili - Jenni Linares 2001

[diagram]
6 tt:Je2 tt:Jc6 7 O-O d5 8 cxd5 exd5 9 a3 .i.xc3 10 bxc3 .i:r.e8 A roundabout way to the Samisch structure.

11 f3 b6 12 l:!.a2 .i.b7 13 g4! (D)

13 ... c4 Black is at a loss for an effective plan. 14 .i.bl tt:Ja5 15 tt:Jg3 tt:Jb3 16 g5 tt:Jd7 17 e4 tt:Jxcl 18 'iVxcl

NIMZO-/NDIAN DEFENCE 131

In spite of losing his dark-squared bishop, White enjoys control of the centre and king side. It turns out that his attack almost plays it self. 18 . bS 19 eS as 20 tZ:lhS WVb6 21 tt:Jf6+ gxf6 22 gxf6 @hs 23 WVh6 .l:!.g8+ 24 @hl tt::i rs 25 .l:!.gl lbg6 26 .l:!.gS 1-0 An interesting relationship exists between the same .itd3, lbge2, f3, lbg3 set-up that oc curs in the Nimzo-Indian and in the Exchange Queen's Gambit. In both cases White wants to use his central majority and enforce e4 fol lowed by e5. Of course, the bishop on g5 in the Queen's Gambit is outside the central pawn chain and seems to play a completely different part from that on b2 or c 1 in the Nimzo-Indian, especially when ..ltxf6 is played with . . . ..ltxf6 as a reply. In both cases, however, White's main idea is e4-e5 (driving a piece away from f6 with tempo), followed by f4-f5 . And there is another connection, as illustrated by this po sition: This comes from our section on the Ex change Queen's Gambit. The bishop has re treated from g5 to f2 via h4, in part to avoid a forced exchange that can occur if the bishop re mains on g5 too long (by ... lbh5 or ... tbg6 and ...h6, for example), but also in order to defend the e3/d4 centre and allow for e4. Isn't this pretty much the function of the 'bad' bishop on b2 in the Nimzo lines that we have just seen? In simi lar fashion, Black will play ...c5 to increase pres sure on d4 and discourage the key advance e4. In both openings White may well switch to an attack via g4. Obviously meaningful differences exist. In the QGD, Black hasn't exchanged his dark-squared bishop for a knight. But we see how White in the Nimzo-Indian can achieve an effective attack with surprisingly reduced ma terial, a prime example being the Botvinnik Capablanca game above . Sarni sch Main Line with . . .cs and . . . .i.a6 After the 4 a3 move-order, Black frequently adopts a set-up in which he doesn't move the d pawn or e-pawn, but plays to blockade White's potential advances on both sides of the board. This strategy has been strengthened by specific move-orders in recent years. First let's see how the issues evolved with practice.

[diagram]
bxc3 O-O For a few comments on this move-order, see the next section.

[diagram]
This fixes the forward doubled pawn on c4 as an easy target of attack and eliminates any idea of White freeing his pieces by pushing his pawn to c5. Amongst the large set of options in the Samisch (and Nimzo-lndian), Black has 6 .. .b6 7 .itd3 ..ltb7, when 8 f3 is the normal move and has had mixed results. Much more interesting is Vaganian's recent move 8 lbe2 ! ?, offering a promising gambit: 8 ... ..ltxg2 9 .l:!.gl .itf3 (if 9 ... ..lte4, then 10 lbg3 !) 10 .l:!.g3 ..lte4 1 1 f3 ..ltxd3 1 2 WUxd3 with compensation for the pawn. Nevertheless, both sides have chances for ad vantage. 7 .itd3 lbc6 8 lbe2 b6 9 e4 lbe8! (D)

132 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

At first sight this gives a strange impression: Black doesn't develop a piece and moves the knight backwards. The retreat is justified by three considerations: Black avoids the annoy ing pin ..ltg5, he prepares to answer f4 with .. .f5, and he manoeuvres the knight towards the d6- square from which point it will attack c4 again. An early game Bronstein-Najdorf, Budapest Ct 1 950 illustrates what not to do as Black: 1 d4 tZ:lf6 2 c4 e6 3 tbc3 ..ltb4 4 a3 ..ltxc3+ 5 bxc3 c5

6 e3 tbc6 7 itd3 O-O 8 lbe2 d6 9 e4 lbe8 (the

procedure with . . . lbe8 and ...f5 works best with the pawn on d7 supporting the pawn-chain, but this is still a sensible way to play) 1 0 O-O b6 1 1 f4 ( 1 1 ..lte3 ! ?) 1 1 . ..ita6? (there was still time for 1 1 . ..f5 ! ) 12 f5 ! e5? (an innocent-looking move which loses the game !) 1 3 f6 ! (D). There is no good answer; for example, l 3. .. tZ:lxf6 14 ..\tg5 ! and Black will not survive lbg3-h5 and/or ..\txf6 with lbg3 and WVh5; and l 3. ..gxf6 14 d5 tZ:le7 1 5 ..lth6 tZ:lg7 1 6 tZ:lg3 is al most as bad. This is why f5 is seldom allowed and f6 almost never. You can see the rationale behind the blocking manoeuvre .. .f5. The game concluded 1 3. ..@h8 1 4 d5 lba5 1 5 lbg3 gxf6 16 tZ:lf5 ..ltc8 1 7 WVh5 ..ltxf5 18 exf5 .l:!.g8 1 9 .l:!.f3 J:lg7 20 ..lth6 .l:!.g8 2 1 .l:!.h3 1 -0.

10 O-O ..lta6

Getting to work on that c-pawn. Black's plan is simple and White needs to create something in the centre or kingside to counter it.

11 f4 f5

There's the blockading move that we men tioned. Notice how, by preventing f5, Black has prevented White's queen's bishop from moving to the kingside and perhaps joining in an attack. This same idea occurs in the Closed Sicilian line 1 e4 e5 2 tbc3 tbc6 3 g3 g6 4 ..ltg2 ..ltg7, where White plays f4 soon thereafter and Black replies ...f5. Similarly, in the King's Indian At tack, White will often arrange the move f4 and run into ...f5. Black has alternative approach: he can allow White to go one step further and then blockade by 1 1 ...f6 ! ? ( l 1 ...tLla5 1 2 f5 f6 is a similar idea) 1 2 f5 (D). The board is full of tension. A game Tisdall Amason, Husavik 1 985 went 1 2. .. cxd4 1 3 cxd4 .l:!.c8 14 ..\td2 ! exf5 ! 1 5 WVa4 fxe4 16 ..ltxe4 ..ltb7; here 17 WVc2 ! looks good, when 17 ...g6 1 8 ..\td5+ @g7 1 9 WVc l g5 20 tbg3 lbd6 2 1 WVdl is a sample line. Black has all kinds of options, however ( l 2. .. .l:!.c8 is an obvious one). I wouldn't bet on either side after 1 1 .. .f6. We now return to 1 1 .. .f5 (D ): From the position after l 1 .. .f5, we look at two games:

N!MZO-/NDJAN DEFENCE 133

Yusupov - Karpov Linares 1 993 12 lbg3 (D) At almost every juncture White has tried to exchange pawns, sometimes gaining a small advantage. In this position the exchange seems to help Black's structure as much as White's; e.g., 12 exf5 exf5 13 dxc5 bxc5 14 ..lte3 d6 1 5 .i.f2 WUd7 is a simple example. But the assess ment of these and similar plans can and will change as players refine their move-orders.

[diagram]
This move took over theory and practice for a while after Karpov won two games versus Yusupov. But 1 2. .. tt:Jd6 is logical, attacking the c4-pawn and defending f5. One possible prob- lem for Black is 1 3 exf5 exf5 ( 1 3. .. tZ:lxf5 14 lbxf5 exf5 1 5 dxc5 bxc5 16 WUf3; 1 3. ..cxd4 ! ?) 14 dxc5 bxc5 1 5 ..lte3, when his loose pieces make the defence difficult. 13 .ite3 (D) Keeping the tension in the centre. Again White can open the position with 1 3 exf5 exf5 14 dxc5 bxc5. Then 1 5 WVa4 is very interesting, and a tactical line that has occurred several times is 1 5 ..lte3 d6 ( 1 5. . . WUa5 16 .i.e2 .l:!.f7 or

16. ..

tZ:lf6 is unclear) 16 ..ltxf5 ! ? gxf5 1 7 WUd5+ .l:!.f7 1 8 WVxc6 ..ltxc4 (the riskier pawn sacrifice 1 8. .. .i.b7 has also been tried, with mixed re sults). Black can follow up with moves like ...WVc8 and ....l:!.b8 with a complex position that like so much else may be worked out by the time you read this book! What's important here are not the specific moves and ever-changing theory, but the overall situation: the burden is on White to alter the pawn-structure and/or dy namics of the position before Black consoli dates and wins positionally. This applies to a great number of Nimzo-Indian positions that involve ... .i.xc3+ and bxc3, and is worth keep ing in mind over-the-board. 13 .  . cxd4!? Karpov's idea, designed to improve upon (or merely pose other problems than) his earlier game with Yusupov, which went 1 3. .. lbd6 14 exf5 !? (initiating a bold sacrifice, although pos sibly something simple along the lines of 1 4 dxc5 lbxc4 1 5 ..ltxc4 ..ltxc4 16 .l:!.el i s the reason why Karpov didn't repeat 1 3. .. lbd6) 14 ...lbxc4 1 5 ..ltxc4 ..ltxc4 1 6 fxg6 ( 16 .l:!.f2) 1 6. ...i.xfl 1 7 WUh5 WVe7 1 8 .l:!.xfl hxg6 ! ? ( 1 8. . .cxd4! i s proba bly better) 1 9 WVxg6+ WVg7, and in Yusupov Karpov, London Ct (3) 1 989 White eventually lost in the unclear complications after 20 WUd3. The endgame after 20 WVxg7+ @xg7 21 dxc5 ! was a promising option. These lines should def initely help you to understand the opposing strategies. 14 cxd4 dS! The fascinating thing here is that Black, who has the knight-pair, forces open the position, as opposed to the strategies of previous players who tried to keep everything closed . 15 cxdS ..ltxd3 16 WVxd3 fxe4 17 WVxe4 A fair alternative is 1 7 lbxe4, when 17 ... WUxd5 leads to complex play that I'd assess as equal. This whole line may be superseded in the future so I'll spare the details. 17 .  WVxdS 18 WVxdS exdS (D) The basic concept remains: Black works on the light-square complex, as he has done since

134 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the very first move. Looking at this structure for a moment we see that c4 and e4 are weak whereas the bishop on e3 is passive. If Black could now play ... lbd6, preventing f5 and keep ing White' s bishop entombed on e3, his advan tage would be very significant. But it' s White' s move: 19 .l:!.acl .l:!.c8 20 f5! lbd6 21 fxg6 This isn't a theory book but 2 1 ..lth6 !? .l:!.f7 22 fxg6 hxg6 23 tbe2 is also interesting and again the chances seem about equal. Something similar applies for the next two moves, but soon after that Karpov's well-posted knights and White's weak pawns tum the game in Black's favour.

21...hxg6 22 .l:!.xf8+ @xf8 23 h4 lbc4 24

..ltg5 lbxd4 25 h5 gxh5 26 .l:!.fl+ @e8 27 lbxh5 tt:Jxa3 28 lbg7+ @d7 29 .l:!.f7+ @c6 30 fila7 lbac2! 31 .itf6 b5! 32 g4 b4 33 .l:!.a2 b3 34 .l:!.b2 @cs 35 tt:Jf5 .l:!.g8! 36 tt:Jxd4 .l:!.xg4+ 37 @f2 lbxd4 38 ..ltxd4+ @xd4 39 .l:!.xb3 .l:!.e4 40 .l:!.a3 .l:!.e8 0-1 Here's another example of how White, not wanting to wait around for Black's queenside attack, takes drastic action: V. Milov - J . Polgar Moscow FIDE KO 2001

[diagram]
..ltxc3+ 6 bxc3 c5 7 .itd3 lbc6 8 lbe2 b6 9 e4 lbe8 10 O-O ..lta6 11 f4 f5 This is the same main line that we have just seen. After many years of following the same themes, a new idea appeared: 12 d5!? lba5 13 e5! ..ltxc4!? Especially in view of what happens, it's logi cal to try to prove that White's centre is overex tended. Thus 1 3. .. d6!, and if 14 dxe6, 14 ... WVe7 ! . Then it's natural t o play 1 5 g4 ! ? (blasting away; White tries to force the position open .. .) 1 5. ..g6!? ( ...and Black to keep it closed! A real mess occurs after 1 5 ...fxg4 16 lbg3) 1 6 gxf5 gxf5 1 7 lbg3, but then 1 7. .. WVxe6! has the idea 1 8 ..ltxf5 .l:!.xf5 1 9 lbxf5 WVxf5 20 WUd5+ @f8 ! 2 1 WVxa8 ..ltb7 and Black has too much attack. Instead of all this, 14 lbg3 g6 emphasizes the essential solidity of Black's position; for exam ple, 1 5 WVe2 lbc7. In the spirit of the position, then, White might try 1 4 g4!?, which is not at all clear. At any rate, 1 3. ..d6 would be a consis tent way for Black to proceed. One can see why White might choose the more straightforward lines with exf5 and dxc5 mentioned above. 14 ..ltxc4 lbxc4 15 d6 ( D) Quite a position! Black is a pawn ahead with a solid pawn-structure, but the knight on e8 and rook on f8 are hemmed in, and White has ambi tions to attack on the queenside. The main point is that it's hard to break down White's cramping central pawn-structure. On the other hand Black still has good control over the light squares. ... bS Again there have been several games that were played after this one. Since the opening is sues have been defined, I'll merely point out that Black's options include 1 5. ..g6 and 1 5. .. WVc8, the latter from the stem game for this line, Ziatdinov-T.Georgadze, USSR 1 985.

16 a4 a6 17 WVd3 g6 18 axb5 axb5 19 ..lte3!

This attacks c5 once, and lbcl -b3 will do so once more.

N!MZO-/NDIAN DEFENCE 135

19 .. J:lxal 20 .l:!.xal WVb6 21 lbcl lbg7 22 tt:Jb3 .l:!.c8 23 .itf2 (D) The game continued and White recovered his pawn with a superior position. Some wild tactics ensued but eventually he won: 23 ... lbb2 24 WVc2 lba4 25 c4 WVb8 26 tt:Jd2 lbb6 27 cxb5 c4 28 tZ:lf3 lbh5 29 g3 WVb7 30 .l:!.a3 @g7 31 tt:Jd4 @f7 32 WVa2 WVe4 33 l::t a7 g5

34 WVe2 WVbl+ 35 WVn WVe4 36 WVe2 WVbl+ 37

@g2 @g6 38 fxg5 c3 39 WVc2 WVb4 40 .l:!.b7 l::t c4 41 lbxe6 dxe6 42 .l:!.xb6 WVb2 43 WVd3! .l:!.f4 44 WVe3 c2 45 d7 cl WV 46 d8WV l:!.xf2+ 47 WVxr2 WVxe5 48 WVe8+ @xg5 49 WVxe6 WVxe6 50 .l:!.xe6 f4 51 l::t e5+ @g6 52 .l:!.c5 f3+ 53 @xf3 WVhl+ 54 @e3 1-0

4 e3 and the H ubner

Variation

[diagram]
For most of the modem history of the Nimzo lndian Defence, this modest advance has been played more often than any other move. Over the last decade or so 4 WVc2 has become a top level favourite and has recently surpassed 4 e3 on most levels of tournament play, but not by much. Between them these moves dominate Nimzo-Indian practice. In general one can say that 4 e3 is more flexible for both sides, leading to a remarkable number of formations, some times only barely related! I'll stick with a few popular variations whose lessons extend into other lines. We'll look at 4 ...O-O and 4 ...c5, each in their own section. Another important move is 4 ...b6. I'm not devoting space to it, but compare the Queen's Indian Defence of the next chapter. At this point we have some move-order is sues that are seldom addressed although obvi ously known to most masters. It says something about the technical nature of the Nimzo-Indian that tiny differences in move-order have such important positional effects. Because this is all rather confusing, I'm going to make a compari son of the consequences of playing 4 ...O-O and 4 ...c5 in terms of reaching desired positions. Otherwise, whether you're White or Black, it will be easy to get off on the wrong foot. Early Castling 4

 O-O (D)

Castling is the most popular move at the top levels versus 4 e3. It is nevertheless a committal decision and it's interesting to see which of White's standard set-ups will achieve more or less against a castled king. White has four pri mary options (which are the same ones he plays versus 4 ...c5): 5 a3, 5 ..\td3, 5 tbe2 and 5 tZ:lf3. I'll look at the knight moves as main lines. 5 a3 enters into Siimisch territory, which we've been over. And 5 .itd3 is a transpositional bee hive, as follows: a) Should Black play 5 ... d5, then 6 a3 ! ? ..ltxc3+ 7 bxc3 followed by tbe2 should be compared with the Botvinnik Siimisch. b) Alternatively, 5 ... c5 leads to a number of positions depending upon what White chooses. I should mention that 6 tZ:lf3 d5 7 O-O is one of the classic positions of the Nimzo-Indian. It can

136 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lead to positions that are familiar to us; for ex ample: b l ) 7 ...dxc4 8 ..ltxc4 cxd4 9 exd4 b6 10 ..ltg5 ..\tb7. b2) 7 ... tbc6 8 a3 dxc4 (8. .. ..ltxc3 9 bxc3 dxc4 { or 9 ... WVc7 } 1 0 ..ltxc4 WVc7 is one of the oldest Nimzo-Indian variations) 9 ..ltxc4 cxd4 1 0 exd4 ..lte7 (after 10 ... .i.xc3 1 1 bxc3, Black has committed his knight to c6 rather than d7, which some players don't like; however, that's another story) 1 1 ..ltg5 b6 12 .l:!.el ..ltb7 (D ). Both 'bl ' and 'b2' are the type of IQP posi tions which we discussed and of which I gave numerous examples in Chapter 3 of Volume 1 . 5 tbe2 (D) Torre - U nzicker Wijk aan Zee 1981 White plays conservatively, hoping to avoid the doubled pawns that would otherwise arise after ... ..ltxc3+. He wants to drive away the bishop and then expand in the centre. The drawbacks to this knight move include hemming in the bishop on fl and developing rather passively. 5 ...d5! Because this counter is available, 4 ...O-O is arguably the best order versus the tbe2 sys tems, or at least the easiest to play. Another strategy to exploit White's slow development and knight placement is 5 ... .l:!.e8 6 a3 .itf8 !?, when a recent game continued 7 d5 d6 8 g3 tbbd7 9 ..ltg2 tbe5 ! 10 b3 exd5 1 1 cxd5 ..ltg4 1 2 f4 tbed7 1 3 WVc2 ..ltxe2 14 @xe2 ! ? c6 1 5 dxc6 bxc6 16 e4 tbc5 1 7 ..lte3 d5 ! 1 8 e5 tbg4 1 9 ..ltd4 f6 20 ..ltxc5 fxe5 ! 2 1 @f3 e4+ 22 @e2 ..ltxc5 23 tbdl ..\tb6 with enormous centre pawns, Av rukh-P.Carlsson, Turin OL 2006.

6 a3 ..lte7 7 cxd5 exd5!?

7 ...tbxd5 i s the safer move, equal i f unambi tious: 8 g3 c5 ! 9 dxc5 (9 ..ltg2 tbxc3 10 tbxc3 tbc6) 9 ... tbxc3 10 WUxd8 .l:!.xd8 1 1 tbxc3 ..ltxc5 12 ..ltg2 tbc6 1 3 O-O ( 1 3 @e2 is an option) l 3 ... ..lte7 14 .l:!.bl ? ( 1 4 .l:!.dl .l:!.xdl + 1 5 tbxdl e5 16 .itd2 ..lte6 17 ..ltc3 f6 with equality) 14 .....\td7 1 5 b4 .l:!.ab8 16 ..ltb2 tbe5 17 tbe4 tbc4, Ki.Geor giev-Sax, Warsaw Z 1 987. Black has far better piece placement and a significant advantage.

[diagram]
In traditional Queen's Gambit fashion, Black shifts his eyes to the kingside and e4; moves such as ... .itd6, ... itf5 and ... tbe6-g5 are on the cards.

12 b4 (D)

Here we see a conventional minority attack by White designed to weaken Back's queenside by b5. That takes a long time, however, so

N!MZO-/NDIAN DEFENCE 137

[diagram]

12. .a6 13 tZ:lf4 lbg6 14 lbxg6 hxg6 15 g4

[diagram]

138 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

has to find another constructive plan in the meantime. 13 . . @h7 14 h3 tZ'Bg6 15 tZ'ifS tZ'Bg8 Black's play deteriorates a bit but he defi nitely has the worse of it.

16 g4 tZ'Bh4 17 WUg3 tZ'ixfS 18 exfS f6?! 19 f4!

WVe8? 20 fxeS dxeS 21 ..lte3 WVe7 22 .l:!.bS a6 23 ..ltxcS WVc7 24 .i.b6 1-0 White's strategy deserves attention. 4 . . . c5 and the Hubner Proper

4. ..cs (D)

This is the best path to take if you want to end up in the Hubner Variation, which is the subject of this section. 5 .itd3 Now 5 tZ'Be2 gives White some aggressive op tions and causes much more trouble for Black than does the position after 4 ...O-O 5 tZ'Be2 d5. The extra complications that come with 4 ... c5 could be a disincentive for Black in practice, but that depends upon specific variations. Here's an overview of 5 tZ'Be2 lines: 5 ... cxd4 (5 ... d5 6 a3 ..ltxc3+ 7 tZ'Bxc3 cxd4 8 exd4 dxc4 9 ..ltxc4 is satisfactory for Black but not to everyone's taste; Black can also play 5 ...b6! ? 6 a3 ..lta5, which has traditionally been a sideline but is considered fully playable) 6 exd4 d5 (6 ...O-O 7 a3 ..lte7 8 d5 exd5 9 cxd5 .l:!.e8 1 0 d6 ..\tf8 has a lot of theory attached to it, with difficulties for both sides, but perhaps a little more for Black if White really knows what he's doing) 7 c5 tZ'Be4 8 .i.d2 tZ'Bxd2 9 WUxd2 (D). 9 ...a5 (9. ..O-O 10 a3 ..lta5 ! ? is also possible)

10 a3 ..ltxc3 1 1 tZ'Bxc3 a4 1 2 .itd3 itd7 1 3 O-O

tbc6 14 ..ltc2 and White gets genuine attacking chances. It just takes some study to catch up with this, especially by White. 5 ... tZ'Bc6 5 ... ..ltxc3+ 6 bxc3 tZ'Bc6, trying to get to a Hubner Variation, is a big positional error be cause White can play 7 tZ'Be2! instead of 7 tZ'Bf3. Then he is a full tempo ahead of a normal Samisch position because he skipped a3. 6 tZ'Bf3 ..ltxc3+ Only now does Black play this way, when White's knight on f3 obstructs its own pawns. 7 bxc3 d6 (D) This is the 'real' Hubner Variation, made fa mous by Hubner himself, but also by Fischer with his positionally devastating win over Spassky in their world championship match. Black has intentionally 'wasted' a move by ex changing on c3 without waiting for White to play a3. The point is that he plans ...e5, a move that wouldn't be particularly attractive if the c-pawns hadn't been doubled; e.g., if White

N!MZO-/NDJAN DEFENCE 139

had WVc2 in before ... ..ltxc3. The irony here is that in the Samisch Variation White is happy to 'waste' the tempo a3 in order to make his ideas work; whereas in the Hubner Variation, Black does the opposite (wastes a move by not wait ing for a3) for much the same reason! What are the general characteristics of the variation? Black is about to play ...e5, so as to partially close the position, and if White plays e4 and d5 (a common set-up) then the position is blocked on at least the queenside and in the centre. Therefore we expect more action on the king's wing. That explains why Black may not rush to castle, as he did above; he may well play . .. O-O-O. White may also choose not to castle, according to taste. On the one hand castling gives White an extra move to see what Black is doing. On the other hand, since the closed cen tre renders White's king safe enough, foregoing O-O can give him an extra tempo to carry out other manoeuvres. At this point the play therefore splits into 8 O-O and lines in which White plays without (or delays) O-O. Lukacs - Stohl Austrian Cht 1994

[diagram]
A typical reorganization, going for f4 with out blocking off the d3-bishop, but it's hard to achieve that.

9 . . .O-O (D)

10 dS lbe7 11 f3! This is better and more realistic than trying to get f4 in: 1 1 WVc2?! lbg6! 1 2 f4? (White's position is too loose for this move, and he ex poses his internal weaknesses on e3 and d3; 1 2 f3 was still the better choice) 1 2. . . exf4 1 3 exf4 .l:!.e8 14 h3 (versus ... lbg4) 14. .. lbh5 ! 1 5 lbe4 .itf5 16 @h2 WVh4 (Black' s pieces are swarm ing all over the place) 1 7 tZ:lf6+ (what else?) l 7 ...gxf6 1 8 ..ltxf5 WVg3+ 1 9 @gl .l:!.e l ! 20 WVf2? (but 20 .l:!.xel is met by 20 ... WVxel + 21 @h2 .l:!.e8 ! ) 20 ... WVxf2+ 2 1 @xf2 .l:!.xfl+ 22 @xfl tbg3+ 0- 1 Spiegel-Mednis, Wattens 1 994. 11 .. tt:Je8 Jakab-K.Szabo, Budapest 2003 went 1 1 ...h6 1 2 .l:!.f2 lbe8 1 3 e4 tbg6 14 g3 with a sound, flexible set-up for both sides.

12 e4 lbg6 13 g3 fS! (D)

A standard counterattack. White wins e4 but Black activates his pieces against White's slightly weakened kingside. He also has an other idea. 14 exfS ..ltxfS 15 lbe4! WUd7 16 WVc2 lbf6! 17 tZ:lxcS!? White intentionally falls for it. Otherwise pieces are coming off and he'll have to suffer a long defence. 17 ... ..ltxd3 18 lbxd3 l:!.ac8 19 lbb2 Black has a good game for a pawn and espe- cially after his next move: 19 ...bS! (D) 20 ..ltgS 20 cxb5 WVxb5 2 1 c4 WUxd5 ! with good pres sure on White's weak queenside. 20 . bxc4 21 ..ltxf6 .l:!.xf6 22 WVe4 WVbS 23 tt:Jdl lbe7?! 23 ... WUa5 ! would completely tie White down. 24 lbe3 WVaS 25 f4! The only shot: diverting the marauder.

140 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

25 . WVxc3 26 fxe5 WVxeS!? 26 ... J:lxfl + 27 .l:!.xfl WVxe5 2 8 WVxe5 dxe5 29 d6 tbg6 is also advantageous but difficult. 27 'ii' xeS dxe5 28 l:!.xf6 gxf6 29 l::t cl!? .l:!.d8! 30 :Xc4 tZ:lxdS 31 tZ:lxdS .l:!.xd5 32 .l:!.c8+ @g7 33 :tc7+ 'it>g6 34 .l:!.xa7 Although Black failed to convert his advan tage into victory, his opening play is a model treatment. White Avoids or Delays O-O

[diagram]
!Oc6 6 tZ:lf3 ..ltxc3+ 7 bxc3 d6 8 e4 e5 9 d5 This is the most direct way: White closes up the centre and proceeds to reorganize his pieces as quickly as possible. 9 ... tt:Je7 10 lbd2 ( D) The knight on f3 is blocking White's posi tion (compare the Samisch, where the knight is on e2). so White gets it out of the way. We look at two games. Petrosian - lvkov Nice OL 1 974

10. ..O-O 11 lbfl! WUas 12 .itd2 tt:Je8

A plausible sequence is 1 2. .. lbg6 1 3 lbe3 ( 1 3 g3) 1 3. .. tZ:lf4 1 4 ..ltc2 .itd7 1 5 h4 ! @h8 16 g3. 13 lbg3 f5?! 14 exf5 tZ:lxfS 15 WVc2 g6 16 O-O .itd7 17 lbe4 (D) This looks like a King's Indian Defence where White has obtained his usual e4 outpost but Black has been denied his on d4. We've talked about the usefulness of doubled c-pawns in covering key central squares.

17. .

tZ:lf6 18 tZ:lgS!? Perhaps 18 f4 ! ? could be tried. 18 . .l:!.ae8 19 f3 lbg7 20 g4! ( D) Petrosian typically wants to take the very last squares away from both the g7- and f6- knights. 20 .. iii' a4!?

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 141

[diagram]

23 a4 'i'c7 24 h3

Now f4 is always a possibility.

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
O-O-O! (D)

[diagram]

142 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

21. hS 22 h4 gxh4!

22 . . .g4 is well met by 23 'iVdl !, because after White plays a4 he can return to play f3 with f-file control. These are typically extended strategies when you play with or against the Hilbner. 23 gxh4 f4 24 g2! rs 2S xf4 exf4 Instead, 25 .. .fxe4 26 'i'xe4 f5? loses to the simple 27 xe6+. 26 el! White has much the better game. His bishops are simply too strong on the open board and he went on to win. This is an example of how the player with the bishop-pair can afford to be pa tient.

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 143

Classical Nimzo-lndian: 4 'tWc2

[diagram]

O-O.

[diagram]

[diagram]
This is the most direct and one of the two most important replies to 4 'i'c2. In many ways it is the most logical. As indicated above, White's queen has abandoned defence of d4, so the threat of ...dxc4 is a serious one. If you think in terms of the Queen's Gambit Declined, it seems aw fully early for White to have his queen on c2. In fact, the first thing that we'll look at can tum into the equivalent of the QGD Exchange Variation, 5 cxd5. That can lead to a quiet game or a com plex tactical game depending upon what the players want. We'll get an overview of the mate rial by looking at instructive games, which as usual are mainly aimed at strategy and less at bringing you up to date with theory.

144 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

5 cxdS I shall just give an outline of the alternative 5 a3 xc3+ 6 'i'xc3. Much of its theory has be come a matter pure analysis, heavy on tactics. Black has a wide choice over the next few moves; for example, recently 6 ...c5 has gained a lot of attention, intending 7 dxc5 d4, and if 8 'iVg3, either the double gambit 8 ... tt:Jc6! ? with the idea 9 xg7 Ii.g8 or simply 8 ... O-O 9 h6 tt:Je8. Modem chess is full of all these dynamic counterattacks. Instead 6 ... tt:Je4 7 'i'c2 (D) has produced the most analysed position of the 4 'i'c2 Nimzo lndian:

[diagram]

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 145

gain some advantage before the fireworks be gin, but he can't do so in the main lines. This is merely a proposition, and there may prove to be exceptions, but to me it indicates that a funda mental dynamic balance exists in some opening variations that cannot be overcome even by the most ingenious ideas. We now return to the position after 5 cxd5

(D):

This is an odd place to put a diagram as you'd think that it would go after the recapture 5 ... exd5. But there are two absolutely legiti mate moves here:

[diagram]
'i'xd5 ; B: 5 ...exd5.

A)

[diagram]
146 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 147

[diagram]

[diagram]

148 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 149

[diagram]

[diagram]
1 5 O-O h4 16 lllhl 'i'g5 ! forces a response to the attack on e3; for example, 1 7 e4 lllf6 ! 1 8 e5 lll h5 and White has difficulties untangling his pieces.

15. ..

h4 16 lll fl lll f8 17 llld2 .l:.e7 18 J:lhel

[diagram]

150 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

24 ... lllg3?! 24 ... J:le6! is better. 25 '1t>gl! 25 lll xg3? 'if xg3+ and 26 @fl 'ifh2 or 26 'it>gl xe3 27 J:lxe3 xe3, etc. 25 ... lll h5! ? 26 dl !? e6 27 'iff2 Petrosian's defence is effective as usual, and White has put things together nicely in the face of severe pressure. Only his mistake on move 30 negates this hard work. 27 ... 'ife7 28 j,b3 g5 29 j,dl g6 30 g4? hxg3 31 lllxg3 lllf4! 32 'ifh2 c5 33 'ifd2 c4 34 a4 b5! 35 c2 lllxh3+ 36 @fl 'iff6 37 @g2 lllf4+ 38 exf4 J:lxel 39 fxg5 'ife6 40 f4 e2+! 0-1 Seirawan - Portisch Rotterdam 1989

9...O-O! (D)

[diagram]

NIMZO-/NDIAN DEFENCE 151

[diagram]

12. .

[diagram]

13. ..aS 14 .ile2! axb4 IS axb4 l:!xal+ 16

[diagram]
17 ...d6 Seirawan got a similar advantage against Tal in Niksic 1 983: 1 7. .. l2Jc6 1 8 b5 l2Jd8 1 9 O-O c5 20 bxc6 bxc6 21 l:tcl .ild7 22 a5; Black is in terrible shape positionally. IS O-O l2Jc6 19 bS l2Je7 20 l:tal ! g6 21 cs

(D)

[diagram]
2 1 ...d7 22 l:ta7 l:tb8 23 .ild3. Black will have to defend for ages, and a well-timed e4 could pose big problems. 22 xd6 cxd6 From now on White is in charge. Notice the opening of a second front that is almost always necessary to win a game if the defender pas sively protects his weaknesses on his vulnera ble side of the board. 23 @n @rs 24 @el @es 2s .ild3 @ds 26 @d2 l:tbS 27 l2Je2 .ilcS 2S l2Jc3 .ilb7 29 l2Ja4 .ilcs 30 l:tcl .ile6 31 l:tc2 l:tb7 32 l:ta2 l:ta7 33 @c3 @c7 34 @b4 @b7 3S l:tc2 l:taS 36 l:tcl l:!cS 37 l2Jc3 l:taS 3S .ilc2! rs 39 .ilb3 .ilgS 40 h4 .i::t rs 41 l2Je2! .i::t r6 42 l:thl .ilr7 43 l2Jr4 @c7 44 .ildl ! .ilgS 4S g4! rxg4 46 .ilxg4 @bS 47 l:tcl .i::t rs 4S hS gxhS 49 .ilxhS .ilh7 SO l:thl i.e4 Sl r3 i.rs S2 .ilg4 .ilxg4 S3 rxg4 l:tr6 S4 @c3 @c7 SS @d3 @cs S6 @e2 @c7 S7 @r3 @cs SS @g3 @c7 S9 l:tcl + @b7 60 l:tc2 @bS 61 l:tr2 @c7 62 l:!h2 1-0 Uncompromising Attack After all that technical material, we turn to 7 .ilh4, which signals a disinclination to sim plify. White generally gets his wish in that re spect. 7 i.h4 cS (D) This must be considered one of the most im portant variations stemming from 4 c2 d5,

152 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

8 O-O-O?

[diagram]

NIMZO-[ND/AN DEFENCE 153

or Botvinnik Variation of the Semi-Slav - but there' s really very little for me to explain or suggest except that you hit the books, comput ers, or whatever scheme you might have for studying/learning. To give you a flavour of the action, I'll squeeze some positions into a sam ple game that follow the most popular and criti cal variations. R. lbrahimov - Mamedyarov Baku 2006 8 ... g5 9 ..tg3 lbe4 10 e3 A recent game went 1 0 ..txb8 iff6! 1 1 ..tg3 lbxc3 12 a3 ..tf5 13 ifd2 ..ta5 14 b4?? (White goes wrong in the complications; instead, 14 e3 is a risky winning try, while White can also try to bail out with the forcing line 14 lbf3 ! ? lbbl ! 1 5 'ifxa5 ifxb2 1 6 'ifa4+ ..td7 1 7 ..te5 lbc3 1 8 ifdl ! lbxdl 19 ..txb2 lbxb2, when . . . lba4 fol lows with a small edge) 14 ... lbe4 1 5 ifc l l:.c8 ! 1 6 l:.a2 l:.xc5 1 7 ifal 'ifc6 1 8 ife5+ @d8 1 9 ifxh8+ @d7 0- 1 I.Sokolov-Aronian, Turin OL

2006. A treacherous line, as we can see by the

fact that a game between such powerful players lasted less than 20 moves.

10. 

'ifas 11 lbe2 ..trs (D) The basic position. What follows is repre sentative of some recurring tactical ideas. 12 ..te5 Who knows what's happening in lines like 12 ..tx b8 ! ? l:.x b8 1 3 lbd4? Only the experts ... maybe. You may get a feel for the nature of the tactics by 1 3. .. ..td7 !? (not a very intuitive move, but 1 3. .. ..tg6 14 ..tb5+ @f8 1 5 ..td3 ! gave Black problems in Dreev-Zhang Zhong, Moscow (Russia vs China) 2004; best play is then 1 5. .. 'ifxc5 { 1 5. .. lbxc3 1 6 O-O! } 1 6 O-O with some advantage to White) 14 lbb3 ! ..txc3+ 1 5 bxc3 'ifxc3+ 1 6 'ifxc3 lbxc3 1 7 f3 @e7 1 8 @d2 lba4, I.Sokolov-Van Wely, Wijk aan Zee 2005. A difficult position to assess, but in any case close to equality. 12 ... O-O 13 lbd4 l:.e8!? This may be the most important move of all. Maybe ten years from now we'll know some thing definitive. 1 3. .. lbxc3 has been the most explored alter native; here are a few samples: a) 14 'ifxf5 lbe4+ 1 5 @d i !? (Emms sug gests 1 5 @e2 ..txc5 ! ? 1 6 lbb3 'ifa6+ 17 @f3 'ife6!) 1 5. .. lbc6 1 6 lbb3 'ifa4 17 h4? ! lbxe5 1 8 hxg5 lbg4 1 9 l:.xh6, B u Xiangzhi-Sargisian, Moscow 2006, and here 1 9. .. l:.fc8 ! is strong. b) 1 4 lbxf5 lbe4+ 1 5 @dl lbc6! (D). 16 ..td4 ( 1 6 ..tg3? ..txc5 1 7 f3 l:.fd8 ! ! with a mega-attack, Law-Ward, London 1 994; 1 6 ..td6! ?) 1 6. .. lbxd4 1 7 exd4! .tel ! 1 8 lbxh6+? ( 1 8 @c l ! lbxf2 1 9 l:.g 1 is not clear - Emms) 1 8. ..@h8 ! 1 9 @cl l:.ac8 ! 20 @bl ..txf2! 2 1 ..td3 ..txd4 2 2 ..txe4 dxe4 2 3 h4 l::!. xc5 24 'if xe4 ifd2 25 lbxf7+ @g7 0- 1 Devereaux-Emms, British League (4NCL) 2004/5. Very nice. We now return to 1 3. .. l:.e8 (D): 14 ..txb8 Emms offers 14 lbxf5 l:.xe5 1 5 lbxh6+ @g7 l 6 lbg4 l:.e6, when 1 7 ..td3 may be one of those fortunate moves that is effective for no logical reason. 14 .. lbxc3!? Giving up a piece. Some simplification took place in Atalik-Short, Sarajevo 2004: 14 ... ..tg6

154 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1 5 ..td3 l:.axb8 1 6 O-O 'ifxc5 1 7 i::!. ac l l:.ec8 1 8 f3 ( 1 8 ife2 ..txc3 ! ?) 1 8. . . lbxc3 19 ..txg6 lbe2+ 20 'ifxe2 'ifxc 1 2 1 ..tf5 ! with equality. 15 lLixf5 lLie4+ 16 @e2 'ifa6+ 17 @dl iff6 18 f3 1 8 g4 ! looks clever, cementing the super knight. Maybe 1 3. .. lbxc3 is best after all?

18. ..

'ifxfS 19 fxe4

19 a3 looks like the best try. The great thing

about Black's combination is that it develops so slowly and without a great deal of material re maining. 19 .dxe4 20 ..td6 l:.ed8 21 @e2 (D)

21...l:.ac8 22 'ifa4 l:.xcS! 23 ifxb4 l:.xd6 24

@el aS 25 ifxb7 l:.f6 26 ifb8+ @g7 27 ifg3 l:.c2 28 ..te2 a4 29 b4 axb3 30 axb3 ifdS 0-1 That's what 'real chess' looks like in the sharp theoretical lines! Classical with 4 . . . O-O

4 ... O-O (D)

By choosing this move, Black refuses to commit to a plan and waits to decide upon his choice of ...d5, ... c5, or ...b6. Rather than cover the tens of subvariations that can follow, I'll give a few examples of a fairly recent and the matic continuation, followed by a brief look at the 'main line' . Central Occupation

5 e4 (D)

Talk about a fundamental challenge to 4 ... O-O! White simply takes over the centre. This had been condemned for years and designated an error by some sources; then someone decided that it might be OK to suffer a little as long as he could win the battle of control over vitally important central turf. As of this writing 5 e4 has been doing about as well as any other varia tion in the Nimzo-lndian. It is so committal, however, that I wouldn't be shocked if it were 'solved' in the sense of giving Black a clear

NIMZO-/NDIAN DEFENCE 155

path to equality or even better. Whatever hap pens, however, an examination of 5 e4 must be worth it, if only for the average player to under stand why such a natural move hasn't always been one of White's main choices and why it has become one. We' ll first look at 5 ... d6, a re sponse that Black has used to avoid the most critical lines, and then 5 . . .d5, directly challeng ing the centre. For the curious, other moves such as 5 ...c5 seem playable. The Slow Line 5 ...d6 (D) Apparently unchallenging, Black's simple move has its strengths. Much as in other varia tions of the Nimzo-lndian, he wants to block ade the big centre in order to attack it later. 6 a3 a) The logical alternative 6 ..td3 avoids dou bled pawns, but anything that doesn't support d4 allows Black to transform the pawn-structure to his liking: 6 ...e5 ! 7 lbe2 ! ? (7 a3 ! ..txc3+ 8 bxc3 transposes to our main game; 7 d5 allows for a variety of choices, since the c5-square has opened up for Black's bishop on b4 or his knight on b8; e.g., 7 ... lba6 8 a3 ..txc3+ 9 'ifxc3 lbc5 10 f3 lbh5 intending ... ifh4+ and/or ...f5) 7 ...exd4 8 lbxd4. This position was contested as far back as the 1 930s. Black can continue 8 . . . ..txc3+ 9 'ifxc3 l:.e8 1 0 f3 d5 1 1 cxd5 lbxd5 12 ifb3 lbb6 with complications. Or he can choose 8 .. . l:.e8 9 O-O ! ? ..txc3 10 'ifxc3 lbxe4 1 1 ifc2 lbf6 1 2 ..tg5 h6 13 ..th4 with some com pensation. Even 8 ... lbc6 9 lbxc6 bxc6 has been tried with reasonable prospects. One other thing to note is that Black can retreat to c5 with his bishop in all these lines, especially after a3, and have satisfactory play. b) I should mention that 6 e5 ! ? is also played, when White's centre isn't as vulnerable as it looks. 6 ... dxe5 7 dxe5 lbg4 8 lbf3 lbc6 9 i.f4 or 9 a3 can follow, with complex play that I won't pursue here. 6 ... ..txc3+ 7 bxc3 e5 We have a Samisch Variation in which Black has played ...e5, with the important difference that White has played e4 in one jump. On the other hand the move 'ifc2 isn't necessarily that useful, and the advanced centre is potentially ex posed. The resulting strategies can vary wildly. To begin with, Black threatens ... exd4 followed by ... lbxe4, so White's next move is natural: 8 i.d3 (D) Here the main moves are 8 . . . lbc6 and 8 .. .c5, for which I shall give game examples. Black's other continuation is 8 ...b6 9 lbe2 ..tb7 1 0 O-O l:.e8, which attempts to force White into playing d5. This is a traditional way for Black to proceed in the Nimzo-lndian, but White doesn't have to oblige (perhaps having the queen on c2 is worthwhile after all !): 1 1 lbg3 lbc6 1 2 i.b2 lbe7 ! ? 1 3 f4 lbg6 1 4 i.c l ! lbd7 ! ? 1 5 f5 lbgf8 1 6 f6! (a trick that keeps coming up !) 1 6. .. lbxf6 1 7 i.g5 lb8d7 1 8 lbh5 @h8 1 9 l:!.f3 l::!. g8 20 l:!.afl . White had a terrific attack in Leitao-Urday, Americana 1 997. Short - Karpov Dortmund 1997 8 .. lbc6 9 lbe2 b6 10 O-O ..ta6

156 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Standard stuff. Black lines up to attack c4. 11 f4! lbd7 12 ..te3 lbaS (D) 13 cS!? Although highly praised, this advance does have the problem that it will inevitably open the c-file and expose White's weaknesses. On the positive side, White staves off material loss and weakens Black's centre. 1 3 'ifa2 with the idea .l:.adl and/or l:.f3 is another approach. 13 . ..tc4?! Black might do better with 1 3. .. ..txd3 ! 14 ifxd3 dxc5 ! (14. .. exd4? 15 cxd4 bxc5 16 dxc5 lbxc5 17 i.xc5 dxc5 1 8 ifc3 and White has a big advantage). Then 1 5 dxe5 looks good at first for White due to his kingside pawn-mass. But Black can move his knight and count upon long term advantages: 15 ... lbb8! 16 i::!. adl !? ( 1 6 ifc2 lbc4 17 l::!. f3) 16 ... ifxd3 17 .l:.xd3 lbc4. This is hard to assess but should be OK for Black. 14 cxd6 cxd6 15 lbg3 'ifc7 16 lLifS (D)

16.. @h8 l 6 ... ..txd3 1 7 ifxd3 lbc4 wins c4 but is too slow: 1 8 fxe5 dxe5 ( 1 8. .. lbxe3 19 exd6) 1 9 ..th6!. 17 l:.f3 l:.ac8 18 i::!. afl ! (D) 18 .. f6 Regardless of what follows, we can say that White has won the opening. Short anticipated 1 8. . . ..txd3 1 9 ifxd3 'ifxc3 20 'ifxc3 i::!. xc3 2 1 fxe5 dxe5 2 2 ..th6! l:.xf3 2 3 ..txg7+ @g8 24 l:.xf3, winning. At this point we're seeing one of those positions in which the knight on a5, the strongest minor piece on the board if Black breaks through on the queenside, is the weakest when attention turns kingside. The game re mains complicated. I'll present it with a mini mum of notes. 19 ..tf2 bS 20 ..tg3 a6 21 h4!? ..tf7?! 22 .tel lbb6 23 if f2 lbac4 24 l::!. g3 g6 25 lbh6 ..te6 26 rs gxfS 27 lLixfS .l:.g8!? 27 . . . lbxa3 28 lbg7 ..tg8 29 ii.d2 ! threatens ..th6. 28 lbxd6! Now White is winning, although it still takes accuracy. 28 .. i::!. cf8 29 l::!. xg8+ @xg8 30 lLifS ifd7 31 ifg3+ @h8 32 dS ..txrs 33 l:.xfS lbd6 34 ht.fl lbbc4 35 hS ifg7 36 ifh4 l:.g8 37 ifxf6 lLie3 38 ifxg7+ @xg7 39 l:.f3 lbec4 40 ..th4 @h6 41 ..te7 @xhS 42 l:.f6 .l:.g6 43 l:.fS+! A nice finishing touch. There's nothing like two bishops and a passed pawn. 43 .. lbxfS 44 exfS .l:.g4 1-0 lvanisevic - Nisipeanu Istanbul Ech 2003 8 ..cS!? 9 lbe2 lbc6 10 d5 lbe7 (D)

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 157

11 f3!? This has become a typical Hilbner Variation structure (see that section), but with a knight on e2. White's most pointed strategy is to counter Black's typical development by playing 1 1 ctJg3 ; for example, l l ...ctJg6! 1 2 ctJf5 ctJf4 1 3 O-O ..txf5 ! ? 1 4 exf5 l:.e8 1 5 f3 ctJxd3 ! ? 1 6 ifxd3 e4 1 7 fxe4 tt:Jxe4 1 8 f6! , again with the idea 1 8. .. ctJxf6 1 9 ..tg5. Of course this is just a sample out of scores of continuations; the flexi bility of strategies by both sides is an attractive feature of such positions. 11 ... '2Jg6 12 h4 ctJhS!? (D) 13 g3? The idea is to stop either knight from coming to f4, but Black finds an ingenious rejoinder. Much better would be 1 3 g4 ctJhf4 14 h5 ctJg2+ 1 5 @f2 ctJ6f4 1 6 l:.h2 ! tt:Jxe2 17 'ifxe2 ctJf4 1 8 ..txf4 exf4 1 9 e5 !, when White has ideas of if e4 and e6. 13 ..bS! ! (D) 14 cxbS c4! 15 ..txc4 fS Black has a promising kingside attack, his amazing moves ...b5 and ...c4 serving to clear the way to White's weakened kingside pawns. 16 ..tgS ifb6 17 exfS ..txfS 18 ifd2 Emms gives the line 1 8 ..td3 ..txd3 1 9 ifxd3 e4 ! 20 fxe4 ctJe5, when White is three pawns up but he'll be lucky to survive. 18 ... e4! 19 f4 l:.ac8 Black has taken over. White's next move is a bit desperate, but it's hard to find a good one: 20 ifd4 ifxd4 21 ctJxd4 l:.xc4 22 tt:JxfS l::!. xfS 23 g4 (D) 23 .. l::!. xgS! 24 fxgS ctJhf4 25 a4 i::!. xc3 26 aS i::!. c2 27 b6 '2Jg2+ 0-1 There follows 28 @dl tt:Je3+ 29 @el ctJe5 and checkmate. Challenging the Centre 5  dS (D) This starts a direct assault on White's broad centre, leading to a set of critical variations that

158 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

have to be assessed on an individual basis. It's surprising that White can allow Black to de velop so quickly with threats; after all, he only has two pieces out and is far from castling. White' s contention is that his central advantage will overcome temporary tactical and develop mental difficulties. There are many paths to consider here; I won't begin to try to cover all the complexities of 5 ... d5, but will follow what currently seems to be the main line: 6 es tt:Je4 7 a3 7 ..td3 c5 8 a3 ..txc3+ 9 bxc3 transposes but is less forcing. 7 ... ..txc3+ 8 bxc3 cS 9 ..td3 (

D)

A key position. We look at two games. The ory is exploding in this line, so they are merely examples. Vallejo Pons - Schandorff St Vincent ECC 2005 9  cxd4 10 cxd4 'iVaS+ 11 @fl ..td7!? Another course is 1 l ...ctJc6; for example, 12 ctJe2 ctJb4 1 3 axb4 'ifxal 14 f3 f5 1 5 ifbl ! 'ifa4 1 6 ..tc2, Pogorelov-An.Rodriguez, Calvia open 2004; now 1 6. . . ifa6! is extremely complicated. 12 tt:Je2 f6 13 ..txe4! dxe4 14 exf6 l:.xf6 15 ..te3 ..tc6 16 tt:Jg3 Shariyazdanov-Pikula, Biel 2002 had gone 1 6 h4 ! ? ctJd7 1 7 l::!. h3, and here 1 7. .. i::!. af8 ! 1 8 ctJg3 l::!. 6f7 ! is strong, with the idea 1 9 tt:Jxe4 ?? iff5. 16 ... l:.f8 17 @gl ctJd7 (D) 18 h3 Vallejo Pons analyses 1 8 tt:Jxe4 iff5 19 f3 'ifg6 20 h4 l:.xf3 ! 2 1 h5 'ifg4 22 ctJf2 iff5 23 'if xf5 i::!. xf5 with approximate equality. 18 ... tt:Jf6 19 @h2 i::!. ac8 20 l::!. hcl 'if c7 This position is called unclear by Vallejo Pons. The game was ultimately drawn. Vallejo Pons - Leko Morelia/Linares 2006 9 ... 'if aS 10 tt:Je2 Euwe tried 1 0 ..txe4 versus Muhring in Jo hannesburg 1 955. Alas, 10 ... dxe4 1 1 ..td2 'ifa6 1 2 'ifxe4 'ifxc4 1 3 ctJe2 ctJc6 14 O-O htd8 was pleasant for Black. This is the sort of evidence that got 5 e4 discarded in the first place.

10. ..cxd4 11 cxdS

1 1 O-O dxc3 1 2 ..te3 ctJc6 1 3 cxd5 exd5 1 4 f3 ctJd2 1 5 i.xh7+ @h8 1 6 ..txd2 cxd2 was good for Black in Kelecevic-Abramovic, Yugoslavia 1 984. Again, this was well before contempo rary players began to look into 5 e4 in earnest. 11 ..exdS 12 f3 tt:Jxc3 13 tt:Jxd4 tt:Je4+ 14 @e2 (D)

NIMZO-[NDIAN DEFENCE 159

14 ...fS! 15 ..te3 Kasparov suggests another crazy line: 1 5 e6! '2Jc6 ! 16 lLixc6 bxc6 1 7 e7 l:.e8 1 8 'iVxc6 .l:.xe7 ! 19 'iVxa8 '2Jg3++! 20 @dl 'iVc3 2 1 ..td2! 'iVxal + 22 ..t c1 'iVc3 ! 2 3 ..td2 'iVal + with a repetition. Whether any or all of this is correct, it shows what fantastic play is hidden in this variation.

15.  '2Jc6!? (D)

[diagram]
(D)

With two extra pawns and an attack, Black is winning. Only capturing the knight on e4 gives White any hope, but then he opens lines against his own king. 23 ..tb2 'iVa2 24 ..te2 ..td7 25 fxe4 ..txbS 26 ..txbS l::!. b8 27 ..tc6 'iVxb2 28 ..txd5+ @h8 29 'iVxb2 l::!. xb2 30 exfS l::!. b4 31 @c2 l::!. d4 32 ..tf7 .l:.e4 33 e6 hS 34 ..txhS @g8 35 g4 @f8 36 gS @e7 37 h3 aS 38 ..tg4 a4 39 f6+ gxf6 40 g6 @rs 0-1 Modern Line: Going for the Two Bishops 4 'iVc2 O-O 5 a3 ..txc3+ 6 'iVxc3 b6 (D) Needless to say, there are alternatives; e.g .. the gambit 6 ...b5 ! ? 7 cxb5 c6! tries to dominate the light squares by ... ..tb7 in conjunction with opening lines and accelerated development. 7 i.gS White plays his most ambitious move, put ting his bishop outside a potential pawn-centre with e3 and fighting directly for e4.

160 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

7 .....tb7 (D) There is a considerable body of theory and practice behind the move 7 ... ..ta6, although it is still not considered as important as the simple fianchetto. In grandmaster games in which 4 'ifc2 is played, this position is reached more often than any other. For the most part the variations turn technical, however, which dampens the interest of many lower-level players. I'll give a couple of games to indicate what both sides may be after. 8 f3 Kasparov - Timman Linares 1993 There's a logic to this move that goes beyond enforcing e4, namely, that control of the square itself lies behind most of White's strategies in this variation. For example, apart from 8 f3, White sometimes plays 8 lbf3 and then 9 lbd2, as in the next game. Or, in other lines, a knight will come to c3 via e2. White does have one other idea that is specifically connected with 8 f3 : his knight can develop to h3 and then per haps f2. But this highlights a negative aspect to White's whole approach: he is still a long way from developing his kingside. 8 ... dS!? (D) Black employs the easiest idea, which is to challenge White's centre before it becomes mo bile. But 8 ...h6! is helpful in several lines, since after 9 ..th4 it takes the bishop away from the queenside and centre, in particular e3. There's also a tactical point to forcing the bishop back, as seen in the note to move 1 0.

9 e3 lbbd7

These last two moves have become so cus tomary that (ignoring the omission of ...h6 for the moment) the majority of games with a ...d5 defence begin here. 10 cxdS! exdS A tactic that often applies in these positions is 1 0. .. lbxd5?! 1 1 ..txd8 lbxc3 1 2 ..txc7 lbd5 1 3 ..tf4 lbxf4 1 4 exf4. White's pawns are crip pled, but he's still a pawn ahead and this posi tion has lacked takers from Black's side . ..td3 and lbe2 will follow in most lines, with @f2 a good centralizing move. However, it's important to note that if the moves 8 ...h6 9 ..th4 were inserted, as they usu ally are, then in this line Black could answer ..tf4 with ... g5 ! and win the e3-pawn. That position is known to be equal. In fact, White hasn't been able to prove any advantage in the lines after 8 ...h6 9 ..th4 d5, although the debate continues. 11 ..td3 (D)

11. ..

l:.e8

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 161

Targeting the e-pawn right away. Now it looks as though ...h6 is a threat. 12 lbe2! h6 13 ..th4! In fact, we've transposed to a normal posi tion except that Black didn't have the opportu nity for an effective ... lbxd5. 13 .. c5 The point is that 13 ... l::!. xe3? loses to 14 ..txf6! lbxf6 15 ..th7+.

[diagram]
An important positional idea is that 16 ...cxd4 is well answered by 1 7 exd4! (D), even though 17 lbxd4 places a knight in front of the isolani opposing the bad bishop. That latter position isn't bad, but it does give Black nice posts on e5 and c5 for his d7-knight. After the recapture by the pawn, we have a position that could come from the Queen's Gambit. Every key central square is covered and White, whose position looks innocuous at the moment, can slowly activate his pieces, in particular a rook to the e-file and his bishop to g3. Again, stability favours the bishop-pair. 17 lbc3! lbf8 18 l:.fel lbe6 19 ..th4 lbg5

19. ..

[diagram]

26. . dxe4

26 ...d4 27 e5 ! results in a very large advan tage for White. 27 .l:.xd8 i::!. xd8 28 xc5 lbg5 29 ..txg5 hxg5 30 xg5 c4 31 fxe4 d4+ 32 e3 xe3+ 33 l:.xe3 l:.d2 34 l:.e2 .l:.xe2 35 lbxe2 lbxe4 36 ..txe4 ..txe4 37 @f2 and White eventually won the ending. In general, however, it is difficult for White to counter Black's rapid development and cen tral counterattack after 8 f3, whether Black plays 8 ...h6 9 ..th4 d5 or 8 ...d6. So White has looked for other approaches, as in the next game. Krush - Shirov Edmonton 2005

[diagram]

10 f3 is another matter. Then one possibility

is 10 ...c5, to contest d4. A fascinating game

161 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Van Wely-Timman, Breda (7) 1998 continued

[diagram]
d5 1 1 e3 l:.e8 !? (anticipating 12 cxd5 exd5, opening the e-file) 12 ..td3 h6 1 3 ..th4 e5 ! . Here s an example of the fundamental con flict: Black's central advances force White to alter the pawn-structure before he can consoli date his bishop-pair advantage. Whether or not this succeeds, both sides are pursuing their philosophic goals: White to prevent the weak ening of his pawns in order to win in the long run. and Black to rip into the position as best he can.

I0

1tc8!? (D) An odd-looking move whose point becomes clear in a moment. Instead, 10 ...c5 1 1 dxc5 ! is a way to gain time for development. 1 1 f3 c5 12 dxc5!? Played to release the pressure on White's centre and get castled quickly. One drawback is that White cedes a central majority to Black; the other is tactical:

12. ..

htxc5! This attacks the bishop on g5 with tempo. 13 ..th4 b5! 1 3 ...lbd5? fails to 14 ..txd8 lbxc3 15 ..te7 l::!. e8 1 6 ..txd6 l:!.c6 17 ..tg3.

14 b4 htc6 15 lbb3 bxc4 16 lba5 l:.c7 17

lbxb7 l::!. xb7 18 ..txc4 l:.c7! 19 ifd4 Now things are looking up for White. In ad dition to the advantage conferred by his two bishops, Black's pawns are a bit weak. 19 ..e5! 20 ifd3 e4! (D) As the owner of the knight-pair, Shirov must continue the policy of disturbing White's pawn structure to open lines and create outposts for his knights. 21 'ife2 2 1 fxe4? 1oses a piece to 2 1 ... lbe5.

21. .

lbe5 22 ..tb5? It turns out that the c8-square needs to be covered, so 22 ..ta6 ! is better, with a double edged game still in store. But that's certainly not easy to see at this point.

22.  . exf3 23 gxf3 (D)

NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENCE 163

Now White's kingside is weakened, but how does Black follow up?

23. ..

'iVcS! (D) As so often, Shirov finds a creative way to seize the initiative.

24 O-O

After 24 .lfi.xf6? l:tc2 25 'iVdl gxf6 26 O-O 'it'h8 27 'it'hl l:tg8 28 .lfi.e2 d5 ! Black has deci sive threats. 24.. l:tc2 25 'iVdl ctJdS! (D) 26 'iVel 26 'iVxd5 'iVh3 27 l:tf2 l:txf2 28 @xf2 (or 28 .lfi.xf2 '2lxf3+ 29 'it'h l 'iVxh2#) 28 ... 'iVxh2+ 29 @fl 'iVhl + 30 'it'e2 'iVxal might be a reasonable exchange sacrifice for White but his king is too exposed. The rest is easy.

26. . '2lc3 27 a4 a6! 28 .lfi.e7 axb5 29 i..xf8

'iVh3 0-1 There follows 30 l:tf2 '2lxf3+ 3 1 'it'hl 'iVxh2+' 32 l:txh2 l:txh2#. The system with Ji.gs and ctJf3-d2 is hard to assess, even after the .. Jhc5 idea. My overall impression is that the play is dynamically equal.

6 Queen's Indian Defence

[diagram]

1 d4 '2lf6 2 c4 e6 3 ctJf3 (D)

By playing 3 '2lf3 White enters into a contest about move-order choices. By omitting or put ting off '2lc3 he avoids the highly-respected Nimzo-Indian Defence ( 1 d4 '2lf6 2 c4 e6 3 '2lc3 .lfi.b4) and indeed, this is generally consid ered the main motivation behind 3 '2lf3. Other wise, with a few exceptions mentioned below, White gains little by delaying 3 '2lc3 versus the main defences to 1 d4, and he can sacrifice some popular options. Let me clarify that by examples. After 3 '2lc3, White might want to enter into a variation not accessible after 3 ctJf3, such as the Exchange Queen's Gambit 3 ... d5 4 cxd5 exd5 5 ii.gs c6 6 e3 .lfi.e7 7 .lfi.d3 O-O 8 '2lge2. White's commitment to '2lf3 precludes a number of popular options. In fact, even the Classical Queen's Gambit Declined that arises from 1 d4 '2lf6 2 c4 e6 3 ctJf3 d5 4 '2lc3 differs in several ways from 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 '2lc3, al though they will often transpose. In the latter order, for example, Black might play 3 ... .lfi.e7. These positions are dealt with at some length in Chapter 2 on the Queen's Gambit. Another restriction imposed by 3 '2lf3 comes up in the Modem Benoni. White has eliminated certain options that arise after 3 '2lc3 c5 4 d5 exd5 5 cxd5 d6 6 e4 g6; for example, 7 .lfi.d3 .lii. g7 8 '2lge2 O-O 9 O-O, 7 f4 i..g7 8 i..b5+ (or here 8 ctJf3) or 7 f3 .lfi.g7 8 i..g5. Obviously, none of those variations can be played after 3 ctJf3 . Thus, when playing 3 ctJf3, it's necessary to build a repertoire around these limitations. In actual practice, most players are not deterred by that task. 3 ...b6 (D) The Queen's Indian Defence (a.k.a. 'QID') is defined by this move. Notice that after 3 '2lc3, 3 ...b6?! allows 4 e4 with superior central control, something Black really doesn't want to let happen. After 3 '2lf3 b6, however, Black in tends to keep a determined hold on the central light squares and permit neither a successful e4 nor d5 . This can involve the moves ...d5 or . .. f5, if necessary, and often includes occupation of e4 by either a knight or a bishop. White for his part may strive directly to en force e4 by moves such as '2lc3 (perhaps pref aced by a3 to prevent ... .lfi.b4) and 'iVc2. Or he can do the same, but slowly, by means of g3, .lii. g2 and ctJc3 or '2lbd2 depending upon the sit uation. His ultimate set-up and strategy will de pend upon what Black specifically undertakes in the centre. The resulting tension can produce

QUEEN'S INDIAN DEFENCE 165

both strategically and tactically interesting chess. This is a lesson to players everywhere, because for many years the Queen's Indian De fence had the reputation of being a dull opening that normally led to a drawish position. In fact, that reputation still holds among some lower rated players, although it shouldn't. I'm going present an overview of the varia tions and ideas of the Queen's Indian, with a mix of older and newer games. The emphasis will be on a few of the typically dynamic ideas that are being played in modem chess. To this end the material divides into two sections: the Fianchetto Variation (4 g3), and the Petrosian System (4 a3). Fianchetto Variation

[diagram]

166 N!ASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

After 4 g3, Black makes a decision as to how he wants to counter White's space advantage: 4 ... .lfi.b7 or 4 ... .lfi.a6. The Classical 4 . . . .tb7 4 ... .lfi.b7 This is the older move, which generally leads to a quieter game but not always so. 5 i.g2 White's plan is O-O, Cl'Bc3, and then d5 or 'iVc2 and e4. 5 ... i.e7 (D) Where do the pieces belong? Basically Black has to develop his kingside, get castled, and make sure that White doesn't play d5. His other natural choice is 5 ... .lfi.b4+, when 6 .lfi.d2 i..xd2+ (6 .. . .lfi.e7 ! ?) 7 'iVxd2 Cl'Be4 8 'iYc2 O-O 9 Cl'Bc3 sets up an old trap: 9 ... 'l'Bxc3? 10 'l'Bg5 ! and Black is losing material ! This is a typical tactic that is worth knowing, although Black had to make some weak moves to allow it.

6 O-O

[diagram]
9 Cl'Bg5 (now the d-pawn is pinned) 9 ...'l'Bc6 (best

was 9 ...h6! 10 'l'Bxd5 .lfi.xd5 1 1 i.xd5 Cl'Bc6) 10 Cl'Bxd5 g6 1 1 'iVd2 ! 'l'Bxd5 12 .lfi.xd5 l:tb8? 13 0:Jxh7 ! l:te8 (the main line goes 1 3. .. 'it'xh7 14 'i1Vh6+ Qgs 15 'iVxg6+ 'it'h8 16 'iVh5+ 'it'g8 17 .lfi.e4 f5 18 .lfi.d5+, etc.) 14 'iYh6 'l'Be5 15 Cl'Bg5 .lfi.xg5 16 .lfi.xg5 'iVxg5 (16. .. 'iVc7 17 .lfi.f6) 17 'iVxg5 .lfi.xd5 18 O-O i.xc4 19 f4 1-0.

6. ..

O-O 7 'l'Bc3 'l'Be4 Otherwise White will prevent this by 'iVc2. 8 .lfi.d2! A very instructive move. If White plays 8 d5 instead, then 8 .. . 'l'Bxc3 cripples his pawns. So 8 i.d2 is logical, preparing 9 d5. But the interest ing part is that if Black captures White's bishop on d2, White counts upon having a big centre and better development that will outweigh the bishop-pair. That is a bit unusual when there are no weaknesses in Black's camp, but it has been shown to be true in this particular position. Thus you will very seldom see 8 ... 'l'Bxd2. 8 ... .lfi.f6 The other well-known move is 8 ... f5, when 9 'iVc2 .lfi.f6 10 l:tadl ! has won some nice games. 9 l:tcl (D) This is the basic position of the main line. Let's see how a World Champion handles it:

QUEEN'S INDIAN DEFENCE 167

[diagram]
Kasparov - Ponomariov Linares 2003 White wants to play d.5, so Ponomariov blocks it. 9 ...c5 is more frequently played, leading to a Benoni-like position after 10 d5 exd.5 1 1 cxd5 and, for example, l 1 . ..'2lxd2 12 '2lxd2 d6. 10 cxd5 exd5 11 i.f4 '2lxc3 Korchnoi-Salov, Belgrade 1987 may have helped to inspire Kasparov. That game contin ued 1 1 .. . '2la6 12 i.. e5 l:te8 1 3 i.xf6 'iVxf6 14 e3 c5 15 '2le5 'iVe7 1 6 l:tel '2lc7 17 ctJd3 '2lxc3 1 8 bxc3 c4 19 ctJf4 'iVd6 (D).

20 f3 ! (shades of the Exchange Queen's

Gambit and Nimzo-Indian Samisch Variation! White intends to play e4; this came out of no where) 20 .. . l:te7 21 e4 f6 22 l:tc2 l:tae8 23 l:ke2 b5 24 h4 ! (a sort of second front; watch how terrifically White's pieces coordinate over the next few moves) 24 ...a5 25 'it'h2 .lfi.c6 26 'iYc2 g6 27 .lfi.h3 'it'g7 28 h5 ! g5 29 '2lg6 ! (D).

[diagram]

12. . .

'2la6 (D) Allowing a tactic that secures White the better centre. Black's problem after 12. .. '2ld7 13 c4! dxc4 14 l:txc4 is that he can't get 14. ..c5 in due to 1 5 d5 ! l:te8 16 l:tel b5 1 7 l:tc l . Perhaps

12. ..c5 immediately was correct.

13 e4! A nice pawn sacrifice to break down the cen tre. Black has to accept, but then weakens his position trying to hang on to the pawn.

13. 

dxe4 14 l2ld2 g5!?

14. ..c5 15 '2lxe4 threatens l2lxf6+; 14. ..

.l:!.e8 15 l:tel also favours White. 15 .lfi.e3 l:te8 16 f4!

168 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Somehow Kasparov always manages to get open lines!

16. .. exr3 17 .ll

xr3 .lidS!? 1 7. .. .llxf3? allows a winning attack after 1 8 'iVxf3 'iVe7 1 9 l:tce 1 . 18 .lixdS 'iVxdS 19 l:txr6 l:txe3 20 'iVg4! (D) Now both l:tcfl and l2lf3 are threats. 20 . . l:te6 21 i::t rs 'iYc6 22 'iVxgS+ l:tg6 23 'iVhS l:tr8 24 l2lr3 What's that knight doing on a6?

24. r6 2s l2lh4 i::t

g7 26 'iVh6 lLlb8 21 i::t hs rs 28 'iVr4 'iYe4 29 l:tfl 'iVxr4 30 l:txr4 l:tg4 31 :rxrs White is a clear pawn up. 31 . . lbd7 32 l:txf8+ lbxr8 33 @r2 lbd7 34 lbrs (D) If there is ever a Kasparov decal, it should have a picture of the board with a knight on f5. 34 ... 'it'h8 3s Qr3 i::t g8 36 :th6 :rs 37 g4 lbr6 38 c4 'it'g8 39 @r4 i::t r7 40 gS lLle8 41 Qes l:td7 42 'it'e6 i::t r7 43 i::t r6! lbxr6 43 ... lbxf6 44 gxf6 l:tf8 45 f7+ @h8 46 'it'e7 and White's pawn promotes. 44 gxr6 i::t r8 4S r7+ @h8 46 'it'e7 1-0 Here's a well-known older game in which Black demonstrated what to do when White overextends: Euwe - Keres Rotterdam (9) 1939140

[diagram]
.lle7 6 O-O O-O 7 lbc3 lbe4 8 'iVc2 This move is logical. 8 . .  lbxc3 9 'iVxc3 d6 10 'iVc2 rs Black's philosophy: don't allow e4 for free! 11 lbel 1 1 d5 ! is more promising, based on the idea l l . ..exd5 ? 1 2 lbd4 ! .

11. .. 'iYc8! 1 2 e4 lbd7 13 dS! ? fxe4 1 4 'iVxe4

lbcS lS 'iYe2 i..r6! ( D) Look how active Black's pieces are. Now White embarks upon unjustified tactics: 16 i..h3 l:te8 17 .lle3 'iVd8! 18 .llxcS exdS! 19 .lle6+ 'it'h8 20 l:tdl No better is 20 .lla3 'iYe7 2 1 cxd5 .lixd5 with an extra pawn and much better pieces.

20. ..dxcS 21 l2lg2 d4 22 r4 d3!

Initiating a winning combination. 23 l:txd3 'iVxd3! 24 'iVxd3 .lid4+ 2S l:tr2 l:txe6 26 @n l:tae8! ? But here h e slips up a bit. 26 .. . .llxf2 ! 27 @xf2 l:tae8 was winning. 27 rs? 27 l:td2! would have been a more stubborn defence.

QUEEN'S IND/AN DEFENCE 169

27  l:beS 28 f6 gxf6 29 l:td2 i..c8! 30 '2lf4 l:te3 31 'iVbl l:tf3+ 32 'it'g2 l:txf4 33 gxf4 l:tg8+ 34 @f3 i..g4+ 0-1 The Modern 4 . . . .ta6

4. .. i..a6

[diagram]

[diagram]

1 70 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

dxc4 ! (this time the flank outweighs the centre, if only because the centre pawns will take too long to mobilize) 20 i.g2 .lfi.e4 2 1 l:tc l ll'Bb6 (the whole situation has changed in a few moves: Black's pieces are swarming all over the queenside and ... b4 is coming) 22 ll'Be5 .lfi.xg2 23 'it'xg2 b4 24 l:tc2 c3 25 .lfi.c l .lfi.d6 26 f4 'iVa8+ 27 'it'g l ll'ibd5 28 ll'Bxd5 'iVxd5 29 'iVd3 ll'Be4 (compare each sides' pieces) 30 l:tdl f6 3 1 ll'Bg4 .lfi.f8 32 ll'Be3 'iVc6 3 3 d5 'iVc5 34 'it'g2 ll'Bd6 35 ll'Bf5 ll'Bxf5 36 'iVxf5 a5 37 e4 a4 38 l:te2 b3 39 axb3 axb3 (White' s centre pawns are finally rolling, but Black's are already there) 40 l:tfl l:tb7 41 l:tff2 'iYc8 42 'iYxc8 l:txc8 43 e5 ii.cs 0- 1 . 9 ... ll'ifd7 1 0 ll'Bxd7 ll'Bxd7 ll ll'Bd2 O-O 1 2 O-O l:tc8 13 e4 (D) 13 ... bS This is one of Black's standard plans. In the next game we see 1 3. ..c5 . 14 l:tel dxe4 Both sides have tried all sorts of moves here. I'm ignoring most of the theory. 15 ll'Bxe4 bxc4 16 'iVe2 ll'Bf6 Intending 17 bxc4 CDd5 ! . 17 ll'icS! (D) It's worth putting up with some trouble to get the bishop-pair and dark-square control, even if the latter is limited.

17. ..

i.xcS 17 ...ll'Bd5? fails for tactical reasons: 1 8 .lfi.xd5 ! .lfi.xc5 19 .lfi.xe6! . 1 8 dxc5 'iVe7 1 8. .. ll'Bd5 19 i.e5 ! ? ll'Bb4 20 l:ted l ! favours White. 19 b4! Now it's a pawn sacrifice. Neither side has a great advantage, but White has the more attrac tive deployment of forces.

19. ..

l:tfdS 20 'iVb2 ll'Be8 21 a4 h6 22 l:te2 l:td3 23 .lfi.e4 l:td7 24 l:teel (D)

24. .

.lfi.b7?! 24 ... ll'Bf6 looks right. The bishop returns any way.

QUEEN'S INDIAN DEFENCE 1 71

2S 'iVa2 i..a6 26 l:tabl ll'Bf6 27 i.g2 ll'idS 28 i.eS 'iVf8 28 .. .f6! may be better; e.g., 29 i.d6 (29 ii.al ) 29 . .. l:txd6 3 0 cxd6 'iVxd6 3 1 l:tbd l . Unclear? In any case, White's exchange sacrifice would be risk-free. 29 l:tecl .l:.b7 30 'iVa3 'iVd8 31 h4 f6 32 i.d6 c3?! 33 l:txc3! (D) Minor pieces actually have more effect than rooks in such a position. White has better prac tical chances and he managed to break down Black's defences:

33. .

ll'Bxc3 34 'iVxc3 'iVd7!? 3S l:tb2 'iVf7? 36 bS! cxbS 37 'iVaS! bxa4 38 'iVxa6 l:txb2 39 'iVxc8+ @h7 40 'iVa6 .l:.bl+ 41 'it'h2 'iVg6 42 'iVxa4 l:tb2 43 'iVd4 l:te2 44 c6 eS 4S 'iVxa7 .l:.c2

[diagram]
Topalov - Anand San Luis Wch 2005 7 .lfi.g2 c6 8 .lfi.c3 dS 9 ll'ieS CDfd7 10 ll'Bxd7 ll'Bxd7 11 ll'Bd2 O-O 12 O-O l:tc8 This variation had been a main line for some time, but now the following 8- 10 moves have been tom apart by games and analysis. No won der that some players keep switching to new lines in the QID. Fortunately there are a lot of ideas out there.

13 e4 cS 14 exdS exdS lS dxcS dxc4 ( D)

16 c6! cxb3! 17 l:tel! b2! 18 i.xb2 ll'icS 19 ll'Bc4 There have been several other moves played at this point and unsurprisingly, given the high publicity accorded this game, over the next sev eral moves as well. 19 . . .lfi.xc4 20 'iVg4 Ji.gs 21 'iVxc4 ll'Bd3 22 i.a3!? ll'ixel 23 l:txel l:te8 24 l:txe8+! 'iVxe8 25 .lfi.dS! (D) This is arguably the end of the opening ! White is a full exchange down, counting upon his passed pawn and two bishops. Normally that would be a pretty good situation, but there isn't a great deal of material left, and Black would love to give back the exchange for a pawn by ... l:txc6. As it turns out, White can pre vent that and tie Black down enough to prevent active counterplay. As a result, White seems to have a draw in hand, and can try for more. 2S .. hS 26 'it'g2 i.e7 27 .lfi.b2 i.f6 28 i..cl! 'iVe7 29 i.e3 l:tc7 30 h4 ii.es 31 'iVd3 .lfi.d6 32 ii.gs 'iVe8 33 'iVf3 bS 34 .lfi.e3 34 'iVxh5 l:txc6 should be equal. 34 .. 'iVeS 3S 'iVdl 'iYe8 36 'iVxhS! Allowing the simplifying sacrifice on c6 only in order to reject it! White will now have a pawn for the exchange with very limited material. yet he's definitely the one playing for a win.

1 72 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

36 ... l:txc6 37 .lfi.xa7 l:ta6 3S .lfi.d4 Ji.rs 39 ii.es b4 40 'iVrs g6 41 'iVr4 'iVe7 42 i.d4 l:ta5 43 'iVr3 .lfi.g7 44 .lfi.b6 l:tb5 45 .lfi.e3 .lfi.c3 46 .lfi.g5!

(D)

46 ... 'iVa7? 46 ... 'iVfS ! is correct; obviously defending is a tremendous burden in such a situation. 47 'iVd3! l:tb6? 4S .lfi.e3! 'iVa6 49 .lfi.xr7+! 'it'xr7 50 'iVd7+ @rs 51 'iVdS+ @r7 52 'iVc7+ 'it'gS 53 'iVxb6 At this point Topalov was objectively win ning, but Anand kept finding clever ways to confuse things. After a late-night exchange of errors the players eventually drew. But this was a brilliant performance by Topalov and some indication of how much room for creativity ex ists in the QID. Let's try another game between the same two players in the same time period: Topalov - Anand Sofia 2005

[diagram]
.lfi.b4+ 6 .lfi.d2 i.e7 7 '2lc3 Instead of 7 i.g2, White plays directly for e4, a natural and logical plan. The main prob lem is that the knight can no longer defend c4 against attacks by ...d5 and ...b5. 7 ...c6 S e4 d5 Here we are again with the basic idea. The combination of ...c6 and ...d5 (with perhaps ...b5 to come) militates against White's bishop straying from fl, from where it defends c4, even though it 'belongs' on g2. 9 'iVc2!? dxe4 10 '2lxe4 i.b7 11 '2leg5!? A novelty at the time. 11 .  .c5 12 d5! exd5 13 cxd5 h6 14 '2lxr7!

(D)

This is truly incredible, as is what follows. Notice White's slow development and his seri ous weakness along the h l -a8 diagonal. It's in spiring that such ideas are possible ! .. @xr7 15 O-O-O! i.d6 Safest, under the circumstances. 16 ctJh4 i.cS 17 l:tel '2la6 lS l:te6! Is the opening over yet? A lot has changed when the Queen's Indian Defence starts looking like the Najdorf Sicilian. Ironically, Topalov's whole conception from start to finish depends upon the bishop on fl. This is the 'problem piece' that wasn't able to get developed!

1S

 '2lb4 After 1 8. .. i.xe6? 19 dxe6+ 'it'g8 20 i.xa6, Black would still be under a ferocious attack. 19 i..xb4 cxb4 20 i.c4 b5! 21 i.xb5 i.e7? 22 '2lg6! '2lxd5 ( D) 23 l:txe7+?

QUEEN'S INDIAN DEFENCE 1 73

This turns out to be a serious mistake. Topa lov undoubtedly saw that 23 l:i.e5 ! i.b7 24 iVf5+ 'lt>g8 25 i.c4 was winning, but decided to keep it simple and safe. He must have missed Anand's 25th move. 23 . . lll xe7 24 i.c4+ @f6 25 lll xh8 id4! After the expected capture 25 ... ixh8?, 26 l:i.dl ! wins. 26 l:i.dl iVal + 27 'lt>d2 id4+ 28 @el ie5+ 29 ie2 ixe2+ 30 @xe2 lll f5 31 lll f7 After all that, Topalov eventually won this pawn-up endgame. The theory of the variation with 4 g3 i.a6 5 b3 i.b4+ is ever-expanding. We may soon find out if Black can effectively neutralize White's play in this manner or will have to suffer under a long-term disadvantage. Whether the Queen's Indian supplies a satisfactory defence to 3 lllf3 depends in part upon his solution to 4 g3. Petrosian System (4 a3)

1 d4 lll

f6 2 c4 e6 3 lll f3 b6 4 a3 (D)

At first you may think that this move is a ter rible waste of time. Obviously, White is trying to prevent ...i.b4, but is it worth a tempo? And what else does 4 a3 do? To begin with, prevent ing ... i.b4 is worth a lot more than it may seem. It's not just that the Nimzo-Indian (3 lll c3 i.b4) is such a bother to play against, but that Black has already committed himself to ...b6 (and thus ... i.b7 or ... i.a6). That is a set-up in which a knight on c3 is particularly useful. Specifically, a knight there not only supports e4 (as does a knight on d2 or queen on c2), but also the pawn advance d5 (a move that loses its support after llld2 or ic2). This is important because once Black has fianchettoed his queen's bishop, a white pawn on d5 can become particularly irri tating. In response to this potential threat, Black can of course play ...d5, but that accedes to a type of pawn-structure that Black may not pre fer once committed to ...b6. To understand this. let' s compare that formation with the Queen's Gambit Declined. The only major variation in which Black plays ...b6 is the Tartakower. In deed, if play from the diagram proceeded 4 ...d5 5 lll c3 i.e7 6 i.g5 O-O 7 e3 i.b7 (7 ...h6 is a po tential waste of tempo: 8 i.xf6!), Black would have a standard position of the Tartakower Vari ation in which the move a3 can justifiably be re garded as useless, or nearly so. But once Black has weakened his queenside squares, White has other options; e.g., 6 cxd5 ! exd5 (6 ... lll xd5 7 e4) 7 i.f4 O-O 8 e3 (D).

White has serious queenside pressure be cause of Black's weaknesses there (l:i.c 1 and ei ther ih3 or ia4 might prove useful). In fact, the move lll b5 becomes an immediate theme (e.g .. 8 ... i.f5 9 lll b5 llla6 10 ia4), because White's profligate 4 a3 actually prevents ... i.b4+ in re sponse ! 4 . i.b7 We'll follow this as the main line but it's quite possible that other moves are as good or better: a) 4 ... i.a6 is very popular. Black has done well in this line, and he retains a degree of flexi bility in his choice of piece placements. The main line goes 5 ic2 i.b7 ! (this is a hyper modem idea: first Black diverts the queen and

1 74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

then wastes a move to cover e4; but what's the point?) 6 lbc3 c5 ! (the queen no longer sup ports the move d5, so Black can break up the centre in this way) 7 e4! (taking over the largest share of the centre; 7 dxc5 would concede d4) 7 ... cxd4 8 lbxd4 (D). As in the Sicilian Defence, Black has a central majority and would love to achieve ...d5. For the moment, that move fails to cxd5 and i.b5+, so White has some time to strengthen his cen tre. The queen on c2 can either be a drawback (it sits on the open c-file) or an advantage (it al lows White's rooks to connect more quickly). Here Black has played 8 ... lbc6 and 8 ...d6 with reasonable success. A complicated alternative is 8 ... i.c5 9 lbb3 lbc6! (not only does Black de velop quickly but he also targets the only weak ness in White's position: the hole on d4) 10 i.g5 h6 1 1 i.h4 lbd4! 12 lbxd4 i.xd4 13 i.d3 (the white e-pawn needs protection) 13 ... Vib8 !? (or 13 ... .lte5; the dark squares are key) 14 .ltg3 i.e5

15 O-O-O O-O 16 'lt>bl d6 1 7 i.xe5 dxe5 (D).

There's that doubled e-pawn structure that we talk about periodically through the book. Whether the pawns are ultimately useful or a problem is as yet unclear, but notice that both d5 and d4 are covered so that White can't put a piece on either square, and of course d4 will serve as an outpost for Black's pieces. On the other hand, White has no targets for Black to attack and he has a potentially important queen side pawn-majority. Khenkin-Adams, Bundes liga 2002/3 continued 1 8 ie2 l:i.d8 19 ie3 (White could consider some kingside attack with, say, 19 g4 or 19 f3 and g4 next) 19. .. l:i.d4!

20 f3 i.a6!? 21 b3 ic7 22 @b2 l:i.ad8 23 lbe2

l:i.4d7 24 i.c2 ! b5 !? (Black's pieces are well placed for this, but he invites active counter play) 25 c5 ! b4 ! 26 axb4 l:i.b8. This complicated position is dynamically equal. b) 4 ...c5 (D). Now White's most ambitious move is 5 d5. Then: bl) It's instructive to see why 5 ...exd5 6 cxd5 d6 (6 ... g6 !?) 7 lbc3 g6?! isn't supposed to be good: 8 e4 i.g7 9 i.b5+ ! i.d7 1 0 i.e2 (or I 0 i.d3) 10. ..O-O I I O-O (D). Note that we've arrived at a Benoni in which Black has two extra moves ...b6 and ... i.d7 for White's one. Nevertheless, this trade-off fa vours White, who can handily play moves such as .ltf4 with tempo. Conversely, Black's plans are disrupted because he would like to play ei ther ... lba6-c7 (not possible here) or ...l:i.e8 and ... lbbd7, in which case he needs to move the d7- bishop. That points to the move l l ... i.g4, when 12 i.f4 i.xf3 13 i.xf3 ie7?! prepares ... lbbd7, a familiar plan from the Modem Benoni of

Q UEEN'S INDIAN DEFENCE 1 75

Chapter 9. Unfortunately, White can then play

14 e5 ! and, because of the insertion of ...b6, the

[diagram]

1 76 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

line is 6 ... il..e7 7 Via4+!? c6 (7 ... id7 chal lenges White to enter an apparently equal end game; for example, 8 ixd7+ lllbxd7 !? 9 lbb5 il..d8 10 cxd5 lbxd5 1 1 e4 lll5f6; so 8 Vic2 !? is often played) 8 il..xf6 il..xf6 9 cxd5 exd5 10 e3 O-O 1 1 il..e2 (D). Recognize this? In both structure and piece placement we have a QGD Tartakower De fence ! Play might develop along the same lines; for example, 1 1 . .. l:i.e8 12 O-O llld7 13 l:i.fd 1 lbf8 14 l:i.ac l llle6 15 ic2 or something similar, with equality. At least 4 a3 comes in handy here in order to prepare b4. More challenging is 10 g3 O-O 1 1 il..g2, putting pressure on d5; com pare the next note.

6. ..

[diagram]

What are the characteristics of this position? Black has the bishop-pair and White's f-pawns are doubled. Nevertheless, White light-squared bishop is better than its counterpart on b7, he has the g-file, and a well-timed knight jump to e5 can be useful. Black can try to gain space on the queenside ( ...b5 and ...a5 or ... lbb6, for ex ample) or use piece-play on the kingside ( ... l:i.e8, ... lllf8-g6). In the meantime, White might shift his pieces to the kingside ('lt>h l , l:i.gl , ic2, e3, lbe2-g3), especially since any attempt to play b4 can be weakening. But 6 ... lbxd5 (D) is the most important con tinuation: Apart from the main lines with 4 g3, this is probably the most heavily analysed position from the Queen's Indian Defence. By 'surren dering the centre' but keeping the long diagonal open for his bishop, Black announces his policy of allowing White to form a strong centre and then sniping at it from the wings. The resulting positions resemble the Griinfeld Defence in spirit. Black's bishop will usually be on e7 in stead of g7, but Black's quest for the queenside light squares gives the two openings a similar flavour.

Q UEEN'S IND/AN DEFENCE

1 77 At this juncture White normally plays: A: 7 e3 or B: 7 ic2. We' ll look at games that express typical ideas behind both moves, by no means attempt ing to recreate the current theoretical standing of the variation. A complex alternative is 7 i.d2, which intends a recapture with the bishop after ... lllxc3; this idea normally appears after 7 ic2. There are also a number of variations with 7 ia4+ and/or g5 that haven't produced spectacular results, probably because the move a3 isn't so useful in that case.

A}

7 e3 (D)

[diagram]

16 O-O ic7

[diagram]

1 78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

White tries to exploit the absence of Black's bishop from the long diagonal. 1 1 .. .c5 (by no means forced) 12 dxc5 bxc5 1 3 i.c3 O-O 14 b4! (breaking up Black's pawn-structure) 14. .. l:i.c8

15 O-O cxb4 ( 1 5. ..

[diagram]

QUEEN'S IND/AN DEFENCE 1 79

i.cS ilc6 19 l:i.xaS i.bS 20 l:i.el l:i.ac8 21 b4 i.c4 Black has equalized. It's hard to believe that he can stand too badly in these lines, but the i.d2-b4 idea is intriguing. Let's return to Black's 7th move and see his alternative to a fianchetto. The ... i.e7 lines are especially important as similar positions may also arise from other move-orders. 7 . i.e7 8 i.bS+ c6 9 i.d3 (D) We have reached a position that has occurred frequently over the years. The basics are easy to understand: White wants to protect his centre and then shift towards the kingside or, some times, simply push the d-pawn down the board. Black tries to counterattack on the queenside, usually via the c-file. Eliminating the light squared bishops goes a long way towards pro tecting his king. We'll look at two games from this position. Epishin - Beliavsky USSR Ch (Leningrad) 1 990 9 . O-O 10 'iVc2 h6 11 e4 lllxc3 12 bxc3 cS 13

O-O (D)

13. ..

VicS!? This odd-looking move has the most immedi ate goals, threatening ... cxd4 and preparing to rid the board of White's dangerous bishop on d3. That would leave him with one less attacking piece and weak light squares on the queenside. After l 3 ... lllc6, a seemingly more logical move, 1 4 i.b2 l:i.c8 1 5 'iVe2 cxd4 1 6 cxd4 gives White the better of it with his central advan tage. 14 'iVe2 Perhaps 1 4 'iVa2 ! ? could be tried in order to get a passed pawn after 1 4. .. ila6!? 1 5 i.xa6 'iVxa6 1 6 d5. These are more or less typical ideas of the line 4 a3 ilb7 5 lll c3 d5 6 cxd5 tllxd5. Inter estingly, this conflict between White's good centre and Black's restraint of it in combination with counterplay on the queenside light squares is extremely similar to both the Semi-Tarrasch (see page 46) and the Griinfeld Defence.

14.  .

[diagram]

180 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

B)

7 'iVc2 (D) A popular move, trying to get e4 in without further ado. The queen will also exert pressure down the c-file in cases where Black doesn't exchange on c3. 7 ... lbxc3 An illustrative excerpt is 7 ... i.e7! ? 8 i.d2!? (8 e4 lbxc3 9 bxc3 transposes to the main line) 8 ...O-O 9 e4 lbxc3 1 0 i.xc3 (this time White's bishop assumes an active role and Black must be ready for the move d5, creating a passed pawn) 10 ... lbd7 1 1 l:i.dl 'iVc8 ! (aiming for ...c5 and in some cases ... i.a6, to eliminate White' s best bishop) 12 i.d3 l:i.d8 13 O-O c5 (D).

14 d5 ! (a Griinfeld-like passed pawn) 14 ...

c4! 1 5 i.e2 exd5 16 exd5 i.f6 and the play was almost equal in the game Miles-Polugaevsky, Biel 1990, since the d-pawn won't get any fur ther even if White advances it to d6. 8 bxc3 Naturally 8 'iVxc3 is sometimes played, when apart from 8 ...h6, Black has the sequence 8 ... lbd7, and if9 i.g5, 9 ... i.e7 ! 10 i.xe7 @xe7. In spite of the black king's odd placement, White isn't able to make any progress, and moves like ... l:i.c8 and ...c5 will follow, or in some circumstances ... lbf6, ... 'iVd6 and ... c5. Such a line reflects a master's pragmatism: in stead of worrying about the principle of king safety in the abstract, he makes a real-world as sessment of White's actual attacking chances. 8 . .  i.e7 9 e4 O-O 10 i.d3 c5 (D)

QUEEN'S IND/AN DEFENCE 181

11 O-O

You may recognize that this is the main line after 7 e3, with the sole exception of the pawn on h6. This illustrates the consistency of ideas that follows logically from a given pawn-structure.

11...'iVcS!

l l . . .cxd4 12 cxd4 lll c6 isn't necessarily bad, but doesn't actually infiltrate on the queenside and thus risks White building up his attack rela tively unperturbed. Here's a nice example: 13 i.b2 l:i.c8 14 'iVe2 (D) .

14. ..

[diagram]

182 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Here White had the nice option 23 ia2 ! ic4 24 ixc4 l:i.xc4 25 l:i.xd5 l:i.xf4 26 l:i.xd7.

23. ..

l:!.f8 24 if3 lll c5 25 h6! (D) 25 . g5!?

25. ..

[diagram]

3S ...

l:i.f7.

[diagram]

21...b5!? 22 lllg5 g6

Not 22 ... ilxg5 23 i.xg5 l:i.xd4? 24 ixd4! l:i.xd4 25 l:i.cS. This theme persists for many moves.

23 h5 h6!

[diagram]

25 f4 tllc4

[diagram]

7 King's Indian Defence

Before we even begin, I should explain that the King's Indian Defence (a.k.a. 'KID') is actu ally a set of moves that has no specific starting point. That is to say, Black plays 1 . . .tll f6, 2 ... g6, 3 ... .lll. g7, ...d6 and almost always ... O-O (nor mally in that order), versus almost any first move by White other than l e4. But we shall concern ourselves with the King's Indian De fence in its original meaning, that is, versus d4. The best way to introduce ourselves to the KID is to take a stroll through the first few moves. 1 d4

1 c4 lll

f6 can transpose into a 1 d4 version of the King's Indian Defence should White play d4 on any of the next several moves. The same applies to 1 lll f3; for example, 1 .. .tll f6 2 d4 g6, etc.

1...tllf6 (D)

2 c4 2 lll f3 g6 is another route that often trans poses to c4 lines. Of course that order might lead to independent systems; for example, 3 .Ill. gs, 3 .lli. f4, and a number of lesser options that are not covered in this book. A very brief word on the first two, since I'll have a bishop-devel opment theme over the next few moves. a) 3 .Ill. gs is an offshoot of the Torre Attack. Black can play any number of systems and any number of move-orders, but in deference to my lectures about ...cS in these contexts, I'll point out that after 3 ... .lll. g7 4 tll bd2 (versus . . . lbe4 ) 4 ...c S i s a legitimate choice, with one important line proceeding S .lll. xf6 .lll. xf6 6 lll e4 xd4 (or 6 ... 'i\b6 7 lllxf6+ \Rxf6) 7 tllxd4 cxd4 8 'ikxd4 O-O 9 O-O-O tllc6 (9 ... \WaS 10 tllc3 tllc6 is also possible) 1 0 \Rd2, and now 10 ... dS ! 1 1 'ikxd5 \Rc7 is an effective sacrifice, intending .. . e6 and play along the c- and d-files. b) 3 .lli. f4 is the London System, a good choice to avoid theory but perhaps not a good one to learn from. Again ...cS is to be consid- ered at most points; e.g., 3 ...cS is theoretically equal and 3 ... .lll. g7 4 e3 d6 S h3 (to have a place to hide after ... tllhS) S ...O-O 6 .lll. e2 cS can be played, among others. In both cases Black has an eye on the move ... \Rb6. This is relevant to points that I make below. 2 ... g6 3 lll c3 This time 3 lll f3 .lll. g7 4 g3 can be of inde pendent significance and will generally trans pose to the Fianchetto System, which I shall not be covering in this book. 3 ... .lll. g7 (D) This position may be considered the begin ning point for the King's Indian Defence. a sto ried opening associated with dynamic slugfests of the highest order. It was championed by

184 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 185

That's quite a superficial account of play in the King's Indian, and such positions don't even arise in many variations. But the 'threat' of their occurrence underlies a lot of what both sides actually do in terms of strategy. The other positional factors that interact with this opening are too numerous to mention, so I'll leave that to analysis and examples in specific variations. My emphasis will be on the major systems that begin 1 d4 tt'Bf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt'Bc3 i.g7 4 e4 d6. They constitute the large bulk of master prac tice, and along with g3 systems they account for well over 90% of grandmaster games. Be cause the main lines are so instructive, I'll only briefly examine some instructive alternatives in what follows. Selected Alternatives to 4 e4

1 d4 tt'Bf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt'Bc3 i.g7 (D)

There are of course many alternatives to 4 e4, but none of them except the g3 variations are very popular. Therefore I'll point out only a few options with ideas that you might want to be aware of. I'll try to tie this section together a bit by emphasizing the move i.g5 in many con texts. 4 tt'Bf3 This flexible development of the king's knight introduces most serious deviation from main lines. Almost any set-up following from 4 e3 can be met by ...d6, ... O-O and ...e5 (sup ported by a piece if necessary). 4 i.f4 is a legiti mate move and will usually transpose into some other variation after 4 ...d.6. Both sides should be aware that Black's attempts to exchange such a bishop by means of ... tt'Bh5 (for example ) are an important consideration. Compare lines below. Our main theme is the development of the queen's bishop to g5 at various stages. Here 4 i.g5 can be met by 4 ...c5 (4 ...h6 5 .lth4 d6 is normal and fine, of course; ...c5 may follow soon anyway), and if 5 d5, 5 ...h6 6 i.h4 'ika5 7 iVd2 g5 8 i.g3 tt'Bh5 (D) followed ... tt'Bxg3 with equality. What should be noted is that, unsupported by a knight on f3, the move 9 i.e5 cannot be played. That is the move that White should look for if Black has not yet played ...d6 (see the next note). In this kind of position, which is ubiquitous in the King's Indian and Benoni, hundreds of top-level games have confirmed that Black's two bishops at least compensate for his slightly weakened pawn-structure. Regarding the latter. we can apply the old saying: weaknesses aren't weak unless you can exploit them. 4 ...d6 Once White is committed to 4 tt'Bf3, castling by Black seems to have lost the disadvantages that it has in the order 4 e4 O-O. That doesn't mean that it's a better move than 4 ...d6, but it al lows Black a few new options; for example. 4 ...O-O 5 i.g5 c5 (the move ...c5 is thematic if the c I -bishop strays to the kingside; see below )

[diagram]
tt'Bh5 9 i.e5 ! , and if 9 .. .f6?, 10 i.xb8 ! .l:Ix b8 1 1 d6!, when things are getting awkward for Black)

8 e4 !? (not the only move) 8 ...

g5 9 i.g3 tt'Bh5 with equality. 5 i.g5

186 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is known as the Smyslov System, which is very solid and a good choice for White if he doesn't fancy too complicated a position. He opts for quick development and well-placed pieces without trying to capture too much of the centre. For his part, Black doesn't feel very threatened and can play to gain some space on either wing. He also hopes to chase down White's dark-squared bishop as above. As for 5 .lli. f4, Farago-Bilek, Budapest 1965 saw a creative solution to 5 ... O-O 6 h3, a rather irritating move which is frequently played to preserve the f4-bishop and avoid having it chased down as in the examples that we keep seeing. The game went 6 ...c5 (6 ... lll h5 7 .lli. h2 is the point) 7 e3 \Ra5 ! 8 \Rd2 cxd4 9 exd4 e5 ! ( D). 10 .lll. e3 (not 10 dxe5? dxe5 1 1 .lll. xe5, when l l ...Ii.e8 wins material, and l 1 . . .tllc6 is also very strong) 10. ..tllc6 1 1 d5 lll e7 12 .lli. d3 tlle8 (12 ... tllf5 13 .lll. g5 h6) 13 O-O f5 with equality. This even looks like a King's Indian! We now return to 5 .lll. g5 (D):

5 .. h6 Black prepares yet another combination of chasing the knight and . . .c5. After 5 ...O-O 6 e3, the obvious 6 ... tll bd7, to prepare ... e5, can be met by the sophisticated and well-tested move 7 \Rc2! ; e.g., 7 ...e5?! (7 ...c6 8 .lll. e2 e5 9 O-O \Re7 10 b4! is White's idea) 8 .l:!.dl !, threatening dxe5, when 8 ...h6 9 .lll. h4 .l:!.e8 1 0 .lll. e2 leaves Black cramped. Instead of this, 6 ...c5 7 .lll. e2 .lli. f5 intending ... tlle4 is often recommended, as Smyslov himself played when Black versus Pachman. That is hardly the most incisive line, however, and shouldn't put anyone off playing 5 .lll. g5. 6 .lll. h4 g5 7 i.g3 lll h5 Once again both sides have to decide where to put their pieces. The following is a logical way to continue:

8 e3 c5 9 d5 (D)

Not the only move, but an instructive one. 9 . . . \Ra5 10 \Rd2 tlld7 11 .lll. e2 lll xg3 12 hxg3 tll f6 With equality. The nice thing about this position for Black is that he still has the option to castle queenside if he wants to. Of course, this is hardly all that there is to the Smyslov System. The Orthodox 4 e4

1 d4 tll

f6 2 c4 g6 3 tllc3 .lll. g7 4 e4 As mentioned above, this move accounts for the bulk of games in the King's Indian Defence. White's intentions are not subtle: he wants to play with a central space advantage so as to limit Black's development and make more room

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 187

for his own pieces. The conflict between this wish and the vulnerability of his centre to Black's attacks underlies the players' strategies for most of the opening phase and sometimes well beyond.

4. ..d6 (D)

This is almost universally played after 4 e4. Black's intent is to restrain eS and stake out some claim to the centre. I shall only remark upon 4 ... O-O in the introductory note to the Four Pawns Attack below, in the context of that vari ation. Although I won't entirely neglect other vari ations, I shall devote most of this chapter to the Four Pawns Attack (S f4), and the Classical Variation (S lllf3), with an emphasis on the lat ter. The King's Indian is so vast that one could devote this book to its many fascinating varia tions, but in line with the philosophy that un derstanding can only be gained by attending to details, I have decided to specialize in those two variations. The examination of the Four Pawns continues my policy of taking the most obvious attempt at refutation of an opening in order to gain some insight into its character. To do this we might ask which moves would probably be proposed by the average player if he were see ing an opening for the first time, especially if he'd heard that the opening wasn't supposed to be any good. That is, which variation would he instinctively use to demonstrate that the open ing was disadvantageous? For the King's In dian Defence, the Four Pawns Variation seems the obvious choice in that respect, because it at tempts to punish Black immediately for not oc cupying the centre. The Classical Variation of the King's Indian Defence is one of the most subtle and complex variations in chess, but at the same time it has some broadly applicable ideas that are quite straightforward, especially about pawn-struc tures and their treatment. Thus the inexperi enced player can gain insights that will help him begin to play the KID, and there will be material that should help players of any level to refine their understanding. In addition to these two systems, I have in cluded sections on the Averbakh Variation (S .lll. e2 O-O 6 .lll. gS) and the Samisch Variation (S f3). They feature a few unique pawn-structures and in particular emphasize the formations with the move ...cS that don't appear in the Classical Variation. First, to complete the discussion that we've had about .Ill. gs lines, I'll focus on the move S .Ill. gs and tie it in with the earlier examples we looked at, both practically and philosophically. After S .lll. gS, Black can castle, but one might ar gue that S ...O-O isn't optimal because it justifies White's play after 6 \Rd2, preventing ...h6 and preparing attack in many lines. Of course that's hardly disastrous, but S .. .h6 is the more ambi tious choice: 6 .lll. h4 (if instead 6 i.e3, 6 ... tll g4 is a good response, and 6 .lli. f4 can be met effi ciently by 6 ... tllc6 7 dS eS !); and now 6 ... cS !

We've now seen this move several times; in the King's Indian and most 1 d4 openings, an early move of White's queen's bishop to f4 or gS indicates that Black should strongly con sider ...cS as his reply (immediately or within

188 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

1966. White's resignation is due to 24 .i.g3

lllf6. A classic victory by Geller, one of the great King's Indian players. Four Pawns Attack To discuss this variation, let's return to the fourth move:

1 d4 lll

f6 2 c4 g6 3 lll c3 .lll. g7 4 e4 d6 4 ...O-O (D) has advantages in some lines, es pecially if Black wants to play ...cS without a preliminary ...d6; Fischer played it at least once. In doing so, we run into a couple of thought provoking issues. Surprisingly, Black needn't be too afraid of S eS tll e8 6 f4 d6 because White will have diffi culty maintaining his centre in the face of ...cS; for example, 7 lll f3 cS 8 d5 (8 dxcS tll c6 with tremendous compensation if White tries to hang onto his pawn by multiple exchanges on d6; see how the bishop on g7 comes to life) 8 ... .lll. g4 9 .lll. e2 (9 \Re2 .i.xf3) 9 ... .lll. xf3 10 .lll. xf3 dxeS 1 1

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 189

fxeS tlld7 ! . These lines are well worth playing over if you're fairly new to this opening or the concept of how to undermine a large centre. On the other hand, a conventional move such as S .i.gS, which we just saw is not dangerous if ...d6 has already been played, can be trickier af ter S ...d6 6 \Rd2 (now there's no ...h6/ ...gS se quence); or S ...h6 6 .lll. e3 ! and Black lacks the normal harassing move ... tllg4 while he has weakened his kingside. After S ...cS, 6 dS \Was 7 \Rd2 h6 8 .i.xh6! .i.xh6 9 \Rxh6 tllxe4 1 0 .l:Ic l leaves Black's kingside vulnerable to h4-hS, lll f3-gS, etc. White could also play 6 dxcS \Ra5 7 \Rd2 to greater effect, because an early tlld5 can be effective. This incomplete discussion of 4 ...O-O isn't directly important (after all, hardly anyone plays the move!), but we can begin to get a feel for typical King's Indian considerations.

5 f4 (D)

The Four Pawns Attack, White's most ambi tious approach and probably the first one that would occur to a player who has never seen the King' s Indian, but knows the importance of central control and occupation by pawns. In the 1 920s when the King's Indian became more than a curiosity, the Four Pawns was indeed used by the likes of Alekhine, Bogoljubow. among other leading players. The dynamic possibilities and chances for a quick knockout were surely considerations in their reaction. Most textbooks (and this one) will show some examples of the triumph of the centre in other openings; e.g., something along the lines of I e4 eS 2 lll f3 tllc6 3 .lll. c4 .Ill. cs 4 c3 tllf6 5 d4 exd4 6 cxd4 .lll. b6? 7 dS tlle7 8 eS and Black's pieces are driven into passivity as a result of the unopposed onslaught by White's centre pawns. How much better it should be to play moves like eS and dS, when they are protected by pawns on either side! Furthermore, Black is supposed to stake a claim in the centre before he is overrun, right? Of course, it's not so easy for White; advantages of this nature always have their accompanying disadvantages. In the case of the Four Pawns KID, we see that the pawns on c4 and f4 are also restricting the scope of White's bishops on fl and c l . Perhaps this isn't a dominant concern because once the pawns advance, at least one is normally ex changed. For example, in the main lines Black will trade off his e-pawn for White's c-pawn or e-pawn. Still, the cost in time to erect such a centre has to be considered. Furthermore, the advance of pawns in any chess opening leaves open the risk that they might become weak. In the Four Pawns KID. we see that the squares e4 and d4 are no longer able to receive the support of the pawn moves c3 and f3, so they are more exposed to attack: this is particularly true of d4, since it is indi rectly attacked by Black's bishop on g7 and can be disturbed by the pawn moves ...c5 and ...e5. Furthermore, the squares e3 and d3 may be considered 'interior weaknesses', since they are also without support. In most situations. inte rior weaknesses on the third rank are difficult to exploit, being within the defensive range of so many pieces. But that can be a different matter if the centre in front of them is compromised. If and when White's pawns advance further to d5 and/or e5 (which is the plan, after all), e4 and d4 become interior weaknesses as well. Then

190 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

those front pawns are within range of Black' s forces, which are waiting on the second and third ranks for just such an opportunity to tear into the ill-protected foot soldiers. That worst case scenario for White would result from his over-enthusiasm. It turns out that White should usually marshal his pieces to support the centre pawns and wait for the right opportunity to press forward. Or in some cases he will count upon them as cramping influences and forego a gen eral advance indefinitely. These methods pro vide the rationale for White' s entire enterprise. 5 ... O-O 6 lll f3 (

D)

[diagram]

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 191

knight and sometimes threatening to exchange it. In conjunction with a combination of moves like ...c5, ... tllc6 and/or ...e5 this is certainly at tractive. For no obvious or even logical rea sons, the specifics of the position interfere. A good line for White is 7 .lll. e3 (often the bishop on this square is vulnerable to ... tll g4, but not this time) 7 ... tllfd7 ! ? (the thematic move in such positions, supporting ...e5 or ...c5 and un masking the bishop; instead, 7 ... .lll. xf3 8 \Rxf3 e5 9 fxe5 dxe5 1 0 d5 favours White, who will play O-O-O; in this type of position, check to see if White has a bishop on e3 fighting for c5) 8 h3 ! ? (White loses a tempo in order to set up the idea that follows; 8 .lll. e2 is also advantageous since d4 is well covered) 8 ... i.xf3 9 \Rxf3 e5 (9 ... c5 ! ? 10 d5 .lll. xc3+! 1 1 bxc3 \Ra5 has posi tional points in its favour, but White still has his advantage on both wings with his space and bishop-pair after simply 12 .lli. d2, .lll. e2 and O-O; also, 9 ... tllc6 falls short due to 10 e5 !) 10 dxe5 ! ( 1 0 fxe5? runs into the surprise 10. ..c5 ! - a tac tic to remember, since it applies to other posi tions) 10 ...dxe5 1 1 f5 (D). In spite of his command of d4, Black lacks sufficient compensation for White's bishop-pair and the eventual attack by playing g4. This is not at all obvious, so let's go a few moves further and look at two moves: a) 1 1 ...tll c6 12 O-O-O lll d4 13 \Rf2 c6 (13. ..c5

14 g4 \Ra5 15 @bl and White simply marches

forward with moves such as g5 and h4-h5 in some order, with tlld5 another potential factor)

14 g4 \Ra5 1 5 g5. The opening is basically over,

with White well on top with the ideas h4-h5 and/or f6, Glek-Damljanovic, Belgrade (GMA) 1988.

b) 1 1 ....lli. h6! ? 1 2 O-O-O! ( 1 2 .lll. xh6 \Rh4+) 1 2. .. .lll. xe3+ 1 3 \Rxe3 (D). We have reached one of those fairly common cases in which exchanging a 'bad' fianchettoed bishop (in this case on g7) for the opponent's very good one (on e3) can be disadvantageous due to the weaknesses left unprotected; for ex ample, 1 3. .. tll c6 14 g4 tlld4 and Black has a su perb knight versus a very bad bishop and yet after 1 5 h4 he is in serious trouble in the face of g5 and h5; for example, 15 ...c6 16 tlle2 (a sim ple move to get rid of Black's best piece; also good is 16 i.d3 \Re7 17 g5) 16 ... tll xe2+ ( l 6 ...c5 17 lll c3!) 17 .lll. xe2 \Re7 (17. ..\Rb6 1 8 \Rh6; Black could use a bishop on g7 !) 1 8 h5 Ii:.ad8 ( 1 8. ..g5 19 .l:Ixd7 !) 19 hxg6 fxg6 20 .l:Ih6! \Rg7 2 1 c5 ! tllxc5 22 i.c4+ @h8 23 .l:Idh l .l:Id4 24 \Re2 .l:Ixe4 25 fxg6! and wins. Central Break

6. . .

c5 (D)

192 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is Black's traditional main line. He at tacks the centre at its weakest point on d4; but at the same time wants to unleash the power of the bishop on g7. 7 d5 There are two frequently-used ways to devi ate from this natural move: a) White might want to take the King's In dian player out of his normal channels by 7 i.e2 cxd4 8 l2'lxd4 (D).

White aims for a Maroczy Bind structure (characterized by c4 and e4). This is a safe choice, but compared to the Sicilian Defence version in Volume 1, the move f4 instead of f3 weakens e4 and makes it easier for Black to find counterplay; for example, 8 ... lba6! (an ambi tious move that refuses to simplify; Black has a few cards up his sleeve - the immediate ideas are ... lbcS and ... \Rb6) 9 .lll. e3 lbcS 10 .lli. f3 l2'lfd7 ( 10. .. i.h6 is also considered equal) 1 1 O-O (D ). 1 1 ...eS ! 12 lbdbS exf4 ! 13 i.xf4 lbeS 14 .lll. e2 (14 lbxd6 l2'led3 l S lbxc8 \Rd4+ 16 @h l .l:Iaxc8; 14 \Rxd6 l2'lcd3) 14 ... .lll. e6 l S b3 a6 16 l2'ld4 lbc6 ! 1 7 l2'lxc6 ( 17 i.e3 .Ill. es ! ; again eS comes in handy) 17 ...bxc6 1 8 .l:Icl \WaS 19 i.d2 \Rb6 20 i.e3 .l:Iad8 !? 2 1 @hl \Rb8 22 .lli. f3 .Ill. es, Bisguier-J.Watson, Minneapolis 1982. White' s knight i s restricted on c 3 and because of e S and the e-file Black had some advantage. These dark-square themes are ubiquitous in the KID. The alternative 8 ... lbc6 (D) is of course play able but gives few positive prospects for Black. 9 .lll. e3 lbxd4 10 .lli. xd4 eS 1 1 fxeS dxeS 12 .lll. cS l:te8 1 3 \Rxd8 l'.Bxd8 14 O-O .l:Id2 l S .l:Iad l .l:Ixdl 16 :i.xdl .lll. e6 1 7 h3 .lli. f8 with equality, Tarasov-Geller, USSR Ch (Moscow) 196 1 . b) 7 dxcS got a short burst o f attention from some top players but doesn't have much punch: 7 ...\WaS ! 8 .lli. d3 (to protect the e-pawn; instead, 8 cxd6 lbxe4 9 dxe7 .lll. xc3+ 10 bxc3 Ii:.e8 is ter rible for White: it's not just the doubled pawns but his weaknesses on d3, e3 and e4) 8 ... \WxcS 9 \Re2 (to kick the queen out by .lll. e3 and be able to castle; this is a little like the Austrian Attack

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 193

in the Pirc Defence from Volume 1 ) 9 ... i.g4 10 i.e3 'i!Ya5 1 1 O-O tbc6 (D ). Both sides are fighting for d4: a) 12 a3 ctJd7 1 3 b4 'i!Yd8 ( 1 3. ..'i!Yh5 makes sense because now that White's c-pawn is a target and the g7-bishop is unleashed, Black needn't fear any simplification) 14 l:.ac l a5 ! 1 5 b5?! ( 1 5 'i!Yb2) 1 5. .. ctJd4; here Black owns c5 and the c-file versus White's weak c4-pawn, Dlugy-Schmaltz, Internet 1999. b) 12 l:.ac l ctJd7 ! 13 'i!Yf2 (D). 13 ... i.xf3 14 gxf3 ctJc5 15 i.bl lba4 ! (a move that's been emulated more than once; it eliminates White's most annoying idea, i.e. ctJd5; Black's position is without weaknesses, so even if White has a nominal advantage be cause of his space advantage, the practical chances are equal) 1 6 lbxa4 'i!Yxa4 1 7 b3 'i!Ya3 1 8 c5 dxc5 19 i.xc5 'i!Yxc5 ! 20 l:.xc5 i.d4 21 l:.dl i.xf2+ 22 'it>xf2 l:.fd8 23 l:.cd5 e6 with equality, Topalov-Kasparov, Linares 1994.

7. . .e6 (D)

Black has to strike back at White's centre. 8 i.e2 Periodically someone tries to open up the d file by 8 dxe6, but 8 .. .fxe6 covers d5, prevent ing White from landing a knight on that square. In the meantime Black has an outpost on d4. one that masks his potentially weak pawn on d6. A famous example went 9 i.d3 tbc6 10 O-O a6 (or 10. .. lbd4, as Kasparov once played) 1 1 a4 ( ...b5 would greatly benefit Black's pieces. so White stops it) l l ...b6 1 2 lbg5 (D). 12 ... l:.a7 ! (an example of second-rank de fence, and preparation for a counterattack) 13 l:.a3 l:.e7 ! 14 i.bl ctJd4 1 5 i.e3 i.b7 16 'i!Ye i e5

17 f5 (White doesn't want to allow ...exf4, but

1 7 fxe5 l:.xe5 ! also establishes an outpost on an open file) 17. ..h6 1 8 ctJh3 ( 1 8 fxg6 hxg5 19 i.xg5 'i!Ye8 ! recovers the pawn with dividends) 1 8. .. gxf5 19 exf5 'i!Ye8 20 'i!Yh4 e4! 21 'i!Yg3 (Black's opening has been a total success and

MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

his second-rank strategy comes in handy after 21 i.xh6 i.xh6 22 'i!Yxh6 l:i.g7, threatening ...e3 and starting a huge attack) 2 1 . . .ctJh5 22 'i!Yg4 'it>h8 23 ctJf4 ctJxf4 24 l:i.xf4 i.e5 25 l:i.f2 ctJf3+! 26 'it>hl ctJxh2 27 'i!Yh4 h5 ! (threatening ...lbg4; the rest is easy to understand) 28 f6 l:i.h7 29 i.xe4 i.xe4 30 lbxe4 tbg4 3 1 l:i.f5 i.xb2 32 lbxd6 'ii g6 33 l:i.b3 i.xf6 34 i.g5 i.g7 35 l:i.xf8+ i.xf8 36 i.f4 l:i.d7 37 l:i.xb6 i.xd6 38 i.xd6 l:i.xd6 39 l:i.b8+ (or 39 l:i.xd6 'iVb I +) 39 ... 'it>g7 40 l:i.b7+ 'it>h6 4 1 'ii e l l:i.e6 42 'i!Yd2+ 'ii g5. Black won quickly in Hjartarson-Larsen, Reykjavik 1986.

8. ..

exd5 (D) 9 cxd5 a) 9 e5?! is still being played and has been analysed for many years. In most examples it is a classic case of overextended pawns. The easi est road to some advantage is 9 ... lbe4 10 cxd5 (10 ctJxd5 might be the best way to bail out, al though 10 .. . lbc6 1 1 i.d3 f5 12 exf6 ctJxf6 fa vours Black) 10. .. ctJxc3 1 1 bxc3 ctJd7 ! (D). Remarkably, White is already much worse. For example, 1 2 O-O ( 1 2 e6 is weak after either 12 . . . i.xc3+ 1 3 i.d2 i.xd2+ 14 'i!Yxd2 fxe6 1 5 dxe6 ctJb6 or 12. . . fxe6 1 3 dxe6 ctJb6 and Black corrals the d-pawn; for example, 14 O-O i.xe6 1 5 lbg5 i.d5 1 6 l:i.bl i.xc3 1 7 'it>hl i.d4, Fyllingen-Djurhuus, Norwegian Ch (Rorns) 2002) 12 .. .dxe5 ( D) and now: al) 13 'it>hl e4! (this is a key move even when the pawn can be taken ! Here Black opens up the h8-al diagonal without losing a pawn) 14 lbg5 ctJf6 15 i.c4 h6 16 ctJh3 i.f5, Ruhr berg-Kopp, Hessen 1992. a2) 13 fxe5 lbxe5 14 i.e3 ctJxf3+ 15 i.xf3 iVd6 1 6 'i!Yd2 i.e5 17 h3 b6 1 8 i.h6 l:i.e8 19 l:i.ael i.a6 20 i.e2 i.xe2 21 l:i.xe2 c4! (isolating White's d-pawn) 22 l:i.ef2 l:i.e7 23 'it>hl l:i.ae8 24 i.g5 l:i.d7 25 l:i.e2 'i!Yxd5 ! 26 'i!Ye3 l:i.e6 and Black is clearly better, Li Zunian-Gheorghiu, Dubai OL 1986. b) 9 exd5 is also instructive. One good re sponse is 9 ... i.f5 ! (this stops White's only real threat: activation of his c l -bishop and fl-rook by the advance f5) 10 O-O l:i.e8 (10. . . lba6 1 1 i.d3 'i!Yd7 is the same strategy) 1 1 i.d3 (D). This is White's idea. He wants to exchange bishops on d3, then advance his pawn to f5, bring his dark-squared bishop onto an active square, and attack. Now: bl) l l ...ctJa6 12 i.xf5 gxf5 gives us a posi tion of a type that arises in other openings. Ba sically a knight on e4 will block off serious threats to the f-pawn, and meanwhile Black gets the g-file. b2) l l ... 'i!Yd7 (Black takes a stand on f5; un til White breaks down that square, his pieces

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 195

will be cramped and his interior weaknesses on e3 and d3 will come into play) 12 h3 lba6 (now the idea is ... ctJc7 and ...b5; notice how ... 'ii d7 helps in that respect as well) 13 a3 ( 13 g4 i.xd3 14 'i!Yxd3 ctJb4 1 5 'ii d l h5 ! 16 g5 lbe4! 17 lbxe4 l:.xe4 and White's king is exposed; 13 i.xf5 gxf5 ! prepares ... tbe4 with total control along the e-file) 1 3. . . ctJc7 14 'ii c2 (14 g4 allows a promising piece sacrifice by 14. .. i.xg4, which will generally give Black a perpetual check at worst; and Black can also play for queenside files by 14 ... i.xd3 1 5 'ii xd3 b5 ! 1 6 cxb5 l:.eb8 1 7 a4 a6 1 8 bxa6 lbxa6; Black has excellent play on both wings) 14 ...b5 ! 15 cxb5 ctJfxd5 16 lbxd5 ctJxd5 ( D ). 17 i.xf5 gxf5 ! (that e4 outpost again ! Also, compare the remaining bishops) 1 8 l:.b 1 l:.e4 19 l:.dl lbb6 20 b4 'ii xb5 21 l:.xd6 c4 22 'ii f2 c3 23 'ilY g3 'ii e2 24 lbe5 c2 0- 1 Peng Zhaoqin J.Polgar, Novi Sad (women) OL 1990. We now return to the position after 9 cxd5

(D):

From the position after 9 cxd5, I'll present a short overview of the daring 9 ... ctJbd7 and then look at two main moves, 9 ... l:.e8 and 9 ... i.g4, citing games with a selection of the most essen tial treatments and tactical motifs of the Four Pawns. Several of these also apply to other openings. The main alternative 9 .. .b5 ! ? ex presses a different philosophy, trying to divert White from protection of his centre. The first threat is ... b4, which limits White's options. If White plays the obvious move 10 i.xb5?!, Black has a tactic that you simply have to know if you're playing the King's Indian or Benoni with either colour: 10 ... lbxe4! (D). 1 1 lbxe4 'ii a5+ with the idea 12 lbc3 (12 'it>f2 'ii xb5 13 lbxd6 wins a pawn but misplaces White's king and weakens his light squares) 1 2. . . i.xc3+ 13 bxc3 'ii xb5. White has trouble on the light squares, his c l-bishop is restricted, and he can't even castle. Having said all that, the drawback to 9 ...b5 is

10 e5 ! dxe5 1 1 fxe5 lbg4 12 i.g5 (or 12 i.xb5

196 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

13 O-O c4+ 14 'it>hl , when after 14 ...

ctJf2+? 1 5 l:.xf2 'i!Yxf2, 1 6 ctJe4 or (even better) 16 lbxb5 gives White a great game. Central Provocation 9 .. tl'ibd7 Here Black attempts to restrain White's cen tre before attacking it. This is an underrated system that was held to be inferior due to 10 e5, but then Black can launch a dynamic counterat tack. Here's one example: Kopionkin - Ulko Russian Cht (Smolensk) 2000 10 es dxeS Even 10 ... lbe8 ! ? is an instructive position to play around with: is White's centre weak or strong? I think you'll find that Black is doing well. 1 1 fxeS lbg4 12 e6! ctJdeS 13 ltJgS!? fxe6!? A bold sacrifice. 14 i.xg4 lbxg4 lS 'i!Yxg4 exdS (D) Black has two mobile pawns for a piece, two bishops, and open lines against White's ex posed king. 16 'i!Yh4 After 1 6 'ii g3, 1 6. .. l:i.e8+ 17 'it>dl i.f5 looks extremely strong. 16 ... h6 17 ctJf3 gS 18 'ii a4?! (D) But it would be surrender to play 1 8 i.xg5 hxg5 19 'ii xg5 'ii xg5 20 tbxg5 i.g4! and Black has the piece back with a much superior game. 18 ... g4! 19 ctJd2 i.d7 20 'ii b3 c4! 21 'i!Yxb7 'i!Ye7+ 22 lbe2 Even worse is 22 'it>dl ?? i.a4+.

22. ..

1:!.aeS 23 'i!YxdS+ 'it>h8 24 'ii xc4 l:i.f4! Black wins the queen in one way or another; e.g., 25 'ii a6 l:i.a4 26 'ii d3 i.f5 27 'iib5 l:i.b4. Attack on the Centre 9 ... l:i.e8 (D) Black makes a direct, provocative move that attacks the pawn on e4. This brings to the fore the conflict between White's direct e5 and Black's attempts to destroy the central pawns before they strangle him. I'll use two exem plary games to investigate the nature of the re sulting play: Blokh - A. Feldman

USSR 1982

10 es dxeS 1 1 fxeS lbg4 12 i.gS

KING 's INDIAN DEFENCE 197

The slower-looking 1 2 O-O doesn't force Black's queen to move, but retains some attack. Here's a tricky example: 12 ... lbxe5 13 i.f4 ctJbd7 14 d6! (this is the move that opens up White's pieces: his important moves are ctJd5 and i.c4 or i.b5) 14 ... ctJxf3+ 1 5 i.xf3 ctJf8 ! (heading for the important d4-square) 16 'i!Yd2 ( 1 6 'i!Yb3) 1 6. .. lbe6 17 i.g3 'i!Yg5?? ( 1 7. .. ctJd4 ! looks solid enough, when 1 8 i.d5 keeps some initiative for the pawn) 18 d7! i.xd7 ( 1 8. .. 'i!Yxd2 19 dxe8'i!Y+) 1 9 'i!Yxd7 .l::i. ed8 20 'iVxb7 (Black is just a piece down) 20 ... h5 21 i.d5 i.xc3 22 'iVxf7+ 'it>h8 23 bxc3 1 -0 Valsser-Wohlers Armas, Cannes 2000. 12 ... 'i!Yb6 ( D) 13 'i!Yd2!? An exciting move invented by the Four Pawns theoretician Blokh. Instead, one of the main lines of theory goes 1 3 O-O tbxe5 14 lbxe5 i.xe5 1 5 i.c4 i.f5 ! 16 ctJb5 a6 ! 17 d6 ! axb5 1 8 i.xf7 + ! 'it>xf7 19 l:i.xf5+ ! gxf5 20 'iVh5+ @f8 21 i.h6+ i.g7 22 i.xg7+ 'it>xg7 23 'i!Yxe8 c4+ 24 'it>hl 'iVxd6 25 l:i.el 'i!Yf8 ! 26 'iVe5+ 'it>g8 27 'iVd5+ with a draw, Valsser-Bauer, France 1992. OK, this is all theory (and was at the time), but it shows the near-perfect balance between at tack and defence that typifies this main line of the 9 ... l:i.e8 Four Pawns Attack. 13 ... ctJd7 It's always a critical decision for Black whether to capture the important e-pawn. The danger is that it will take too much time from Black's development. For example, Blokh anal yses 1 3. .. tbxe5 14 O-O-O c4 1 5 lbxe5 i.xe5 16 i.xc4 'i!Yc5 17 i.b3 lba6 18 l:i.hfl i.g4 19 d6!

That essential move again ! This time it's based upon the line 19 ... .l::i. f8 20 l:i.de1 ! i.xd6 21 i.f6 and 'i!Yh6. 14 e6! A typically strong thrust when Black plays too passively. ... fxe6 15 dxe6 i.xc3? The best line may be 1 5. .. 'i!Yxe6 1 6 ctJd5 i.e5 1 7 ctJxe5 'i!Yxe5 1 8 i.f4 'i!Yd4 19 'iVxd4 cxd4 20 'it>d2 ! with some advantage, or here 20 lbc7 l:i.e4 21 O-O !?. 16 bxc3 'iVxe6 17 O-O! ctJdf6 Or 17. .. 'iVxe2 1 8 l:i.ael ! 'iVxd2 19 l:i.xe8+ 'it>f7 20 l:i.e7+ 'it>g8 2 1 lbxd2. 18 l:i.ael 'i!Yc6 19 h3! lbe4 20 'iVf4 h6 21 hxg4 hxg5 22 lbxg5 lbxg5 23 'i!Yxg5 'it>g7 24 i.c4 l:i.xel 25 l:i.xel 'iVf6 26 l:i.e7+ 1-0 Not surprisingly, Black could have defended better but this is a good illustration of what damage White's centre can do. Piskov - Parmentier Budapest 1989 10 ctJd2 (D) At first this move looks passive, merely pro tecting e4, but it has a very dynamic plan be hind it: White wants to get his knight to c4 and force e5 through. Why not just leave the knight on f3 and do the same? For one thing, advanc ing to e5 immediately gambits a pawn, as in the previous game. It also happens that a knight on c4 is ideally placed to attack the d-pawn (and the d6-square itself) if, for example, Black plays ...ctJfd7 at some point. Another very important advantage to lbd2-c4 is that a bishop can go to f3 to strengthen White's centre. Then if White

198 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

plays e5, this piece will defend the d-pawn against attack and can grow greatly in range. The formation with a bishop on f3 and knight on c4 also allows a rook on e 1 to provide direct support for a central thrust. Finally, it turns out that there is a dangerous sacrifice initiated by e5 and then playing ctJc4 with tempo. What should Black do? It's all a matter of timing. First of all, ctJc4 isn't a threat yet be cause the pawn on e4 hangs. Queenside activity is called for to activate his pieces before White can implement his plan. Specifically Black would like to play ...b5 and/or ...c4 to try to get a knight to squares like d3. 10 .. lba6 A good defensive example was 10 ...a6 1 1 a4 lbbd7 12 O-O c4!? 1 3 @hl (13 lbxc4 lbxe4 14 lbxe4 l:.xe4 is equal, and has the point 1 5 ctJxd6?? 'ii b6+) 1 3. . . lbc5 14 e5 dxe5 1 5 fxe5 l:.xe5 1 6 lbxc4 l:.xe2 ! (Black must not fear sac rificing the exchange in this line to maintain the initiative; otherwise White has moves like a5, d6, i.g5, etc.) 17 lbxe2 i.g4 1 8 ctJe5 tbce4, Glek-Tseshkovsky, Budapest 1989. Black has activity for the pawn and the d-pawn is weak but the position is still hard to assess.

11 O-O (D)

1 1. ..c4!? A characteristic idea. The other strategy is to play for ...b5; e.g., 1 l ...l:.b8 12 @hl lbc7 13 a4 a6 14 a5 i.d7 ! (this is a customary Benoni ma noeuvre) 1 5 i.f3 ctJb5 1 6 e5 dxe5 17 fxe5 l:.xe5 1 8 lbc4 l:.f5 ! ? (ingenious; Tai introduces an elaborate exchange sacrifice) 19 lbe3 l:.f4 ! 20 tbe2 .l::i. h4! 21 g3 l:.e4 22 i.xe4 lbxe4 23 ctJf4 ctJd4 24 @g2 "ilie7 25 l:.el h5 26 l:.a3 l:.e8 27 tbe2? i.h3+! 28 @xh3 tbg5+ 0- 1 Ufimtsev-Tal, USSR Spartakiad (Moscow) 1967. The finish would be 29 @g2 'ii e4+ 30 @f2 'ii f3+ 3 1 @gl ctJh3#. 12 @bl! lbc5 13 e5! Again White sacrifices a pawn so that ctJc4 can come with tempo. 13 ...dxe5 14 fxe5! 14 lbxc4 e4! 15 i.e3 ctJd3 16 i.xd3 exd3 17 'ii xd3 i.f5 1 8 'ii d2 l:.c8 19 lbe5 tbe4 20 'ii d4 ctJd6 gives Black wonderful compensation for a mere pawn, Meduna-Vokac, Olomouc 1995. Every black piece is on the right square. 14 .. ctJfd7?

14. ..

l:.xe5 ! could lead to consecutive ex change sacrifices: 15 lbxc4 l:.xe2 ! ? 16 'ii xe2 i.f5 17 l:.xf5 ! ? gxf5 1 8 i.g5 with complications.

15 e6 fxe6 16 lbxc4 lbe5 17 d6 (D)

This pawn is going to cause a lot of trouble, pinning down Black's pieces. 17 .. i.d7 18 i.f4 lbc6 19 "i/Bd2 "ilih4 20 g3 "ilih3 21 i.f3 ctJd4 22 i.g2 'ii h5 23 b4! lba4 24 g4! "ilixg4 25 lbe5!?

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 199

Or 25 lbxa4 i.xa4 26 tbe5. 25 ... i.xe5 26 i.xe5 lbxc3 27 i.xd4 lbe2?? 28 i.e5 'i!Yh5 29 'i!Ye3 1-0 The knight is trapped. Restraint of the Centre 9 ... i.g4 (D) Black attempts to prevent White's centre from advancing by exchanging the piece that most supports e5 : White's knight on f3. This results in a position in which Black's play is almost ex clusively of the queenside, involving expansion and routing his pieces in that direction. White either plays in the centre by marshalling his forces to break through on the restricted square e5, or uses pawn advances on the kingside to launch a direct attack on that lightly-populated area of the board.

10 O-O ctJbd7 1 1 l:.el

[diagram]
(D)

White is still trying to blast through in the centre. He needs i.e3 so as to answer ...c4 with i.d4. Both sides have to keep an eye on the plan ...c4, ... ctJc5-d3, exploiting White's interior weaknesses. As usual, it's all a matter of tim ing, not only tactically but also for the achieve ment of positional goals such as winning key squares. Here are two older games from this po sition, both played in the same year and still rel evant. Va'isser - Kindermann Biel 1991 14 ... l:.acS!? Intending ...c4 and ... ctJc5; this has beencrit icized but may not be bad. 15 g4!? This aggressive advance is one of White's main attacking ideas in this variation. although the kingside weakening can cause it to backfire. White really does need to react to the idea of ...c4 and imitating the next game by 1 5 .i.f.! doesn't seem to do enough.

15. ..h6 16 h4 (D)

[diagram]
Here's a trick that players of both colours should know: 1 6. ..h5 !. Now if l 7 g5, l 7 ... lbg4! 18 i.xg4 hxg4 19 'ii xg4 ctJb6! intends ... lbc4 or in some cases ... i.xc3; White's attack has disap peared. And after 17 gxh5 ctJxh5 1 8 i.xh5 gxh5 1 9 'ii xh5 'ii b4 ! , White has to watch out for ... lbf6 and ... lbxe4. These positions are unclear

200 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

but at least as dangerous for White as Black. The ...h5 idea is useful if it looks as though other measures will be inadequate.

17 g5 hxg5 18 hxg5 ctJh7 19 i.g4!

One of the major points behind g4-g5 is to activate this often-passive bishop.

19. ..

l:.cd8 Now we see White explode in the centre just in time: 20 e5! (D) 20  dxe5 21 f5! e4! Freeing Black's bishop and preparing to bring pieces to e5 and d4. This is normally the best way to respond to an e5 sacrifice in the Four Pawns. 22 fxg6! Kindermann 's clever trick was 22 f6? ctJhxf6 23 gxf6 ctJxf6 and White's extra piece means nothing because his kingside is too exposed and Black, already with three extra pawns, threat ens to win the d-pawn by ...b4. 22 ..fxg6 23 i.e6+ l:.xe6? Correctly trying to keep the initiative, but it doesn't work; 23 ... 'it>h8 is best, and difficult to crack. 24 dxe6 lbe5 25 e7! l:.e8 26 'i!Yd5+ 'it>h8 27 'it>g2! l:.xe7 28 l:.hl l:.f7 29 l:.afl l:.xfl 30 'it>xfl 1-0 Kozul - Nunn Wijk aan Zee 1991

14. .. b5 15 a3 lbb6!

Heading for c4, to target the weakness on e3 and supplement the pressure exerted by Black's bishop along the al-h8 diagonal. But White still has the bishops and centre, so this isn't a one-way street; 1 5. .. b4 16 axb4 'i!Yxb4 is also played. 16 i.f2!? (D) 1 6 e5 is the consistent move if it works ! Then a controversial line is 16 ... lbc4 1 7 exf6 lbxe3 1 8 l:.xe3 l:.xe3 19 fxg7 l:.ae8 and only the real experts know what's happening, or maybe they don't!

16. .. lbc4 17 'i!Yc2 ctJd7

Black discourages e5, that square now being controlled five times! 1 7. .. ctJxb2? fails to 1 8 e5 !. 18 i.e2 l:.ab8! A perfectly-timed move, avoiding the tempt- ing 1 8. .. lbxb2 19 ctJxb5.

19 a4 b4! 20 i.xc4

Later 20 ctJb5 ! ? was played. 20 ... bxc3 21 b3 a6 22 l:.ecl ctJb6 23 i.fl c4!

(D)

24 i.xc4!?

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 201

The prettiest of winning ideas is 24 b4 iixb4

25 a5 lbd7 26 l:.cbl 'i!Yb3 ! ! 27 l:.xb3 cxb3 28

'i!Yd3 c2 29 l:.el 1;lec8. 24 .. lbxc4 25 bxc4 .l::i. b2 26 'i!Yd3 l:.d2 27 'i!Yf3 f5 28 e5 dxe5 29 fxe5 l:.xe5 30 'it>hl l:.e4 31 .Itel 'fi!c7 32 l:.abl 1;lde2! 33 i.xc3 1;l2e3 34 d6 'i!Yxd6 35 i.b4 'fi!c6! 36 iifl l:.xh3+! 37 gxh3 1;le2+ 0-1 A classic game. Black's queenside attack beat White's central one. 6 . . . tba6 vs the Four Pawns

[diagram]
ctJf3 ctJa6 ( D) At first this may seem to be a strange way to counter a formation so imposing as the Four Pawns. As it happens, moving a knight to the rim is routine in the King's Indian Defence and relates directly to the centre. For one thing, the usual choices of a square for this piece are: a) c6, where it can be attacked by d5, and b) d7, where it gets in the way of Black's light-squared bishop. In this particular situation neither of those options is realistic. The strategy behind ... ctJa6 is to play ...e5 and then have the c5-square available for the knight in case White grabs the e5-pawn and tries to hold it. That will yield ac tive play. On a secondary level, 6 ... lba6 is a waiting move to see what White is up to. Black can still change his mind about ...e5 and play something like ... i.g4 or ...c5 instead. 7 i.d3 This is probably the most logical continua tion if White is planning to answer ...e5 with d5 at some point. Then his e-pawn is covered, a nice thing in view of a coming ... ctJc5. Some of the alternatives are just as important, how ever. a) 7 e5 might be the Four Pawns player's in stant reaction, since it stops ...e5 and at first the knight on a6 doesn't look relevant with regard to central play. But the latter part isn't true. 7 ... lbd7 (D) follows, when Black is about to play ...c5. Then one of several ideas is 8 i.e2 (White would like to be able to play d5 in response to ...c5 without losing his e-pawn; the only move that keeps the pawns intact on d5 and e5 is 8 'i!Ye2, but then 8 ...c5 9 d5 lbb6! prepares ...e6 to crack open the e-file vis-a-vis White's queen. so 10 i.e3 i.g4! could follow, with good play for Black) 8 ...c5 9 exd6 exd6 (9 ... cxd4 10 lbxd4 ctJb6 1 1 O-O iixd6 12 i.e3 leaves White's pieces nicely centralized, and 12. .. ctJc5? fails to 13 ctJdb5) and now: al) 10 O-O is reasonable. Then Black should probably attack the loose e-file squares by 10 ... ctJf6 (or maybe 10 ...cxd4 1 1 ctJxd4 'i!Yb6 12 ctJcb5 lbac5 1 3 'it>h l lbf6 with the same notion) 1 1 d5 ( 1 1 i.e3 tbg4) l 1 ...l:.e8, intending 12 i.d3 i.f5 ! with a position from 9 exd5 in our last section! a2) 10 d5 (D). Here Black has two moves of note: a21 ) 10 ... ctJc7 1 1 O-O and we should note that 1 1 ...b5? is premature (but l 1 ...ctJf6! should be fine, and l 1 . ..i.xc3 is also possible): 12 f5 ! bxc4 1 3 fxg6 (or 13 i.g5 ! f6 14 i.f4) 1 3. ..fxg6 14 i.g5 with an initiative for White, Vai'sser Golubev, Biel 1995.

202 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a22) 10. .. i.xc3+ 1 1 bxc3 f5 is better and in triguing - it will take White a long time to get his bishops out! Then 12 CLJg5 CLJf6 1 3 O-O CLJc7 (13. ..h6? 14 CLJe6) 14 i.f3 l:.e8 seems to cover White's CLJe6 plan, so White might have to start an arduous preparation for g4. Black could fo cus on achieving the advance ...b5 (he poten tially has four pieces and a pawn to support that) and use his e-file control to discourage White's forces from straying. Of course ...b5 might well activate White's pieces (imagine a bishop on b2), so that has to be well-timed. It may be that this is simply equal. b) 7 i.e2 is the main alternative (to 7 i.d3), and more frequently played. 7 ...e5 and now play comes down to a struggle over the dark squares: bl) 8 fxe5 dxe5 (D) and now: b 1 1) 9 CLJxe5 c5 ! . This undermining attack is the consistent theme and justification for the ... 4Ja6 lines. Then 10 d5? allows 10 .. . CLJxe4!, so 10 i.e3 appears to be best, after which 1 0. .. CLJg4?! 1 1 i.xg4 ! i.xg4 12 '2Jxg4 cxd4 1 3 CLJd5 dxe3 14 O-O i s the kind o f thing White wants: while Black is scrambling to recover his pawn, White switches to the attack. But Black also has 10 . . . CLJb4 !?; for example, 1 1 d5 ! ? CLJxe4 ! 12 '2Jxe4 i.f5 with equality, Huerta Arizmendi, Madrid 2000. bl2) 9 d5 CLJc5 10 j_g5 (White's problems defending his e-pawn indicate why 7 i.d3 might be preferable; a mistake is 10 'i!Yc2?! CLJfxe4 ! 1 1 CLJxe4 i.f5 12 i.d3 i.xe4 1 3 i.xe4 f5 recovering the piece with the better game) 10 ...h6 1 1 i.xf6 'i!Yxf6 12 b4 CLJa6 1 3 a3 c5 ! (I'm not sure that until this game, players in general realized how strong this move is when White's dark-squared bishop is gone; White's queenside progress is completely stifled) 14 l:.bl i.d7 (or 14. .. 'i!Yd6) 15 b5! ? CLJc7 16 d6 CLJe6

17 CLJd5 'i!Yd8 1 8 'i!Yd2, Lautier-Kasparov, Am

sterdam 1995. This is unclear, and the game was drawn. b2) 8 dxe5 dxe5 (D) is a key type of gambit position. Then: b2 1) 9 '2Jxe5 CLJc5 10 i.f3 'ii xdl + 1 1 'it>xdl l:.d8+ 12 'it>c2 CLJfxe4! 13 '2Jxe4 i.f5 14 l:.el i.xe5 15 fxe5 l:.d4, and 1 6 b3 is the only idea White can try ifhe is to search for an advantage, but Black's activity always seems good enough to hold the balance: 1 6. .. CLJxe4 1 7 'it>b2 CLJc5 1 8 'it>a3 4Jd3 19 l:.dl l:.e8 20 i.xb7 l:.xe5 with equality, Peng Zhaoqin-M.Socko, Groningen (women) 1998. b22) 9 'i!Yxd8 l:.xd8 10 CLJxe5 CLJc5 1 1 i.f3 i.e6! is similar: 12 O-O (12 CLJd5 CLJfd7 ! 1 3 CLJxd7 l:.xd7 with straightforward ideas such as

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 203

... l:te8 and ...c6; White' s e-pawn is a problem, he has lost control of d4, and is vulnerable on d3) 12 ...tt'lfd7 ! 13 tt'lxd7 .i.d4+! 14 'lt>h l l:txd7 15 tt'ld5 c6, A.Geller-Belov, USSR 1988; White is poorly coordinated, and ... tt'ld3 or ... .i.xc4 is coming. After all that, let's return to the position after 7 .i.d3 (D): 7 .. .i.g4 Developing quickly is usually recommended. The engaging thing about 6 ... tt'la6 is that the play stays alive regardless of what either side does. Instead of 7 ....i.g4, for example, 7 ...e5 8 fxe5 dxe5 9 d5 ( D) illustrates a different set of themes. Now 9 ... tt'lc5 10 .i.c2 a5 1 1 O-O is attractive for White, who has easy build-ups with .i.g5 or .i.e3 and 'iVd2 available, or can pursue the tradi tional expansion with b3, a3 and b4. So Black usually prefers 9 ...c6 10 O-O cxd5 1 1 cxd5 tt'le8 ( l 1 ...'iVb6+ 12 @hi tt'le8 13 'iVe2 protects the b-pawn and prepares .i.e3; White's position makes a good impression) 12 'iVe2 tt'lac7 1 3 .i.g5 f6 14 .i.h4 ! . The bishop i s well placed here, stopping .. .f5 and ready to go to f2 when that's desirable. You should consider the idea .i.h4-f2 in other branches of the 9 ...c6 line. Vai"sser gives 14. .. 'iVe7 15 tt'ld2! , when White is better.

8 O-O

8 .i.e3 is promising, trying not to waste a tempo by castling: 8 ... tt'ld7 9 h3 ! .i.xf3 10 '6'xf3 (White wants to go throw everything at Black and go queenside when appropriate) 10 ...e5 (what else?) 1 1 dxe5 dxe5 ( l l . ..tt'lac5 1 2 c2 dxe5 13 O-O-O! tt'le6 14 f5 ctJd4 15 f2 with an edge) 12 f5 ! tt'ldc5 (12. .. .i.h6!? 13 O-O-O! xe3+ 14 'iVxe3 is very similar to the position that we saw above in the line with 6 ... .i.g4; play might continue 14 ...c6 and now 15 l:thfl or 15 h4!? 'iVb6 16 'iVh6, etc.) 13 .i.e2 tt'ld3+ ( 1 3. .. .Bh6? 14 l:tdl ; 1 3. .. gxf5 14 exf5 e4 15 g3 ! ) 14 .i.xd3 'iVxd3 1 5 l:tdl 'iVxc4 16 f6 .i.h8 1 7 tDd5 I:tfd8 1 8 b3 ! 'iVc2 1 9 O-O 'iVxa2 20 .i.h6 :xd5 21 l:txd5 tt'lb4 22 l:txe5, winning, J.Watson Becerra Rivera, Linares 1999. 8    tt'ld7 9 .i.e3 e5 10 fxe5 c5 ! ( D) This is a major theme of the 6 ... tt'la6 lines. White can't hold his centre together, whereas 10 ... dxe5 1 1 d5 will favour White due to his ready-made queenside play. 11 d5 1 1 dxc5 accedes to breaking up the centre . which usually indicates that Black will have few problems; e.g., 1 1 ...dxc5 12 .i.e2 tt'lc7 13 h3 .i.xf3 14 gxf3 ! ? .i.xe5, Peev-Spasov, Tsamovo 200 1 . A better option for White is 1 1 tt'ld5. with

204 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the possible reply 1 l ...cxd4 ( l l ....i.xf3 12 l:txf3 cxd4 13 .i.xd4 tt'lxeS) 1 2 .i.xd4 tt'lacS ! ? 1 3 'iVd2. Then Black needs to take some care; for exam ple, 13 ... dxeS 14 .i.e3 fS ! ? l S JI.gs and his posi tion is under pressure. . tt'lxe5 Now White has to press on quickly or Black will remain with a powerful central outpost at eS: 12 .i.e2! (D)

12 ... .i.d7!? This still maintains the eS outpost but also preserves Black's good bishop. The accepted continuation has been 1 2. . . tt'lxf3+ 1 3 .i.xf3 xf3 14 'iVxf3 'iVe7, when White followed older theory in Beim-Kindermann, Bundesliga 1 999/00: l S .i.f4 (White has to think about win ning the dark squares if he's to makes any prog ress) 1S ... tt'lc7 1 6 'iVg3 l:tad8 17 'lt>hl ! (getting out of the way of inconvenient checks but also preparing the knight manoeuvre that follows) 1 7. ..d4 1 8 I:tael f6 (D). I 9 tt'le2 ! ? ( 1 9 h4 might be worth playing in order to have hS in reserve, especially if White has tt'le2-f4 in mind) 19. .. .i.eS 20 tt'lgl (or 20 h4) 20 .. . .i.xf4 21 'iVxf4 tt'la6! (odd-looking, but the knight wants to cover or occupy eS, and the way to get there is via b8 ! In the meantime Black has the irritating plan of ... tt'lb4-c2-d4) 22 l:tf3 ! ? (22 'iVd2 I:tde8 23 tt'lf3 tt'lb8 24 b3 tt'ld7 2S 'iVc3 tt'leS 26 tt'ld2 1h-1h Parker-Galla gher, British League (4NCL) 200 1/2) 22 ... tt'lb8 23 l:ta3 a6 24 l:tb3 'iVc7 2S 'iVfl tt'ld7 26 tt'le2 ! ? l:tfe8 ! 27 tt'lf4 tt'lf8 28 l:tg3 'iVf7 29 l:tf3 'iVg7 30 l:tg3 'iVf7 3 1 .l:!.f3 lf2-llz. 13 'iVd2 tt'lc7 1 3. .. 'iVe7 also appears satisfactory: 14 .i.gS tt'lxf3+ l S .i.xf3 .i.d4+ 1 6 'lt>h1 f6 1 7 .i.h6 l:tfe8 1 8 tt'le2 JI.es I 9 tt'lf4 tt'lc7 and White isn't mak ing progress. Black can contemplate ... bS at some point. 14 .i.g5 'iVe8 15 I:tael tt'lxf3+!? 16 l:txf3 .i.d4+ 17 .i.e3!? (D) Probably White should keep the bishops on. 17 @h 1 f6 1 8 .i.h6 I:tf7 19 l:tefl 'iVeS 20 .i.f4 'iVe7 resembles the last note. 17   .i.xe3+ 18 'iVxe3 'iVe5 19 I:tefl f6 20 'iVf2 'lt>g7 21 @bl a6 22 a4 .l:!ab8 Black has some queenside play and the chances are roughly equal, Mercadal-Buraschi, corr. 200 1 . Classical King's Indian

1 d4 tt'lf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt'lc3 .i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 tt'lf3 (D)

This may be considered the start of the Clas sical Variation of the King's Indian Defence.

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 205

5 .O-O 6 .i.e2 White's overwhelming favourite. As always, there are many options; for example, 6 h3 and 6 .i.g5. 6 ... e5 (D) Also almost automatic, although 6 ... tt'lbd7 can safely introduce ...e5, as explained in the 6 ...e5 7 O-O tt'lbd7 line of this chapter. 6 ...c5 is outside the scope of the discussion, sometimes transposing to a Maroczy Bind Sicilian (7 O-O cxd4 8 tt'lxd4) or to some kind of Benoni (7 d5). For a discussion of why exactly Black takes two moves to fianchetto his bishop and then promptly turns it into a bad bishop, see the dis cussion of this very subject in Volume 1 , Chap ter 2. From the position after 6 . .. e5, it's difficult to select some variations to talk about while ig noring others. As always, I shall try to discuss variations that are important for practical play, but even more so ones whose characteristic positions will apply to other variations in the King's Indian and openings in general. The fol lowing section is fitting that regard. Exchange Variation 7 dxe5 dxe5 White exchanges pawns and then queens. He either hopes that his quick development will al low him to get the better game, or that the sim plified position will suit his playing styl e. Some players use the Exchange Variation to obtain a draw, but that is a tricky business, to say the least. I repeatedly point out in this book that queenless middlegames are not end games. That is all the more the case with so many pieces left on the board. 8 'iVxd8 Although 8 O-O is sometimes tried, this ex change is really the point of 7 dxe5. Upon slower moves, Black can develop freely and gain time to cover the d5-square against inva sion. 8 . .  l:txd8 (D) The Exchange Variation may appear rather dull, and even a reason to avoid playing the King's Indian Defence. But the variation em braces positional ideas that are basic to KID play. First of all, you should always keep in mind that in most chess openings, the early exchange of queens will not eliminate winning chances for either side, and in some cases may even in crease them. With that in mind let's try to under stand what's going on in general terms. Initially White counts upon his central space and rela tively fast development (e.g., by .i.g5, tt'ld5 and O-O-O). These represent short-term advantages

206 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

that might be transformed into something more permanent. But White also cedes his opponent a true outpost on d4; a knight occupying that square will generally have great influence, so much so that White will usually not be able to gain concrete advantages by 'working around' it. If Black successfully implements the move ... c6. it leaves White's knights and rooks without the d5 pivot point, whereas the d6 point isn't easily accessible to knight nor to more than tem porary occupation by a rook (Black responds by ... tl:Je8, ... .i.f8, etc.). The situation with respect to each side's bishop is also significant. White's dark-squared and Black's light-squared bishops have excellent scope - they are 'good'. But White has to deal with a very bad bishop on fl (cut off by both the c- and e-pawns), whereas Black has blocked off his own bishop by ...e5. The second situation is not so grave in that Black strengthens his control of d4 thereby, and later the g7-bishop can be activated by a couple of different methods. A typical way to enliven things is ... .i.f8 and ... .i.c5 or ... .i.b4 as appropri- ate. Even ... .i.f6-d8-b6 puts the bishop on an ef- fective diagonal. How these trade-offs play out will determine the course of the game. As indicated, Black will attempt to post a piece on d4. Sometimes the move .. .f5 can be useful but that is generally not played until the pieces are reorganized. The c5-square is also crucial: a knight occupying it hits several im portant points in the enemy position, and the potential for ... tt'le6-d4 can cause White head aches. If Black gets a knight to c5 he will gener ally try to support it by ...a5. Finally, .. J'!e8 < protecting the e-pawn) and ... tt'ld7-f8-e6 may prove feasible. For his part White would love to achieve the moves b4 and c5 (or tt'la4 and c5), opening up the fl -a6 diagonal for the previously passive bishop and clearing c4 for pieces (a knight, for example, might travel to it by tt'ld2-c4). An other set-up is with a3, b4, .i.e3 and tt'ld2-b3. Once Black plays ...c6 and ...a5, his b6-square can be inviting to White's pieces. Finally, as mentioned before, White's lead in development may help him to force changes in the initial pawn-structure which, if it persists, will favour Black in the long run. Let's start out with a game in which White succeeds in achieving his goals. 9 .i.g5 Born - Tonneman corr. 1978 9 tt'ld5 tt'lxd5 10 cxd5 c6 1 1 .i.c4 cxd5 ! ? 12 .i.xd5 tt'ld7 1 3 .i.g5 l:te8 transposes to the next game. 9 ... .l:!.e8 10 O-O-O Again, 10 tt'ld5 tt'lxd5 1 1 cxd5 c6 12 .i.c4 cxd5 can transpose, but 12. ..b5 1 3 .i.b3 c5 !? is also played.

10.  .

tt'la6 10 ... tt'lc6 is an option, aiming directly for d4, with approximate equality following 1 1 tt'ld5 ( 1 1 .i.e3 tt'ld4 12 tt'lxd4 exd4 1 3 .i.xd4 tt'lxe4 with equality) l l . .. tt'lxd5 12 cxd5 tt'ld4 1 3 tt'lxd4 exd4 14 .i.d3 c6. 11 tt'lel (D) This has several points. White wants to play f3 to solidify his centre, and by playing tt'lel he avoids ... .i.g4 (when ... .i.xf3 would strengthen Black's control of d4). Most importantly, he wants to bring his knight to the queenside to support expansion on that wing.

11. . tt'lcS

1 1 .. . .i.e6 is another good move, simply de veloping.

12 f3 c6

l 2 ...tt'le6 is also sensible. You can see that Black hasn't had trouble with the opening yet, but neither has White, who is slowly solidifying his position. 13 tt'lc2 tt'le6!? Reorganization by 1 3. .. a5 14 .i.e3 .i.f8 is also possible. 14 .i.e3 .i.f8 15 b4!?

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 207

The right idea: White grabs space and the c5 idea looms. It does allow an unclear tactic, so 1 5 Md2 first might have been better. lS  aS 16 a3 axb4 17 axb4 Md8?! Black's first mistake. A better if messy idea was 1 7. .. tt'ld4!? 1 8 tt'lxd4 .i.xb4; for example, 1 9 'lt>c2 ! exd4 20 .i.xd4 tt'ld7 2 1 Mal Mxal 22 Mxal f5 !? with complications. 18 'lt>b2! Mxdl 19 l:.xdl .i.e7 20 @b3 White has a small advantage because Black lacks a plan.

20. @fS 21 tl:la4 tt'ld7 22 cS ( D)

There it is. White has finally made the de sired move. 22 .i.dS 23 tt'la3! 'lt>e7 24 l:td2 .i.c7 2S tt'lc4 The opening is over and White controls the board. He went on to win the game. Danailov - Kasparov Dortmund Jr Wch 1980

1 c4 g6 2 tt'lf3 .i.g7 3 tt'lc3 d6 4 d4 tt'lf6 S e4 O-O

6 .i.e2 Before continuing, let's look at a different game. It's a model for Black, with the inclusion of 6 h3 instead of 6 .i.e2. White could have played ml!ch better, but we see Black's system atic exploitation of the dark squares in ultra clear fashion. Note particularly that the rook ends up on d4; that square is not exclusively re served for knights: 6 h3 e5 7 dxe5 dxe5 8 'iVxd8 l:txd8 9 .i.g5 c6 1 0 .i.e2 tt'la6 1 1 O-O l:te8 1 2 .i.e3 .i.f8 1 3 tt'ld2 tt'lc5 1 4 l:tfd l tt'le6 1 5 tt'lb3 a5 1 6 a4 .i.b4 1 7 f3 tt'ld7 1 8 I:tac l tt'ldc5 (D). 1 9 tt'lxc5 tt'lxc5 20 Mal .i.e6 2 1 JI.fl l:ted8 22 @f2 'lt>f8 23 g3 tt'lb3 24 Mabl JI.cs (still working on the dark squares) 25 .i.xc5+ tt'lxc5 26 h4 'lt>e7 27 'lt>e3 tt'lb3 28 g4 l:td4 29 .i.d3 .i.xc4 30 .i.c2 Mad8 0- 1 Borsuk-Kaminski, Warsaw 1 992.

6. ..eS 7 dxeS dxeS 8 'iVxd8 l:txd8 9 JI.gs

tt'lbd7 10 tt'ldS c6 1 1 tt'le7+ @rs 12 tt'lxc8 .l:!.dxc8 13 O-O-O tl:lcS 14 .i.xf6 .i.xf6 One of the main lessons of this game is that simplification will not solve White's underly ing positional problems. lS .i.d3 aS 16 l:thel (

D)

16 . . l:teS! Protecting e5 and freeing the bishop on f6 to move. The future World Champion activates his last piece and makes it look easy.

17 JI.fl .i.d8 18 g3 a4 19 @c2 JI.as 20 .l:!.e3

l:tad8 21 l:txd8 l:txd8 22 .i.h3 f6 23 Me2 'lt>e7 24 .i.g2 tt'ld3 Threatening ... tt'lb4+ . 2S a3 On top of everything else, there goes the b3- square. But 25 b3 tt'lb4+ 26 @b1 (26 'lt>b2? a3+ !

208 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

27 @xa3 ?? tt'ld3 28 b4 .i.xb4+ 29 'lt>b3 tt'lc 1 +) 26 ...a3 27 @c l .i.b6 28 tt'lel .i.d4 wins for Black. This time it's the bishop that uses d4! 25 ... tt'lcS (D) White's bad bishop haunts him to the very end. We see why either tt'ld5 or b4 and c5 is so desirable for White in this variation.

[diagram]

1 d4 tt'lf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt'lc3 .i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 tt'lf3 O-O

6 .i.e2 e5 7 O-O White normally chooses not to enter into the Exchange Variation, which can be understood from the examples in the last section. 7 O-O is the most flexible move, not committing to any central pawn-structure. Strongpoint Variation 7  tt'lbd7 (D) This solid knight development was the pri mary way of playing for several decades after the King's Indian Defence first gained attention in the 1920s. During that time 7 ... tt'lbd7 natu rally generated many new ideas and wonderful games, but now has been overtaken by 7 ... tt'lc6 and 7 ... tt'la6. Nevertheless, specialists still find ways to benefit from it, sometimes moving be yond minor improvements to new methods of play. One appealing feature of 7 ... tt'lbd7 is that it is a central move and thus stays in contact with c5, e5 and f6, all key King's Indian squares. Compare 7 ... tt'la6, which only controls c5; or 7 ... tt'lc6 8 d5 tt'le7, a two-move continuation based largely upon transfer to the kingside. Situ ated on d7, Black's knight can be used to support e5 as a strongpoint, or to play ... ctJe5 or ... tt'lc5 if Black chooses to play ... exd4 at some point. The disadvantages of 7 ... tt'lbd7 relate pri marily to its failure to challenge White's space advantage and the fact that it blocks off Black's bishop on c8. This latter circumstance (which you' 11 note does not apply to 7 ... tt'la6 or 7 ... tt'lc6) means that achieving the move . . .f5 may be problematic, and that White can keep the centre fluid without worrying as much about immedi ate attacks on the kingside. Thus Black is un likely to dominate one side of the board or the other, although he has access to and plays on both wings. Another drawback has to do with a concrete feature of the King's Indian, that c7 is left unprotected, so that Black hasn't as much leeway to move his queen as he does after 7 .. . tt'la6. I haven't mentioned the greatest virtue of 7 .. .tt'lbd7 from our point of view: the play stemming from this move includes a majority of themes and concepts that characterize the entire Classical King's Indian! After 7 ... tt'lbd7 we see properties of the KID that don't appear after 7 ... tt'lc6 8 d5 tt'le7 (the main line of most of this chapter). For example, lines in which Black plays . . . tt'lc5 or . . .exd4, and situations in which White plays dxe5 in a more effective way than in the Exchange Variation. For those reasons we'll delve into some details of three variations:

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 209

A: 8 .i.e3; B: 8 l:tel ; C: 8 d5.

A}

[diagram]
14 h3 'llh6 1 5 c5) 1 3 h3 'llgf6 14 .i.e3 'll

h5 15 l:tfdl 'iVe7 16 g3 ! (keeping Black's knight out of f4) l 6 ... l:te8 1 7 'lt>h2 'iVe6? ! 1 8 tllg1 ! 'llhf6 19 l:td2 .i.f8 20 c5 ! 'iVe7 21 I:tadl l:tb8 22 tllf3 .i.g7 23 .i.c4 'llf8 24 'llb6 'll8d7 25 .i.b3 ! 'llxb6 26 cxb6, Uhlmann-Knaak, Leipzig 1980. With control of c5 and the d-file, White has things well in hand. b) 8 ...c6 used to be considered the main line; however, 9 d5 forces a decision about how to defend the d-pawn. Then the natural move 9 ... 'llg4 fails tactically to 10 .i.g5 f6 1 1 dxc6! 'llc5 ( l l ...fxg5 12 cxd7) 1 2 cxb7 .i.xb7 13 JI.cl , winning a pawn because 1 3. .. 'llxe4 ?? 1 4 'llxe4 .i.xe4 1 5 'lld2 costs Black a piece. And 9 ...c5 (D) establishes the kind of structure that gen erally favours White, particularly since Black took two moves to get his pawn there. This is a pawn-chain situation, and the two breaks are b4 and f4. The latter is less appeal ing because after ...exf4 it opens up the long diagonal for Black's bishop. Play can proceed 1 0 'llel (the standard idea to put the knight on d3 and play for b4 to break down Black's pawn-structure) 10 ... 'lle8 (there's no plan ex cept ...f5) and now White can flout the older rules by playing 1 1 g4 ! ? in order to discourage ...f5; e.g., 1 1 ...f5 12 exf5 gxf5 1 3 gxf5 I:txf5 14

210 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.i.g4 l:tf8 1 5 .i.e6+ 'it>h8 16 tllf3 and tllg5. Then Black comes under attack and suffers be cause of White's outposts. He also stands worse positionally because White has penetrated to Black' s interior weakness on e6. 9 .i.g5 f6 10 .i.d2 c6 11 d5 Normally White should play this after Black plays ...c6. It forces Black to commit and elim inates any dynamism that might result from ... exd4 followed ...d5. After d5, White is ready to expand upon the queenside. n ... 'iVe7 12 b4! 'it>h8 12 ... 'llh6 1 3 dxc6 bxc6 14 b5 .i.b7 1 5 bxc6 .i.xc6 16 'lld5 is similar. 13 dxc6! bxc6 14 b5 (D)

This is almost a refutation of Black's play, and applies both here and in some other ...c6 lines. White gains the d5 outpost by force. The moral is that once White plays d5, Black should be ready to play either ...c5 or ...cxd5. 14 ... .i.b7 15 bxc6 .i.xc6 16 'lld5 .i.xd5 17 cxd5 tllc5 18 'llel 'llh6 19 f3 White has the bishop-pair, space and open lines on the queenside. The game flows surpris ingly smoothly hereafter. 19 . 'llf7 20 'lld3 'llxd3 21 .i.xd3 .i.h6 As good as anything. At least Black gets rid of a problem piece. But for one thing his knight won't be able to get back in time to defend the queenside. 22 .i.xh6 'llxh6 23 'iVd2 g5 24 I:tacl f5 25 l:tc6! f4 26 h3 See how difficult it is for Black to play the standard kingside assault ...g5-g4 when he has no light-squared bishop? 26 .. tllg8 27 I:tfcl l:tfd8 28 .i.a6! ( D) Placing the bishop here not only stops any ... I:tc8 forever but threatens .i.c8-e6, which can't be stopped for long. 28  'iVf8 29 l:tc7 'llf6 30 'iVc2 'llh5 Even worse is 30 ... 'lld7 3 1 .i.c8 tllc5 32 .i.f5. 31 .i.c8 tllg3 32 .i.e6 l:tdb8 33 l:tf7 'iVh6 34 'it>h2 l:tf8 35 l:td7 g4!? 36 .i.xg4 'iVg6 37 'iVc6? Easier was 37 'iVc7 with the idea 37 ...h5 38 I:txd6 'iVg5 39 l:tcc6. 37 .. l:tad8 38 l:te7 l:tg8 39 l:te6 'iVg5 40 I:txd6 l:txd6 41 'iVxd6 h5 42 h4! 'iVxh4+ 43 .i.h3 'iVg5 44 l:tc6 Donaldson avoids the last trick: 44 l:tc7? 'llxe4 45 fxe4 'iVg3+. 44 . 'it>h7 45 'iVe6 'll fl+ 46 'it>gl 'lle3 47 l:tc7+ 'it>h8 48 'iVe7 'iVxe7 49 l:txe7 l:tb8 50 d6 l:tbl+ 51 @f2 l:tb2+ 52 @el l:tbl+ 53 'it>e2 l:tb2+ 54 'it>d3 1-0 A graceful and well-executed win. It shows what the possession of space and creation of enemy weaknesses can do for ycu.

KING'S INDIAN DEFENCE 211

8 .   l:te8!? Krush - Bologan Edmonton 2005 As explained above, this rook move (threat ening ... exd4) has been considered inferior be cause after 9 d5, Black's rook will have to return to f8 to support the thematic . . .f5. But Black is working with other ideas: 9 d5 9 ... exd4 was threatened with an attack on the e4-pawn. Instead, 9 'iVc2 tt'lg4 10 .i.g5 f6 1 1 .i.d2?! exd4 1 2 tt'lxd4 tt'lc5 1 3 h3?! f5 ! (a tacti cal theme to remember) 14 hxg4 .i.xd4 15 gxf5 gxf5 1 6 exf5 'iVh4 is good for Black. 9 ... tt'lh5!? This is a relatively recent idea (at least in its present form). It's worth noting that . . . tt'lh5 is normally an inferior move if White can prevent ...tt'lf4 by the move g3, as he does here:

10 g3 .i.f8! (D)

This is the beginning of Black's reorganiza tion: he directs another piece to prevent White's c5 advance, and he makes room on g7 for a knight. 11 tt'lel tt'lg7 Normally one would not expect to fianchetto a knight, but it supports the attacking move . .. f5 and makes it possible to play . . .h5-h4. Black's pieces are achieving a weird sort of coordina tion! 12 tt'ld3 1 2 b4 is a reasonably good move, although it didn't tum out well in Kutsin-Komliakov, Nikolaev 1995: 12. . . .i.e7 1 3 tt'ld3 f5 14 'iVd2 tt'lf6 1 5 f3 h5 16 l:tac l ?! h4! 17 c5 tt'lgh5 18 'it>g2 l:tf8 1 9 cxd6 cxd6 20 exf5 gxf5 2 1 gxh4 f4 22 .i.gl I:tf7 23 tt'lf2 l:tg7+ 24 'it>h l .i.f8 25 'iVel tt'lg3+ ! with a winning attack. 12 ... f5 13 f3 (D)

13 b4 fxe4 14 tt'lxe4 tt'lf5 is fine for Black,

whose knight will probably end up on d4 once the bishop on e3 moves. 13 ... aS!? A recent arrangement of pieces, not neces sarily superior to the old one. But it's intrigu ing because it boldly fights for the queenside, where Black is assumed to be inferior. That is in fact a common theme in the modem King's In dian. The old move was 1 3. .. .i.e7, when a won derful example was 14 b4 (14 'iVd2 ctJf6 15 c5 fxe4 16 fxe4 tt'lg4 with equality) 14 .. . l:tf8 15 c5 tt'lf6 (another idea is 15 ... .i.g5 !? 16 .i.f2 h5 17 'iVb3 tt'lf6 18 cxd6 cxd6 with the idea ...h4) 16 I:tc l ! h5 17 tt'lf2 ! (an extremely original ma noeuvre that depends upon material sacrifice) 17 ...h4 !? (17. ..a5) 1 8 g4 ! ! (Black's attack via ...hxg3, ... tt'lh5, etc., is permanently stopped, at a cost of two pawns) 1 8. ..f4 19 .i.d2 dxc5 20 ctJd3 ! cxb4 2 1 tt'lb5, Onishchuk-Florean, USA Ch (San Diego) 2006. White will recover the b-pawn with a powerful queenside attack; he went on to win.

14 a3 (D)

14 ... tt'lc5 ! ? This is a surprising scheme for Black, to say the least. Now it will take some time for White to organize a successful queenside attack. 15 'iVc2 tt'lh5 16 tt'lxc5 f4!? Bologan is simply going for it in this game, without regard to safety or positional niceties. Perhaps this move isn't objectively best.

212 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

17 tt'le6! Not 17 tt'lxb7 because of 1 7. . . 'iVg5.

17. 

.i.xe6 18 dxe6 fxe3 19 'iVd3? After this Krush has a few problems. At this point 19 f4 ! was the right move because f5 is threatened and 19 ...exf4 20 gxf4 l:txe6 2 1 .i.g4 prevents any surprise attacks. 19 . tt'lg7 20 'iVxe3 tt'lxe6 As so often in the King's Indian, Black has an outpost on d4 to play with; next he denies d5 to White's pieces: 21 @bl c6! 22 I:tadl 'iVc7 23 l:td3 .i.e7 (D) 24 h4? Again 24 f4 was best. From here on out it proves difficult for White to find good moves. 24  Jif8 25 I:tfdl I:tf7 26 JI.fl I:taf8 27 tt'le2? White covers d4, but the cure is worse than the disease:

27. 

tl:lc5 28 l:tc3 'iVb6 29 b3 I:txf3 30 'iVxf3 I:txf3 31 l:txf3 tt'lxe4 32 'lt>g2 tt'lf6 33 tt'lcl e4 34 l:tf4 'iVe3 35 .i.e2 d5 36 cxd5 cxd5 37 I:tffl .i.d6 38 I:txf6 'iVxg3+ 39 @fl 'iVh3+ 0-1

B)

[diagram]
9 JI.fl (D)

9 l:tbl is also popular: 9 ... a5 10 .i.fl l:te8 (Black tries to gain a tempo for . . .exd4 by strengthening its effect down the e-file) 1 I d5 (this is the standard remedy to ... l:te8 in almost any setting). Lerner-Kovalevskaya, Moscow 2002 continued 1 l .. .tt'lc5 1 2 b3 .i.d7 13 tt'ld2. Then I 3 ... .i.h6 worked out reasonably well, but trading the dark-squared bishop can be dicey. A good alternative would be 1 3. .. tt'lh5 ! ; for exam ple, 14 dxc6 (14 g3 cxd5 15 cxd5 f5) 14. .. .i.xc6 (or 14 ...bxc6 with equality) 1 5 tt'lf3 tt'lf4 1 6 g3 tt'lfe6! 17 tt'ld5 tt'ld4 1 8 .i.b2 tl:lce6 1 9 .i.g2 tt'lxf3+ 20 'iVxf3 tt'ld4 2 1 'iVd3 a4 22 b4 .i.xd5 23 cxd5 'iVb6 is equal. 9 . . exd4 Opening the board to activate Black's pieces. This is one of Black's approaches in many KID variations. A 'strongpoint' approach is 9 ... 'iVe7

10 d5 a5 1 1 a3 tt'lc5 12 b3 tt'le8 1 3 .i.b2 f5,

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 213

[diagram]

KID !

[diagram]
(D)

[diagram]

214 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

wins the ending. Along with his better pawn structure, White can create an outside passed pawn by h4-h5 if he needs to. This game pro vides an example of the fight between central control and piece activity.

C)

8 d5 (D)

The important position that this leads to can arise from two other variations: a) The Petrosian System: 1 d4 'bf6 2 c4 g6 3 'Llc3 i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 'bf3 O-O 6 i.e2 e5 7 d5 'bbd7 8 O-O. b) The Glek Variation of the Main Line: 1 d4 'bf6 2 c4 g6 3 'bc3 i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 'bf3 O-O 6 i.e2 e5 7 O-O 'ba6 8 d5 (assuming Black plays ... lbc5 next).

[diagram]

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 215

valuable piece and nice to get rid of. A couple of games have continued 1 1 'bb3 i.xc l 12 l:!.axc l 'bfd7 1 3 'bxc5 'bxc5, and now White should play something like 14 'VJJi d2, ready to answer 14. .. f5?! (not the best) with 1 5 exf5 gxf5 16 f4. Then the disadvantage of ... i.h6 is shown: it can no longer command the long di agonal by playing ... e4 or ...exf4. The above is a rather stylized explanation, but true in essence. 9 .. .a5 Securing the knight on c5. Now White plays the most logical continuation. 10 i.e3 (D) Watch out for another typical trick that comes up in more than one variation: 10 l:!.bl ? 'bfxe4! l l 'bxe4 'bxe4 12 'VJJf xe4 i.f5 and ... i.xb l .

10. .. 'bg4

This stock King's Indian manoeuvre has been the most popular choice here. 10 ... 'be8 !? (preparing ... f5) also leads to particularly infor mative lines. 1 1 'bd2 f5 12 f3 gives White a near-ideal minor-piece configuration. His pieces retain maximum flexibility and the knights both cover the critical e4-square. In spite of those advantages, Black has scored well in practice after the usual pawn-storm attack 12 ... f4 13 i.f2 g5; e.g., 14 b3 (or 14 a3 !, to speed up the attack even further, when 1 4. ..a4 !? 15 i.xc5 dxc5 16 'bxa4 'VJJi e7 provides some compensa tion for the pawn), and now: a) 14 ... i.d7 15 a3 l:!.f7 16 l:!.abl i.f8 17 b4 axb4 1 8 axb4 'ba6 19 c5?! (this looks right, but ends up bringing one more black piece to the at tack; regardless of the objective assessment, defending against a kingside attack over the board can be a thankless task) 19 ... dxc5 20 i.xa6 l:!.xa6 21 bxc5 g4 !? 22 l:!.xb7 l:!.g6 23 fxg4 (23 c6 gxf3 24 cxd7? l:!.xg2+ 25 '>t>hl 'VJJi xd7 and wins) 23 ... i.xg4 24 '>t>hl 'VJJi g5 25 l:!.gl l:!.fg7 26 l:!.bb 1? 'VJJih 5 27 'bfl i.f3 0- 1 Tillmann-Karl. Berne 1998. b) A good illustration of White's strategy would be 14 ... 'bf6 1 5 a3 h5 16 b4 axb4 17 axb4 l:!.xal 1 8 l:!.xal 'ba6 19 c5 ! (D). The idea is 19 ... 'bxb4 20 'VJJi bl dxc5 (20 . . . tl:Ja6 2 1 c6 !) 21 i.xc5. Otherwise, White's twin idea<. are c6 and lbc4. Compare this piece configuration with that in the lines that follow. There White gets either a knight on d2 or a bishop on e3. but not both. 11 i.g5 Better than 1 1 i.d2 f5 12 exf5? i.xf5 1 3 'VJJi d l e4 ! . White mustn't let the g7-bishop get loose. l l. . .f6 (D) Now we get an instructive split into moves that you'll see in the many KID variations with

216 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

OK.

Most of what is shown in this last section ap plies in one form or another to other systems in which White plays d5. The specifics of how both players implement their ideas determine who stands better. Nevertheless, you can see why 8 d5 is not a terribly popular move. The Classical Main Line with 7 . . . 'bc6

1 d4 'bf6 2 c4 g6 3 'bc3 i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 'bf3 O-O

6 i.e2 e5 7 O-O 'bc6 (DJ With this move, by contrast with 7 ... 'bbd7, Black forces the pace. He threatens 8 ...exd4 9 'bxd4 'bxe4!, so White has to respond directly. 8 d5 White usually makes this choice without much thought. He has other moves such as 8 dxe5 and 8 i.e3, when a standard sequence is 8 ... lbg4 9 i.g5 f6 10 i.cl f5 !? normally lead ing to a number of central exchanges in the midst of unclear complications. Nevertheless, moves other than 8 d5 constitute a very small percentage of all master games played. 8 .  . 'be7 (DJ

KING 'S /ND/AN DEFENCE 21 7

The knight moves to support a kingside at tack. 8 ... 'bb8 loses too many tempi. This position, introducing what is often called the Mar del Plata Variation, is the most popular one in the King's Indian Defence, and indeed one of the best-known in chess practice. I shall examine this variation in greater depth than it would normally merit because only a close in vestigation can give us an insight into how deli cately balanced the game of chess can be. The persistence of dynamic equality in variations with frenetic activity on both wings borders on the miraculous. Indeed, variations stemming from 8 ... 'be7 have survived more than 50 years of intense scrutiny by the world's strongest professionals (and computers), only to remain mysteriously resistant to solution. Players of all ages are taught this variation because it exem plifies the pawn-chain as well as the flank at tacks that are designed to break it up. From the diagram, the lines that best illus trate the traditional strategies arise from 9 'bel and 9 'bd2. In both cases White is not only initi ating a reorganization of forces but anticipating Black's plan of moving his knight and playing ... f5 in order to claim some territory. By moving his knight from f3, White does two things. First, by unmasking the e2-bishop, he prevents what is in general the most irritating knight move by Black, namely ... 'bh5; once that is played, the knight often goes to f4 and hovers uncomfortably close to White's king. After 9 'bel or 9 'bd2, Black has to shelve ... 'bh5 ideas for the time being. Black will have to be content with the move ... 'bd7 or ... 'be8 if he wishes to make way for .. .f5. Once Black's knight retreats, White is able to meet .. .f5 by bolstering his cen tre with f3, though he often avoids this until ... fxe4 is a real threat. The reason is that f3 can clarify Black' s plans, and encourage . .. f5, ... g4. etc. In a majority of games White will get a pawn to c5. Then he will: a) pile up pressure on the d6-pawn, perhaps by 'bc4, i.a3 and 'bb5; b) infiltrate down the c-file by means of some combination of doubling or tripling on it with his rooks and queen; c) if necessary, advance his a-pawn to fur ther enhance his queenside assault and in par ticular his threat to occupy the a7-square. Black on the other hand will get his pawns to f4 and g4 (sometimes supported by ...h5), in or der to: a) play ...g3 and dare White to find an an swer that avoids his sacrificial onslaught; b) play ... gxf3 and open the g-file for a di rect assault. Notice that in most Mar del Plata games. Black runs right past the base of the pawn-chain with the move ...g3, putting no pressure what soever on it! So much for traditional pawn chain theory, which would suggest ... h4-h3 in stead. It is often said that Black gets the better of this deal because his object of attack is the king. which no one can afford to lose, whereas if White captures a few queenside pawns and queenside squares, that's not immediately fatal. Indeed, Black's attack can succeed precisely because of the extra few tempi that he can use to punish White's king while his queenside and centre are collapsing. But the compensating fac tor for White is that his attack tends to proceed just a bit faster than Black's while his defensive walls are harder to breach. This not-so-delicate balance creates beautiful games on a regular basis. After 8 ... 'be7, White can also forego 9 'be I or 9 'bd2 and permit Black to play ... 'bh5 and ... f5. In those lines White will often end up playing on the queenside and kingside. The most important case of this arises when White plays 9 b4, the so-called 'Bayonet Variation . It is very popular and also has a massive body of theory related to it. I have given it a brief treat ment at the end of the chapter. The themes

218 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

associated with 9 b4 are so variegated and tempo-dependent that only a thorough exami nation would impart to the reader genuine un derstanding and competence. Therefore I have concentrated upon two systems that feature pawn-chain themes in a wide variety of con texts. Such lengthy pawn-chains don't consis tently appear in most chess openings, and certainly not with such clarity of purpose.

9 Cbel

9 'bel (D) 9 'bel is a multipurpose move that has tradi tionally been White's most popular choice. On a fundamental level, it frees the f-pawn to go to f3 for defence (or to f4, but that move has be come rare). Apart from the functions described above that apply to both 9 'bel and 9 'bd2, the retreat to e l has its own virtues. It keeps a diag onal clear for White's bishop on c l . This turns out to be no small matter, since the move i.e3 is the key to the favourite modern variation that 9 'bel leads into. In addition, after the knight moves to d3 it supports the key pawn-break c5, attacking Black's pawn-chain. A major differ ence between this and 9 'bd2 is that White's knight on d3 can swing back to f2 for defensive purposes, i.e., to discourage Black's advance ...g5-g4. In combination with the move h3 (not always desirable because of the hole left on g3), White could actually have five defenders of g4 (queen, bishop, knight, and two pawns), with the knight being particularly important because capturing and leaving a piece on g4 is normally much better defensively than having to leave a pawn on that square. Finally, the knight will sometimes go to g2, in cases where White tries to stake out territory by g4; that plan is useful to be aware of but is not one that White imple ments much these days. There's always a drawback to any such move, and this time it has to do with the forward reach of White's knight in the two situations. Even if it has successfully supported the c5 pawn ad vance from its post on d3, White's knight is too far away Black's queenside and centre to put pressure on the d6-pawn, much less give weight to a further advance of White's queen side pawns. And of course from f2 it will do nothing in those respects.

9. . 'bd7

There used to be more discussion about the merits of this retreat. Some books (and conven tional wisdom?) dismiss the alternative 9 .. . 'be8 (D) on the grounds that it does nothing versus White's advance c5; others that by not covering the e5-square it encourages White's f4 ad vance. But in theory there isn't anything wrong with

10 f4 exf4 1 1 i.xf4 h6 ! with ideas of . . .g5. Then

1 2 'bc2 f5 1 3 exf5 g5 followed by . . . 'bxf5 is a standard idea, with approximate equality. Black may want more, of course, but presumably White won't be thrilled with such a result. The similar 1 0 'bd3 f5 1 1 f4 exf4 1 2 i.xf4 ( l 2 'bxf4 c6 ! ?) 1 2. . .fxe4 and . . . 'bf5 is not considered bad for Black either. When assessing 9 ... 'be8, issues connected to White's move c5 are much more interesting. In several other lines of the Mar del Plata we see the knight go from d7 to f6 (to provoke White to

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 219

play f3) and then backwards to e8( !) to defend Black's d6- and c7-squares, the latter being a common intrusion square for a rook, knight or queen. This is particularly the case when Black is defending against the 'bd2-c4 strategy exam ined in the next section, but also at a later stage of the main lines with 'be l . Moreover, while there are some subtleties to consider in this massively complicated situation, it turns out that Black' s defence in the older lines featuring 'bd3 (with c5) and 'bd2 (with c5 and 'bc4) don't suffer with a knight on e8. So what's the point of foregoing the immedi ate 9 ... 'be8 in favour of 9 ... 'bd7? In my opin ion, it's the fact that White's 'newer' strategy with an early a4 and attack on the a-pawn seems to gain in strength, since both the move ... b6 and the c6-square are more important in those lines. You can understand this by examining, for example, 9 ... 'be8 1 0 .i.e3 f5 1 1 f3 f4 1 2 .i.f2 g5 1 3 a4, when 1 3. . .a5 ( 1 3. . .'bg6 14 'bb5)

14 c5 'bg6 1 5 'bb5 would improve for White

upon the main ... 'bd7 lines that follow below. All this may sound picky, but anyone who is go ing to go into these heavily theoretical pawn storm variations should know something about such details. Whether the above is true is an other matter! I'm not sure that the distinction between knight retreats has ever been truly in vestigated in depth, and wouldn't be surprising if 9 ... 'be8 were revived once the details were worked out. At any rate, here's an entertaining game with various pawn-storm themes in which it was effective for a unique reason: Gelfand - Kantsler Israel 200/ 9 'bel 'be8 10 .i.e3 f5 11 f3 f4 12 ilf2 You will also see this .i.e3-f2 manoeuvre in the next section, but with Black's knight on d7 rather than e8.

[diagram]
1 3 a4 ! ? would be the test that corresponds to my speculation above, because Black wouldn't have the handy defensive idea 13 ...a5 14 c5 lbxc5 which is available if the knight is on d7, but illegal here. OK, we can skip over that thought and have fun with the game. 13 ...g5 14 a4 'bg6 15 a5 l:!.f7 16 cxd6 'bxd6!

(D)

17 'bd3 .i.f6 18 lbc5 'bf8 Covering e6. 19 'bb5 l:!.g7 20 a6 bxa6! 21 'bxa6 g4! The attack always takes priority over mate rial in this variation. 22 'bxa7 (D) 22 ... g3 This idea will become familiar to you if it isn't already. Unless White plays h3 and allow' some kind of ... .i.xh3 sacrifice, Black's knights will gain squares close to White's king. 23 ilc5 Upon 23 hxg3 fxg3 24 .i.c5 .i.g5 ! 25 'Llxc8 .i.f4! 26 l:!.el iih4! , Black's attack will at the very least give him the better game.

23. .. .i.h3! ! (D)

This is yet another attacking theme to remem ber. Since White wants to capture on c8 and play h3 to thwart the attack, Black simply occupies that square. The less glamorous 23 ... .i.d7 and 23 ... gxh2+ 24 'it>h l .i.h4!? are also options, both unclear.

220 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

24 gxh3? Underestimating the attack. Best was 24 hxg3 :xg3 (24 ... i.xg2 25 'bc6 ! ? d7 26 @xg2 l:!.xg3+ 27 'it>f2 i.h4 28 i.d3 ! and unbelievably White escapes; a little hard to see, that one!) 25 l:!.f2 and it's still unclear. 24 ...d7 25 i.d3 xh3 26 e2 'bg6 Unfortunately for White, this knight always seems to get to f4 or h4. 27 g2 27 'bb5 'bh4 28 'bbxc7 'bg2! ! 29 hxg3 l:!.xg3 30 @f2 i.h4 and this time there's no escape. 27 ... d7! 28 'bxc7 'bh4 29 e2 h3! (D) Black has the same idea two moves later! But what can White do? 30 'be6 'bg2! ! 31 l:!.fcl xh2+ 32 @fl hl+ 33 i.gl 'bh4 Now the threat is 34 ... 'bxf3 35 g2 'bh2+. 34 'bxg7 34 l:!.c2 l:!.gxa7 ! 35 l:!.xa7 l:!.xa7 opens that second front we always look for!

34. ..

'bxf3 0-1 Having learned something, we'll return to the main line 9 ... 'bd7 (D). At this point our focus will be on the old main line 10 'bd3, after which we'll return to the 'newer' one 10 i.e3. Because 10 a4!? be longs with the a4 themes in the next section, we'll talk about it there. Old Main Line 10 'bd3 f5 11 i.d2 This very old variation still has some life in it.

11...'bf6 12 f3 f4 13 c5 g5 (D)

[diagram]

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 221

deep back then before someone deviated! To day, frightening though it may be, we can get mutual preparation beyond move 30. That's OK: there are also new ideas at around move 10 for you to dip into. And ultimately, if you play one of those, you'll still be able to build your game around the same ideas and themes that you're seeing here. We'll look at two games. To be fair, they arose from very different move-orders and only merged at this point. Ftacnik - Sznapik Baile Herculane Z 1982 19 . i.f8 (DJ Black wants to reorganize, as in thousands of Mar del Plata games, with the moves ... .!lf7, ...i.f8, ....!lg7 and at the right moment, ...lllf6. It sometimes seems as though ...g4 can be played at any time along the way. 20 lll xa7!?

20.  .

i.d7! Normally (but not always), trading off the light-squared bishop on c8 makes a kingside breakthrough impossible. 21 lllb5 .!lg7 22 h3 A known defensive trick is to wait until Black has everything ready for ...g4, and then play g4 yourself! Thus White has 22 g4 (DJ. This advance is worth remembering, whether or not it works in the exact situation before us. Something like 22 .. .fxg3 (22 ... hxg4 can be an swered with 23 lllxg4!? or 23 fxg4 lllh4 24 iib3) 23 hxg3 h4 24 g4 might free White to pursue his queenside attack. 22 .. lll h4 23 ii b3 g4! 24 fxg4 hxg4 25 hxg4 A pretty mate follows 25 i.xg4 lll f6 ! 26 lllc7 lll xg4 27 lll e6? lt:lxf2! 28 ClJxd8 .!lxg2#. 25 ... lt:Jf6 26 i.el (DJ 26 ... lllh5! ! This i s not only visually pleasing but also necessary. For example, 26 ... lllxg4 27 lllxg4

222 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

27.  .

'bg3 Otherwise White's move llh3 will stop things cold. 28 .!lxg3 Forced. The knight was wreaking havoc.

28. ..fxg3 29 Wixg3 .!lxa4 30 'bc3!? .!:!.al 31

'bfdl .i.e7 (D) Improve the position of your worst-placed piece ! 32 'be3 'bg6! 33 ii f2! .i.h4 34 g3 'bf4! 35 @h2! lbxe2 36 gxh4!? 'bf4 37 g5 .!lh7! 38 'bf5? Finally a serious mistake, doubtless in time trouble. Better is 38 iig3, thinking about 39 g6. 38 . .  .i.xf5 39 exf5 'bd3! 40 ii g3 .!lxel 41 .!lxel After 41 iixd3 llxfl 42 ii xfl 'ii xg5 Black wins the queen.

41...'bxel 42 @h3

White's got some passed pawns but his king is too loose. The game is over, as shown by 42 'be4? .!lxh4+! and 42 'ii xel 'ii xg5. 42 ... Wic8! 43 ii g4 'bd3 44 'be4 Wicl ! 45 ii f3 'bf4+ 46 @g4 ii gl+ 0-1 There follows 47 'bg3 (47 ii g3 ii d l + 48 ii f3 .!lxh4+ 49 @g3 llh3+) 4 7 ... llxh4+ ! 48 @xh4 iih2+ 49 @g4 iih3#. Kofol - Radjabov Sarajevo 2003 19 .. .i.d7 20 iib3 .i.f8 (

D)

20 ... .i.f6 was tried in one game. Generally this is played in order to move the queen some where and then the bishop to d8, finishing its trip on a more active square, such as b6 or a5. Notice that the central structure hasn't changed fundamentally for a long time, nor will it soon. In such positions, long journeys by single pieces are not uncommon. 21 .!lc4!? This is slightly strange; normal is .!lc2 (or maybe .!lc3). Perhaps White envisioned a tri pling of heavy pieces with either 'ii c3 and .!le 1 , or llfc l , .!l Bc3 and 'ii c2.

21...a6 22 'ba3 .!lg7 (D)

Not a subtle plan, but then play in this varia tion usually isn't. Black airris for ...g4. 23 a5

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 223

White on the other hand has a wide range of choices for his pieces. The only sure thing is that he has to move fast! 23   'Lif6 24 'iVb6 'iVe8 An exchange of queens would cripple Black's kingside attack. 25 h3 The defensive effort begins. Not 25 'iVxb7?? i.b5 (discovery on the queen) 26 'iVb6 .l:!.b8. 25 ..g4! 26 fxg4 hxg4 27 hxg4 tl'Bh4 (D) 28 .l:!.c7 'iVg6 29 i.el ! .l:!.h7! 29 .. . 'Lixg4 30 'Lixg4 i.xg4 would be deadly were it not for the defensive bishop on e l : 3 1 l!xg7+ 'iVxg7 3 2 i.xg4 'iVxg4 3 3 i.xh4 'iVxh4 34 'iVxb7, etc. 30 'iVb3 White's retreat is a moderately bad sign, be cause he would like to carry out a breakthrough on the queenside. Unfortunately, ...'iVh6 was threatened. Now White's queen maintains con tact with h3. It's hard for Black actually to get through to the king in such positions - you'll see both sides achieve their share of points if it gets this far.

30. ..

'Lixe4! Centre pawns tend to be worth more than flank pawns. 30 ... 'iVh6 3 1 tl'Bh3 'Lixe4 32 i.d3 ! ruins everything. 31 iVd3? This fails miserably (or ought to). White should get some pieces off the board by 3 1 'Lixe4! 'iVxe4 32 .l:!.f2. Although 32 ... f3 !? is scary, White has good control of the light squares: 33 l!c4! 'iVxd5 34 i.d3 ! and i.e4. Black could play simply 32 .. . .l:!.b8, however, with perhaps a very small advantage.

31...'Lig3! (D)

32 .l:!.xb7 This time a queen exchange is welcome, be cause after 32 'iVxg6+ 'Lixg6 33 i.d3 i.e8 ! Black wins material.

[diagram]
Black returns the favour. 32 ... i.fS ! is terribly strong, because 33 gxf5 'Lixe2+ is mate in two. 33 'Lixe4! 'Lixe4 34 .l:!.xd7 Eliminating pieces is life-or-death in this variation. White usually has long-term advan tages that are worth a little material.

34. ..

.l:!.xd7 35 i.xh4 'iVh7 36 l!xf4 'iVxh4 37 .l:!.xe4 i.g7 38 i.f3? (D) Better was 38 g3. From now on almost every move can be either questioned or praised, so I' II leave them alone:

38. ..

l!f8 39 'Lic4 .l:!.df7 40 .l:!.e3 l!f4 41 .l:!.e4 l!xf3 42 gxf3 'iVg3+ 43 'it>hl 'it>f7 44 'Lixd6+ 'iVxd6 45 'it>g2 l!h8 46 iVb3 'iVh2+ 47 'it>fl 'iVhl+ 0-1

224 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Modern Main Line with 10 i.e3

1 d4 'Lif6 2 c4 g6 3 'Lic3 i.g7 4 e4 d6 5 'Lif3 O-O

6 i.e2 e5 7 O-O 'Lic6 8 d5 'Lie7 9 'Liel Let's return to this move and look at one more idea. There's a lot to learn by examining games with loads of theoretical content, even if you don't want to play anything of the sort. But for those of you who are either tired of or fright ened by the theoretical wilderness, 9 a4! ? (D) might be of interest: I place it in this section because it goes with the contemporary a4 ideas that are associated with 10 i.e3, and in fact Korchnoi tried 9 a4 versus Kasparov during a period when he was experimenting with several other schemes in volving that move at a later stage. The main idea is simply a5, gaining important space and extra control over b6. White's knight or rook may also use the a3-square. There's little the ory attached to this line, but a small selection of games. Here are some ideas: 9 ...a5 (after 9 ... 'Lih5, White can go ahead with 1 0 a5, when 1 0. .. tl'Bf4 1 1 i.xf4 exf4 1 2 iVd2 favours White, and 10 .. .f5 1 1 c5 ! ? is also promising) and now: a) 10 'Liel 'Lid7 1 1 i.e3 f5 1 2 f3 'Lic5 ! ? 1 3 'Lid3 b 6 1 4 b4 'Lixd3 1 5 'iVxd3 axb4 1 6 'Lib5 'it>h8 and then: al) 1 7 iVb3 ! ? 'Lig8 1 8 'iVxb4 tl'Bf6 with a very unclear position, Korchnoi-Kasparov, Bar celona 1 989. When Kasparov won this game, it unjustly dampened interest in 9 a4 for years. a2) 17 i.d2 ! is probably best, intending sim ply i.xb4 and then a5; White seems well ahead of the normal 10 i.e3 lines with 1 3 a4 a5. In two games with this move White stood clearly better. Even when deviating from the main lines, it still helps to study them! b) Garcia Palermo-Flores, Pinamar 2002 saw 1 0 l:!.a3 'Lid7 1 1 tl'Bh4!? f5 1 2 exf5 gxf5 1 3 f4 (D). Very interesting! You'd think that more peo ple would be investigating this sort of thing, if only to duck theory. The game continued 1 3. .. 'Lig6?! 1 4 'Lixg6 hxg6 1 5 'Lib5 l:!.f7 1 6 l:!.g3 ! with a clear advantage. There were few if any typical Mar del Plata themes in that one! It shows that one needn't be prisoner of the latest innovation on move 25.

9. ..

'Lid7 10 i.e3 Similarly, 10 a4 is playable and has even en joyed a modest popularity in the past few years. I would rather not commit my knight to e l , so I feel that 9 a4 is more promising.

10. fS 11 f3 f4 12 i.f2 (D)

It's ironic that of all the many systems played by White after 9 ... 'Lid7, the line that most

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 225

[diagram]

226 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Unfortunately, both sides should probably know quite a lot of theory to play these lines. To some extent studying examples and playing as many games as possible will make up for straight memorization. Ideally one would do a little of both.

12. ..

gS (D) Black begins the usual assault. He can also play ...h5 first, probably because he isn't happy to confront White's defensive idea g4 and wants to be able to capture the pawn if that occurs. Of course . . .h5 preempts any idea of ... l!f6-h6, but that only works in a minority of cases and may not appeal to everyone. After 12. ..g5, we have the straightforward move 13 l!c 1 and the more sophisticated 13 a4. The Unpretentious Rook Move 13 l!cl (D) I'll offer two games from this position: del Rio - Illescas Dos Hermanas 2004 13  'Lig6 14 c5!? (D) This is a standard but adventurous sacrifice that succeeds or fails under circumstances that vary only slightly from one position to an other. The idea is that White gets the c-file and the initiative while Black's knight is stuck off side. At the very least White generates consid erable pressure on the queenside. 14  'LixcS 15 b4 'Lia6 16 'Libs i.d7 Another recent game continued 16 ... l!f7 17 'Lid3 i.d7 1 8 a4 with mutual and dynamic chances, Pavlovic-Fedorov, Warsaw Ech 2005.

17 a4 (D)

There have actually been a lot of games from this position, including some with 17 'Lixa7. Rather than dig into very technical theory we'll follow the main game.

17 ... 'iVbS!?

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 22 7

Presumably the idea of tbxa7 was getting too annoying for Black's taste. 1 7. .. .l:!.f7 has been seen in many games, with White doing pretty well. After the obvious 1 7. .. tbxb4? !, Mikhal evski offers the continuation 1 8 tbxc7 .l:!.c8 19 tbb5 a5 20 .l:!.xc8 ! .ltxc8 2 1 ll:lc2 ! with advan tage. 18 tiJd3! .l:!.f7 19 tba3 (D) Threatening b5 because Black's knight has nowhere to go.

19. ..

'iVd8 20 b5 tiJb8 21 as a6 This looks awful but Black is a pawn ahead, so White has to prove something. The opening has come to an end and we'll follow the middle game because of its astonishing character.

22 b6 c5 23 dxc6 tbxc6 24 iVd2!

A very subtle move. Instead of the direct threat of .ltc4, which might have followed 24 tbb2 (with 24 ... i.e6 25 i.c4 iVd7 as a probable continuation), White keeps his knight on an ac tive square and plans a surprise.

24. . i.e6 25 lhc6!! bxc6 (D)

Amazing. Now we can see the point of 24 iVd2. 26 ll:lb4 g4!? Probably a good idea, so that White has something to think about too. Naturally ...g3 can't be allowed. Instead, 26 .. . 'iVd7 27 tbxa6 gives White two passed pawns and guess what? His queen protects a5 so that the knight can get out via c7 ! 27 fxg4 f3! 28 .lli. xf3 iVd7! ( D) Black protects c6 and hits g4. 29 h3?! 29 l!bl with the idea tbxa6! was better. 29 .. ttJf4 30 .lte3 c5 31 ll:lbc2 i.h6? 32 'it>h2 Black's 3 1 st move loses the initiative since now White threatens g3. 32 . . i.g7 33 g3 ll:lg6 34 i.g2 ll:le7 35 :di .l:!.d8 36 'iVe2! 'iVc8 37 i.g5 This frees the c2-knight to get to f5 or d5.

37. ..

i.f6 38 i.xf6 l!xf6 39 tbe3 ll:lc6 (DJ 40 ttJrs .ltxrs

228 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Mikhalevski analyses 40 ... tbd4? 41 .l:!.xd4! i.xf5 42 b7! ! li'b8 43 .l:!.d2! (43 exf5 !?) 43 ... i.e6 44 li'xa6 .l:!.f7 45 .l:!.b2 "and when the a-pawn reaches the a6-square the game will be over". 41 exf5 'it>h8 42 ll:lc4 From here on out it's pretty easy. White owns the light squares and has the powerful passed pawn. 42 .. tt:Jd4 43 li'e4 h5 44 b7 li'c7 45 tt:Je3 li'h7 46 g5 .l:!.ff8 47 f6 li'xe4 48 i.xe4 .l:!.b8 49 .l:!.bl ll:lb5 50 .l:!.xb5 axb5 51 a6 b4 l-O Speelman - Uhlmann Leningrad 1984

13. . .l:!.f6 14 b4

It seems generally agreed that if any attack with ... .l:!.f6-h6 works it's going to be in this po sition. Another way for White to continue is 14 c5 a6 15 c6 bxc6 16 dxc6 tbf8 17 ll:ld5.

14. . 

.l:!.h6 15 c5 a6 16 cxd6 cxd6 17 g4 If this had to be played, it may have been smarter to do so a move or two ago. 17 ... fxg3 18 hxg3 ll:lg6! 19 tbg2 tbf4! Easy to spot but still daring for one to actu ally play it! 20 gxf4 gxf4 21 i.h4 i.f6! (D) Perhaps this is what Speelman missed, ex pecting 2 1 . ..li'b6+ 22 i.f2, etc. 22 i.xf6 tbxf6 Black is a full piece down but it's hard to know what to do for White. The first problem is ... li'b6+, and ... i.h3 looms as well, so Speel man tries to escape with the king. 23 'it>f2 .l:!.h2 24 'it>gl l!h3 25 'it>f2 .l:!.g3 26 tbxf4 Or 26 tba4 b5 27 tbc5 dxc5 28 bxc5 i.h3. 26 ... exf4 27 li'd4 ll:lg4+!? 28 'it>el A last chance might be 28 fxg4 li'h4 29 'it>el l!xc3+ 30 'it>d2, however unlikely. 28 ... ll:le5 (D) A monster knight! 29 'it>d2 .lli. h3 30 .l:!.gl i.g2 31 tt:Ja4 i.xf3 32 tbb6 i.xe2 33 'it>xe2 li'g5 34 tbxa8 f3+ 35 'it>f2 .l:!.g2+ 36 l!xg2 li'xg2+ 37 'it>e3 li'g5+ 0-1 Sophisticated Assault

13 a4 (D)

What is this move all about? With a4 on the board, White can more productively attack the a7-pawn (or square) with his knight on b5 and bishop on f2. This is so because ...b6 is met by a5, whereas if Black plays ... a6, tba7 has the important goal of eliminating Black's bishop on c8. As we have seen, that bishop is almost essential to Black's kingside attack. Barring

KING 'S IND/AN DEFENCE 229

that possibility, White has direct ideas such as a5 and even a6. In other cases a4 allows for a rook to come to a3 both in order to defend the kingside (e.g., Black plays ...g4 and White an swers fxg4, unmasking the rook on a3 horizon tally), and to double or triple major pieces along the c-file. Right now 13 ...a5 seems to be Black's best solution to 13 a4, which is paradoxical because it 'weakens' the queenside with tempo. But it also stops b4, which in tum makes c5 more dif ficult to achieve. A few examples out of many demonstrate what 13 a4 is about: a) 13 ...a6 14 a5 .l:!.f6 and now: a l ) 15 ll:la4 I:!.h6 16 c5 'iVe8 1 7 'it>h 1 iVh5 1 8 i.gl l2Jf6 19 cxd6! cxd6 20 l2Jb6 'iVh4 21 l2Jxc8 ! . This is a good example of getting rid of the key attacking piece. Now, although Black gave it an inspired try, he wasn't able to get through to the king in Summerscale-Snape, Coulsdon 2002. a2) 15 g4!?. We've talked about this idea, which Shirov has used before. Here Shirov Tkachev, Biel 1995 continued 15 .. .fxg3 16 hxg3 h5 ! 17 ll:lg2 I:!.h6 1 8 ll:le3 l2Jf6 19 'it>g2 i.d7 20 b4 'iVe8 21 c5 'iVg6 22 cxd6 cxd6 23 l2Jc4 g4? ! (23 ...h4! ?) 24 l2Jb6 gxf3+ 25 .lli. xf3 I:!.f8 (White looks better to me, but this is too complex to say for sure) 26 ll:lxd7 ll:lxd7 27 .l:!.h l ll:lf6 28 'iVe2 h4 29 l!h3 l!c8 30 'iVd2 hxg3 112-112. b) 13 ... I:!.f6? ! 14 ll:lb5 a6?! 15 ll:la7 (D). 15 ... I:!.xa7 16 i.xa7 l!h6 (a remarkable piece of optimism; 16 ... b6 never seems to trap the bishop in such positions, in this case because of

17 a5 ! i.b7 18 axb6 cxb6 19 c5 ! l2Jxc5 20 b4

l2Jd7 21 i.xa6, etc.) 17 ll:ld3 l2Jf6 1 8 c5 ( 1 8 l2Jf2 has also won some games) 1 8. ..g4 19 fxg4 l2Jxe4 20 i.f3 l2Jg3 ! ? 21 cxd6 cxd6 22 hxg3 fxg3 23 I:!.el l2Jg6 24 I:!.e4!, and White's king was able to get to the safe haven on e2, Krivo shei-Cherkasov, Koszalin 1999. c) 13 ... l2Jg6 is under a cloud because after

14 a5 .l:!.f7 (or 14. .. h5 15 ll:lb5) 15 c5, Black's

counterplay is too slow. The knight gets in the way of ... l!f6-h6. We now tum to an example with 13 ... a5.

13. . .as

P.H. Nielsen - Kotronias Hastings 200314 As mentioned earlier, this move weakens Black's queenside and even spends a tempo doing so, but these drawbacks appear to be outweighed by the fact that it also frustrates White's active plans. 14 ll:ld3 b6 (D) Black tries to undercut both c5 and a5. This is the structure that he's been aiming for. \\-ith the benefit that ... l2Jc5 can be a valuable defen sive resource at some point. 15 i.el!? In many ways retreating the bishop is White s most logical move. The reasoning is as follows: a) White needs to get b4 in. b) Once he's made that move and Black ha-; captured with the move ... axb4, White will set his eyes upon his next queenside break. which is a5 . c) Capturing on b4 with the bishop (or even aiming it that way) is the best way to achieve

230 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a5 and continue his queenside attack. Then, whether Black captures White's pawn on a5 or not, White will gain targets on the queenside, such as c7, b6 or d6. d) Finally, by capturing on b4 with the bishop, White preserves his knight on d3 to go to f2 and protect against ...g4 in the traditional fashion. Of course there are difficulties with this procedure in terms of time; the whole thing's rather slow. White's bishop has to travel to e3, f2, el and b4, conceivably hurting his kingside defences thereby (for example, there won't be a i.gl defence). White's knight on c3 will have to get out of the way, although l2Jb5 may be a tempo well spent. And the move c5 will still be a long way from realization even after White completes the a5 plan. Nevertheless, Black's knight on d7 will have to move to f6 (or perhaps c5) at some point in order to continue with his kingside attack, at which point White's queen side chances will inevitably improve. For all that, 1 5 b4 immediately makes sense too, mainly because White must play b4 if he is going to open the queenside and he may be able to make use of the knight on b4 by, for example, going to c6 and supporting a5. However, it should be noted that a knight on c6 in the King's Indian will often be stranded there as Black moves to the kingside to pursue his at tack. Let's see a couple of the main ideas in practice: l 5. .. axb4 1 6 l2Jb5 (after l 6 ll:lxb4 l2Jc5 1 7 a5? bxa5 1 8 i.xc5 dxc5 19 l2Jd3 l2Jc6! 20 dxc6 'iVd4+ Black wins back the piece with an extra pawn and pressure) 1 6. .. l2Jf6 (DJ. 1 7 i.el ( 1 7 ll:lxb4 h5; 1 7 iVb3 !? might plot 'iVxb4 and a5; I don't know if that's been tried) l 7 ...g4 ( l 7 ...h5 1 8 l2Jf2 ! ?) 1 8 fxg4 (White gives up a centre pawn, usually a bad idea if you can avoid it, but 1 8 i.xb4 g3 ! 1 9 h3 i.xh3 ! 20 gxh3 'iVd7 would be a dangerous standard attack; note how useful the light-squared bishop can be) 1 8. . . l2Jxe4 19 i.xb4 i.d7 20 'ifc2 l2Jg5 21 h4!? ll:le4 22 i.el l2Jg6 23 h5 ll:lg3 ! 24 hxg6 'iVh4 with a powerful attack, Chabanon-Degraeve, French Cht 1 999.

15. ..

l2Jf6 16 ll:lf2 h5 17 h3 'it>h8 (DJ 18 ll:lb5 l2Jeg8 19 b4 .l:!.f7 Some recent games from this critical position have favoured White; for example, 19. .. ll:lh6 20 c5 bxc5 2 1 bxc5 .l:!.f7 22 ll:la3 ! .lli. f8 23 l2Jc4 g4 24 fxg4 hxg4 25 hxg4 .l:!.g7 (DJ. 26 .l:!.a3 ! l2Jhxg4 27 ll:lxg4 ll:lxg4 28 .l:!.h3+ 'it>g8 29 .l:!.h4 !? l2Jf6?! 30 'iVc2 ! and Black's at tack looks dead, Zakhartsov-Voicu, Alushta 2005. 20 bxa5 bxa5 21 c5 .lli. f8 22 cxd6 cxd6 23 .l:!.cl l2Jh6 24 .l:!.c4 .l:!.g7 25 'iVc2 g4 26 i.xa5!?

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 231

Perhaps the most critical line is the greedy 26 hxg4!? hxg4 27 tbc7 g3 28 tbxa8, N.Brun ner-Helstroffer, Nancy 2006, agreed drawn at this point! We'll just enjoy the rest of our game, in spite of the fact that White could have played better. 26 ... 'iVe8! 27 h4 gxf3 28 i.xf3 i.g4! 29 i.xg4 tbfxg4 30 i.b6 'iVe7 31 tbxg4?! ll:lxg4 32 i.f2 f3! 33 g3 tbe3! 34 .ltxe3 l!xg3+ 35 'it>f2 l!g2+ 36 'it>xf3 l!xc2 37 l!xc2 'iVxh4 38 .l:!.gl l!xa4 39 tbc3 l!c4 40 'it>e2 i.h6! 41 i.b6 .l:!.xe4+ 0-1 9 lLid2 9 tiJd2 (D) There's a legitimate question whether this move or 9 tbel is better. As mentioned above, once White plays tbd2 it is unlikely that he will return to defend against, say, the standard pawn attack via .. .f5, .. .f4 and ...g5-g4. On the other hand, 9 ll:ld2 supports more aggressive inten tions on the queenside. White's idea is to play c5 (ultimately this is difficult to stop) and then place the knight on c4, which exerts tremen dous pressure on Black's queenside and centre, most obviously on the d6-pawn but also sup porting b5-b6, and infiltrating by tba5-c6 in some lines. All the time, the knight keeps an eye on the e5-pawn, the foundation of Black's position. If Black lets the e-pawn go (say, by ...dxc5, when White also has a bishop on b2), then the collapse of his centre causes an imme diate crisis (essentially, he has to get through to White's king immediately thereafter). A further consideration which affects the entire course of the play is the slow pace at which White is able to mobilize his c l -bishop and a l-rook. This gives Black opportunities to play on the queen side as well. In fact, Black' s play on that wing crops up in almost every major King's Indian system. These ideas are best illustrated by example. We look at 9 ... tbe8 and 9 ...a5. There are of course numerous alternatives, with the most important being 9 ...c5. I'll forego that in favour of giving more detailed coverage of the other two moves. Pawn Race 9 .  .tbe8 (D) After both 9 ll:ld2 and 9 tbel there are dis agreements over whether 9 ... tbe8 or 9 ... ll:ld7 is more accurate. In this position I won't go into that except to say that: a) 9 ... tbd7 protects against c5, with the ca veat that after b4 White might play c5 as a pawn sacrifice; b) 9 ... ll:le8 supports d6 so that a 'traditional " plan with c5, cxd6, tbc4 and tbb5 doesn't threaten the d-pawn or the c7-square. That may be more important. See the more detailed discussion of the same choice after 9 tbel .

10 b4 rs

So now it's a pawn-race, a la 9 ll:lel ll:ld7 .

11 c5 tiJf6

Bringing the knight back to f6 negates the difference between 9 ... tbd7 and 9 ... ll:le8.

12 f3 f4 13 tbc4 g5

232 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is familiar territory. Here are two in structive and entertaining games:

Bogdanovski - Golubev Skopje 1991 14 i.a3 (D)

14. ..

l2Jg6 15 b5 l2Je8!? It's hard to believe that Black can get away with making this passive move twice! But he succeeds in this game, which says something about how dangerous .. .f4, ...g5 and ...g4 can be even in an inferior line. More likely to be good is 15 ...dxc5, as seen in Bunzmann-Golubev.

16 b6 axb6 17 cxb6 cxb6 18 'iVb3 h5 19

.l:!.abl g4 20 l2Jxb6 'iVg5! (D) What material? 21 'it>hl ?! 21 l2Jxa8?! g3 22 h3 iVh4! 23 l:!.b2 i.xh3 24 gxh3 'iVxh3 25 .lli. b5 l2Jh4 is utterly depressing for White, who might have thought he had the game in the bag. There can follow 26 ii.d7 iVxd7 27 lZJbl iVh3, but it doesn't help much.

21...l2Jh4 22 l2Jxc8?!

Normally, getting rid of this bishop is key to successful defence, but now White hasn't even won any material! Other moves are not much easier, however. 22 ... .l:!.xc8 23 l:!.gl .l:!.f7 24 l:!.bcl i.f8 25 l2Ja4 l:!.xcl 26 i.xcl .l:!.g7 27 iVdl l2Jf6 28 l2Jb6 'iVg6

(D)

29 i.d2 Golubev offers the charming analysis 29 'iVel g3 30 h3? l2Jg4! 31 fxg4 hxg4 32 i.xg4 'iVxg4! ! 33 hxg4 l:!.h7 and mates ! 29 ... l2Jh7 30 'iVfl g3 31 i.el l:!.c7 32 i.c4 .lte7! Black begins a standard manoeuvre to free his bad bishop. In this case it serves a defensive function, but in many openings it will make the trip ... i.g7-f6-d8-b6/a5 for attacking purposes.

33 a4 i.d8 34 a5 'it>h8 35 'iVe2 .l:!.g7 36 i.b5

iVf6! 37 i.e8 gxh2 38 'it>xh2 'iVe7?! In time-trouble Golubev backs off. He wasn't sure about what would follow 38 ... l:!.g3 !. 39 i.a4?! This was the last chance for 39 i.d7 ! . 39 ... .l:!.g3! Black finds a very pretty and original combi- nation. 40 i.xg3 (D) 40 ... l2Jf5!! 41 .:!.cl Everything loses: 41 exf5 fxg3+ 42 'it>xg3 iVh4#; 41 i.el l2Jg3 42 i.xg3 fxg3+ 43 'it>xg3 iVh4#.

41.. .fxg3+ 42 'it>gl iVh4 43 iVb5 iVh2+ 44

'it>fl iVhl + 45 'it>e2 'iVxg2+ 0-1

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE

[diagram]

[diagram]
16 ... dxcS!? This strange move is actually a plausible at tempt to get Black's attack going; he prefers to face the move d6 rather than b6. The game R.Hemandez-J.Gunnarsson, Santa Clara 2002 is terribly instructive: 16 ...f8 17 a5 !? (17 b6 is also promising, in view of the line 17 ... axb6?! { 17 ... dxc5 ! is probably the best way to defend} 1 8 cxb6 cxb6 19 l:i.bl l:i.a6 20 ib3!) 17. ..dxc5 ! (Martin offers 17 ...b6 1 8 cxb6 axb6 1 9 axb6 cxb6 20 ll'Ba2! g4 2 1 ll'Bb4 g3 22 ll'Bc6 and White has made too much progress too fast) 1 8 b6 axb6?! (a possible improvement is 1 8. ..cxb6) 19 axb6 cxb6 20 3 ! l:i.a6 21 b2?! (21 l:i.fbl ! must be strong; the overall impression is that White is better after 16 ... f8) 21...ll'Bd7? (Bogdanovski-Rosiak, Lodz 1 989 actually fa voured Black after 2 1 ...g4!) 22 d6! (D). After this powerful breakthrough the situa tion is still complex, but we may consider the opening ideas complete. So we'll sit back and watch how Black can get slaughtered before his attack could take effect: 22 ...h5 23 ll'Bd5 @h7 24 l:i.fdl b5 25 "it'xb5 g4 26 fxg4 ig5? 27 l:i.xa6 bxa6 28 "it'c6 hxg4 29 "it'xc8 f3 30 "it'e8! l:i.g7 3 1 fl ! g 3 3 2 h 3 ih5 3 3 l:i.d2 f2+ 34 @hl ih4 3 5 l:i.e2 "it'g5 36 "it'e6 1 -0. 17 xc5 h5!? (D) 18 d6 The combination in Ftacnik-Cvitan, Bundes liga 1 997/8 has been shown in umpteen books, but not everyone reads these things, so a quick

234 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

run-through: 1 8 a5 g4 1 9 b6 g3 20 @hl ! ll'Bh7

[diagram]
@xg2 li'h3+ ! ! 25 @xh3 ll'Bg5+ 26 @g2 ll'Bh4+ 27 @hl g2#.

[diagram]

[diagram]
White wants to prevent ...a4, with one pawn holding down two.

11. ..

[diagram]

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 235

17 d3 ib6 1 8 ll'Bb3 i.h6 19 ll'Ba5 '!J.c7 20 i.e2? '!J.xc3 ! 21 j_xc3 ll'Bxe4 (an exchange sac rifice tends to be pretty safe when you get a centre pawn and mobile majority) 22 el '!J.c8 23 f3 ll'Bf6 24 d2 xd2 25 ixd2 e4 26 j_e2 ll'iexd5. A second centre pawn has fallen, and Black is clearly better. b) White played a better idea in Sharavdorj Al Modiahki, Yangon 1 999, but didn't get much after 1 2 '!J.a2 "it'b8 1 3 '!J.c2! '!J.c8 14 ll'idbl !? (per haps 14 a4 ! ? intending a3 could be tried; then White could play on the kingside too) 14 ... b5 15 cxb5 ( 15 dxc6 xc6 16 cxb5 .llxe4 17 ll'Bxe4) 15 ...cxb5 16 b4 axb4 17 axb4 '!J.al 1 8 d3 ll'Bh5

19 g3 (19 j_b2 '!J.a7 20 ll'Ba3) 19 ...'!J.a7 with

[diagram]

18 g3 .lld7 19 "it'e2 '!J.c8 20 ll'Bb3 ll'Ba4 21

[diagram]

236 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

23 l:tfxcl xb3! The same reasoning. But what are those pieces defending? 24 l:txb3 tt:\g7! The main point of ... tt:lh5 : d4 is there for the taking with nothing to challenge it. 25 c5! He shouldn't wait around for ... tt:le6-d4 with out activating his bad bishop. 25. tt:le6 (D) 26 l:tbc3?! 26 "it'e3! was better, when 26 ...b5 (26 ... "it'c7 27 j_c4 !) 27 cxb6 (27 xb5 ctJd4) 27 ... l:txc l + 28 "it'xc 1 "it'xb6 29 b 5 i s almost equal, but Black's knight still looks somewhat better than White's bishop; e.g., 29 ... tt:lc5 30 ie3! "it'a5 31 l:tbl "it'c3 32 l:tdl l:tb8. 26 ...dxcS 27 bxc5 "it'a5! 28 ic2?! But 28 "it'e3 might run into 28 ... b6! 29 c6 tt:lc5, etc.

[diagram]
tt:lxc5 32 j_b5 'iVb6 33 l:tlc2? l:tc7 34 "it'cl l:tfc8! 35 j_fl tt:le6 36 l:txc7 l:txc7 37 l:txc7 "it'xc7 Black is a pawn ahead and has a winning position. The Bayonet Variation

9 b4 (D)

[diagram]

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 23 7

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
16 tLlxe4 tt:Jxe4 17 xe4 d5 1 8 cxd5 cxd5 ; e.g .. 1 9 i.c5 ( 1 9 j_c2 is the older move, perhaps a better try) 19 ... dxe4 20 ixd8 l:i.fxd8 21 j_xe 7 l:te8 22 i.c5 l:txe6 23 l:i.xe4 l:td8 24 h4 a6 25 a4 l:td5 with equality, Gyimesi-Baklan, Romanian Cht (Tusnad) 2005. . c6

12. ..

[diagram]

238 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

21 t2Jd6 "ixe6 22 tLlxb7 l:i.ab8 23 t2Jd6 tt:Jc6

24 a3 @h7 2S ia4 id7 26 l:i.adl l:i.fd8

[diagram]

1 d4 tLlf6 2 c4 g6 3 tt:Jc3 j_g7 4 e4 d6 S i.e2 O-O

6 gS (D) In the Averbakh, White tries to limit Black's options while keeping his own development flexible. I won't go into all the positional trade-offs between 5 tLlf3/6 j_e2 and 5 e2/6 g5, but one of White's immediate ideas is to attack Black's king via id2, j_h6 and h4-h5. For this, the bishop on e2 is useful in that after 6 ...h6 7 j_e3, 7 ... tLlg4 is prevented. Another motivation for 5 j_e2 and 6 g5 is to prevent the natural 6 ...e5?? because of 7 dxe5 dxe5 8 ixd8 l:i.xd8 9 tt:Jd5 tLlbd7 10 l:i.dl ! (or 10 tLlxc7) 10 ... l:i.f8 1 1 tLlxc7 with a winning game. Even the dynamic counter-attempt 1 1 ... tt:Jxe4? falls on its face after 12 j_e3 l:i.b8 13 xa7. I shall use the Averbakh Variation mainly to discuss ...c5 structures in the King's Indian, something that we haven't seen much in other parts of this chapter. We shall also examine sev eral Samisch Variation games for that purpose.

6. ..cS

[diagram]

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 239

In this position, l 3 ... ib6 would be a natural move, but I like the idea 1 3. .. l:i.a6!?. Black in- tends ... l:i.b6 and in most cases ... l:i.b4. This is an example of Black abandoning ...f5 plans in fa- vour of queenside action, as we saw in various lines with ...e5 earlier in this chapter. Of course, kingside expansion may follow later.

[diagram]
8 i.e3 is another idea; it allows Black to play 8 ...e6 without immediately sacrificing his d pawn. 8 .e6! A positional pawn sacrifice to activate all Black's pieces, with an emphasis on the dark squares. But White gets a free centre pawn. 9 dxe6 xe6 10 i.xd6 l:i.e8 (

D)

11 tLlf3 (D) 1 1 xc5 is another can of worms. 1 1 e5 ! ? is rare, but shows typically dynamic themes: a) l 1 . ..tLlfd7 12 f4 tt:Jc6 with the idea of an early ...f6 would be wild after 1 3 tLld5 xd5 ! ? 14 cxd5 (14 ixd5 ib6 15 b3 l:i.ad8) 14 ...tt:Jd4 15 b4! ? tt:Jxe5 ! 16 j_xe5 xe5 17 fxe5 l:i.xe5 with a terrific attack for the piece. b) l 1 . . .tLlg4 ! ? 12 xg4 i.xg4 1 3 "it'xg4 "it'xd6 14 f4 id4! 15 tt:Jge2 "it'xc4 with equality. Now (after 1 1 t2Jf3) Black must seek a way to use the power of the g7-bishop. ll . . . "it'b6 l l ...tt:Jc6 is an alternative that has been ana- lysed out 25-30 moves to a drawish ending. I'll pass on that. 12 xb8

12 e5 t2Jfd7 13 tLlb5 tt:Jc6 ! is one of those typ

[diagram]

240 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

This is Bareev-Golubev, USSR jr-Wch qual ifier (Klaipeda) 1 985. Black came out worse in the enticing complications introduced by

23. ..

ll'Bd4? 24 "ixc5 lbc2 25 l:i.xe8+ l:i.xe8 26 l::t d l ! l:i.e2 27 @fl ! l::t xf2+?! 28 @gl ! . White eventually won. All in all, you can see how 6 ...c5 changes the King's Indian dynamic. Samisch Variation

[diagram]
The Samisch Variation is characterized by White's desire to protect his central squares e4 and d4, the first by a pawn and the second by pieces. This set-up is more difficult to attack by the means that we saw in the Classical Variation. If Black plays ...e5 and White replies d5 (by no means forced; see the first game), his favourite attack by ... f5-f4 and ...g5-g4 will achieve less for two reasons. First, White won't have to go through gyrations like ll'Bf3-el in order to attack on the queenside; that is, the moves f3 and j_e3 come without hindrance. Moreover, White will often castle queenside and sidestep a direct at tack on his king. He can then attack on either or both sides of the board, by means of h4-h5 or b4 and c5. I'll present examples below. Black has many approaches to the Samisch, but in general has benefited from remaining flexible. For some time now, 6 ...c5 has been the main weapon of top players. As in the Aver bakh Variation, we'll see Black trying to pry open the long diagonal. Of course, there is a very wide variety of other strategies that both players can employ after 5 f3. My primary goal

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 241

[diagram]

O-O-O (D)

[diagram]

4 e4 d6 5 ll'Bf3 O-O 6 e2 e5 7 O-O ll'ibd7. At any

[diagram]

12. ..

[diagram]

(D)

[diagram]

242 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

16. tt:Jg4! ( D)

[diagram]

17 e5 t2Jf2 18 l::t

[diagram]

24 h3 exf4 25 hxg4 f3 26 tLld3 (26 gxf5 f2 27

l::t fl l::t e l 28 l::t d l l::t xdl 29 l::t xdl l::t e8 30 t2Jd3 l::t e2) 26 .. .fxg4 27 l::t xg4 and after all those com plications, the elegant 27 ... l::t e l + ! 28 tt:Jxel f2.

21...l::t

[diagram]

[diagram]

7 d5 tt:Jh5 8 id2 (D)

[diagram]
KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 243

A famous line is 8 ... 'ih4+ 9 g3 (9 .i.f2 offers repetition by 9 ... 'if4 l 0 .i.e3, etc., or Black can try 9 ... 'ie7) 9 ... lt:Jxg3 ! 10 'if2 (10 i.f2? lt:Jxfl)

10. ..

tt:Jxfl 11 'ixh4 lt:Jxe3. This is Bronstein's idea. Black has only two pieces and a pawn for the queen, but threatens ... lt:Jg2+ and will pick up the c-pawn with chances based largely upon queenside activity. With accurate play, this vari ation may favour White slightly, but that assess ment is still being debated today.

9 O-O-O (D)

9 ...f4?! This familiar advance is Black's most primi tive approach, imitating the one that he uses against the Classical King's Indian. Perhaps my designation of '?!' is a bit harsh, but ...f4 is gen erally not a good idea for the reasons mentioned above. We shall examine it because the result ing positions illustrate White's core strategy versus ... e5/ ...f5 in clearest form. This situation can also arise in other variations in the Samisch such as 5 f3 O-O 6 .i.e3 lt:Jc6 (with a later ...e5); it is also seen in the King's Indian Attack, and even in the Modem Defence ( l .. .g6). Over the years, Black has had more success with the flexible 9 ... lt:Jd7, preparing ... tt:Jdf6 or ...lt:Jc5. White can react in various ways; a classic and still popular possibility is 10 .i.d3

Now: a) 10. .. tt:Jdf6 1 1 lt:Jge2 introduces another classic line. It affords White multiple choices such as exf5 followed by lt:Jg3, or simply h3, preparing g4. Ceding e4 by l 1...fxe4 12 lt:Jxe4 lt:Jxe4 13 .i.xe4 .i.f5 14 lt:Jc3 gives White a small but certain advantage, in view of 14 ... lt:Jf6 15 .i.g5 and White's e4 strongpoint cannot be broken down. b) 10. .. tt:Jc5 ! ? 1 1 .i.c2 a6. Here Black pre pares a counterattack by ...b5; for example, 12 lt:Jge2 b5 13 b4 lt:Jd7 14 cxb5 ! ? axb5 15 lt:Jxb5 ! ? l'ha2 16 tt:Jec3 l':i.a8, which has always been considered better for White, but Ward points out that this is not entirely clear. 10 .i.f2 .i.f6 Intending ... .i.h4, to trade his bad bishop for White's good one on f2. Naturally White doesn't allow the exchange. 11 lt:Jge2 In Gheorghiu-Angantysson, Reykjavik 1986, White got in every move of his ideal plan: 1 1 'iY'el lt:Jd7 1 2 @bl .i.e7 1 3 tt:Jge2 b6 1 4 b4! a5

15 a3 .i.b7 16 lt:Jc l lt:Jb8 17 lt:Jb3 axb4 18 axb4

tt:Ja6 19 tt:Ja2 'id7 20 '1t>b2! @h8 2 1 l':i.al h6 22 lt:Jac l (D) with the idea lt:Jd3 and c5. Although Black could have set up differ - ently, we see what he is up against. l l ... .i.h4 12 .i.gl

244 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

By playing ... .llf6-h4, Black has imprisoned White's rook on h l . The problem is that he needs something positive to do.

12. .. tt:Ja6

Black tries to slow down White's idea of a pawn-storm on the queenside. As before, if not disturbed, White has the simple plan of @bl , lt:Jcl -d3/b3, l::t c l and launching his pawns for ward with b4 and c5. In the early game Petro sian-Gligoric, Zurich Ct 1953, for example, Black let White have his way by 12 ... g5? 13 c5 g4 14 @bl , when Black was stuck for an idea. The game isn't that much better: 13 @bl g5 14 tt:Jcl g4 15 tt:Jd3 gxf3 16 gxf3 'V/ii e7 17 b4 'it>h8 18 l::t cl l::t g8 19 c5 (D) 19 ... lt:Jf6 20 tt:Jb5 .i.d7? But White was getting through anyway. Now Black's pawn-chain collapses. 21 tt:Jxc7! tt:Jxc7

21...l::t

xgl 22 l::t xgl lt:Jxc7 23 cxd6 'V/ii xd6 24 'V/ii c3 ! hits both c7 and e5. 22 cxd6 'V/ii xd6 23 .llc5 tt:Jxe4 Forced, to save the queen; otherwise 23 ... 'V/ii a6 24 lt:Jxe5 followed by 'V/ii xf4 is resignable. 24 fxe4 'V/ii g6 Even sadder is 24 ... 'V/ii f6 25 lt:Jxe5 ! and .i.d3. 25 lt:Jxf4! exf4 26 .ll d4+ l::t g7 27 l::t xc7 .\lf6 28 .ll xf6 'V/ii xf6 29 'V/iib2! 'V/ii xb2+ 30 @xb2 l::t e8 31 l::t xd7 l::t xd7 32 .llb5 l::t dd8 33 .llxe8 l::t xe8 34 l::t el f3 35 @c3 f2 36 l::t fl l::t xe4 37 l::t xf2 @g7 38 d6 l::t e6 39 l::t d2 l::t e8 40 'it>d4 l::t c8 41 @d5 r!;f7 42 d7 1-0 Defence by means of ...e5 is still respect able, but these kinds of difficulties are one rea son why Black has turned toward systems with ...c5. Samisch with . . .cs

1 d4 tt:Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 lt:Jc3 .ll

g7 4 e4 d6 5 f3 O-O 6 .ll e3 c5! (

D)

This variation begins with a pawn sacrifice in order to enhance the power of Black's bishop on g7 and to increase control of the dark squares in general. Remember that when White plays d4, c4 and e4, his most vulnerable square is d4, be cause it can't be supported by adjacent pawns. 7 dxc5 This variation is presented for instructional purposes; otherwise I would need to go into the alternatives 7 lt:Jge2 and 7 d5. Their theory is ex tensive, but for once it's fair to say that mastery of the typical tactics and positional ideas will allow you to play either side with confidence. 7 dxc5 8 'V/ii xd8 l::t xd8 9 .llxc5 lt:Jc6 (D) For his pawn, Black has both dark-square control and a lead in development. At this point we'll look at a few games:

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE 245

Kramnik - Shirov Bundesliga 1 99213 10 i.a3 a5! 11 l:!.dl .i.e6 12 tt:Jd5 tt:Jb4! (

D)

This move was Shirov's innovation, which changed both the assessment of this particular line and the reputation of the 6 ...c5 variation as a whole. 13 tt:Jxe7+! 13 .i.xb4?! axb4 14 lt:Jxb4 lt:Jd7 ! 15 l::t d2 tt:Jc5 (D) illustrates the power of the two bish ops and open files: In spite of White's temporary two-pawn ad vantage, he is already in trouble and all three of his queenside pawns could easily fall. Other wise we can get a position in which White's pieces won't be able to unravel; for example, 16 l::t xd8+ l::t xd8 17 lt:Jd5 i.xb2 18 lt:Jxe7+ @f8 19 lt:Jd5 l::t a8 ! 20 .i.e2 l::t xa2 21 lt:Jh3 .i.xd5 22 exd5 i.c3+ 23 @f2 .i.d4+ 24 'it>el tt:Ja4, etc. 13 ... @h8 14 l::t xd8+ l::t xd8 15 lt:Jd5! Gallagher gives the line 15 .i.xb4? axb4 16 lt:Jd5 l::t a8 17 lt:Jxb4 lt:Jd7 ! and Black stands better, although this time he's three pawns down! Compare the game.

15. .. lt:Jc2+ 16 'it>d2 tt:Jxa3 17 bxa3 b5! (D)

This key move takes the legs out from under the knight on d5 by liquidating the pawns that support it. 18 lt:Jh3 112-112 Unfortunately, the game was agreed drawn at this point, but there's plenty more to say. Shirov gives the line 18. ..bxc4 19 i.xc4 lt:Jxd5 20 exd5 .i.xd5 21 .i.xd5 l::t xd5+ 22 'it>e2. As Gallagher notes, Black could well play on, since he has the better minor piece. He also draws attention to the alternative 16 @f2 (D), first analysed by Shirov and then played in the game Fritz6 - Har-Zvi, Israeli Cht 2000.

16. ..

lt:Jxa3 17 bxa3 b5 ! (Black is two pawns down but will again rid himself of White's

246 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

strong knight and then either recover his mate rial or sweep into White's position) 1 8 lllh3 l::t c8 ! ? (Shirov shows that 1 8. ..bxc4 19 i.xc4 l::t c8! eventually leads to a drawn opposite-col oured bishop ending) 1 9 illxf6?! i.xf6 20 cxb5 l::t c2+! 21 'it>e3 l::t xa2 22 f4 i.d8 ! (the ... i.d8-b6 manoeuvre, standard in many KID positions, has decisive effect) 23 i.d3 i.b6+ 24 @f3 l::t xa3 (Black is a pawn down but the a-pawn and bishops are decisive) 25 l::t d l a4 26 ill f2 l::t b3 27 l::t b l a3 28 l::t xb3 i.xb3 29 i.bl a2 30 i.xa2 i.xa2 and Black won easily. Razuvaev - Shirov Bundesliga 199112 In this brief game we see Black's strategy at its most devastating. I won't give many notes because we've seen the basic ideas. 10 l::t dl!? l::t xdl+ 1 1 lll xdl lll d7! 12 i.a3 a5! 13 llle3 White can almost certainly do better in what follows, but it's no fun in any case. 13 .. lllb4 14 lll h3 illc5 (D) 15 lllf2 e6 Black takes away d5. 16 i.e2 b6! 17 illfdl

17 O-O i.d4! (17. ..

illxa2 1 8 l::t d l is unclear) 18 llledl illxa2 recovers the pawn, and White is even more tied up.

17. .

ill xa2 18 illc2 i.a6 1 8. .. i.b7 with the idea .. .f5 is another stan dard possibility, although it's unnecessary in this position. 19 i.xc5 bxc5 20 llla3 lllcl! 21 lllb5 l::t b8 22 i.fl a4 23 'it>d2 illb3+ 24 'it>c2 l::t d8! 25 lllbc3 l::t d2+ 26 @bl illa5 27 g3 a3 28 bxa3 i.xc4 29 f4 i.b3 0-1 Ro. Gunawan - Gelfand Minsk 1 986 10 lllge2 llld7 11 i.e3 White tries something different, abandoning the placement of the bishop on a3. Now Black targets d3. 11 . lll de5! 12 lll f4 lllb4 (D) 13 'it>f2! Gallagher shows the lovely line I 3 l::t d I lll xf3+ ! 14 gxf3 i.xc3+ 15 bxc3 ill c2+ 16 'it>e2 l::t xd 1 I 7 @xd 1 lll xe3+ 1 8 @d2 illxfl + 19 l::t xfl b6 and White has multiple pawn weaknesses including those on the open c-file.

13. .i.e6!? (D)

14 lll cd5 1 4 illxe6 fxe6 leaves White without access to this important square.

KING 'S INDIAN DEFENCE

14 . i.xdS 15 tt:Jxd5 lt:Jc2 16 l::t cl lt:Jxe3 17 @xe3 e6 18 lt:Jc3 .i.h6+! 19 f4 g5! (D) Remarkably, Black is winning now because all the dark squares fall.

20 g3 lt:Jg6! 21 l::t

c2 Or 21 lt:Je2 gxf4+ 22 gxf4 e5.

21. gxf4+ 22 gxf4 .i.xf4+ 23 @f3 l::t

d2!? 24 l::t xd2 i.xd2 25 lt:Jbl lt:Je5+ 26 @f2 i.f4 27 i.e2 l::t d8 28 b3 l::t d4 29 h4 29 tt:Jc3 l::t d2 30 h4 l::t c2. 29 .. J::t xe4 30 h5 .i.e3+ 31 @g2 .i.d4 32 .i.f3 tt:Jxf3 33 @xf3 l::t e3+ 34 @f4 l::t e2 35 l:!.dl e5+ 36 @rs i::t h2 0-1

8 Grunfeld Defence

1 d4 tL'Bf6 2 c4 g6 3 tbc3 d5 (D)

With 3 ... d5, Black sets White an entirely dif ferent set of problems from those he does with the King's Indian Defence (3 ... .\lg7 followed by ...d6). Black challenges the centre immedi ately, and temporarily prevents White's advance e4. The combination of a dark-square strategy ( ...g6 and ... .llg7) with a light-square one (the move ...d5 will often lead to concentration upon the queenside light squares) is unusual in In dian systems where, at least initially, a particu lar colour complex is the focus of play (light squares in the Nimzo- and Queen's Indian, and dark squares in the King's Indian and Benoni). Similarly, the Queen's Gambit Declined and Slav Defences begin with concentration upon light squares. This attention to both colour complexes lends a particular flavour to the Griinfeld. In the main lines, when White captures on d5 and Black re captures with the knight followed by ... tbxc3, he immediately focuses on the dark squares ( ... .llg7, ... c5, ... tbc6 and ... .llg4), but soon turns his attention to light squares, either for purposes of restraint or occupation ( ...b6, ....llb7, ...e6, .. .f5 and ... tbc6-a5 or ... tL'Bd7-f6/b6). White too has a flexible set of formations that typically en compass both colours in the vicinity of his ex posed centre. The moves c4, tbc3, e4, 'ib3 and i.c4 attend to the light squares, whereas tL'Bf3/e2, .lle3 and 'id2 oversee the dark squares. In addi tion, White's central advances are divided be tween e5 and d5. All this makes it difficult for those new to the Griinfeld to get a handle on what they should be doing. As is so often true, the central situation defines the optimal piece placement. If White creates a central majority by cxd5, he will gen erally concentrate upon establishing and then protecting an ideal e4/d4 structure. In a large majority of Griinfeld games by masters, White plays one of two systems that establish such a centre: A: The Exchange Variation: 4 cxd5 tL'Bxd5 5 e4 tbxc3 6 bxc3 (or 4 tL'Bf3 i.g7 5 cxd5 tL'Bxd5 6 e4 tbxc3 7 bxc3); B: The Russian System: 4 tL'Bf3 .llg7 5 'ib3 dxc4 6 'ixc4 O-O 7 e4. These are the archetypical Griinfeld varia tions, which I shall call 'Main Lines' . Black will try to undermine White's structure, nor mally by pawn attacks early on, but sometimes by piece-play first and pawn moves later (es pecially so in the case of the Russian System). In both instances we have a classic situation where one side captures the centre with support from his pawns, and the other tries to control the centre from the outside of it. I shall concen trate upon precisely that situation. Are there any elements common to all Griin feld systems? Not quite, but in most significant variations, Black plays ...c5 in order to break up White's centre. This applies to most of the main lines above but also to primary alterna tives such as 4 .llf4 .llg7 5 e3 c5 (or 5 ... O-O and 6 ...c5); 4 tL'Bf3 .llg7 5 .llf4 O-O 6 e3 c5; 4 .llg5 tL'Be4 5 .\lf4 tL'Bxc3 6 bxc3 i.g7 7 e3 c5; 4 tL'Bf3 i.g7 5 e3 O-O 6 .lle2 (or 6 .i.d2 or 6 .i.d3) 6 ...c5; 4 tL'Bf3 .llg7 5 i.g5 c5 (5 ... tL'le4 6 i.f4 tbxc3 7 bxc3 c5), etc. In addition, we have 4 f3 c5, 4 h4 c5 and the like. As a practical matter, Black's instinctive reaction to less ambitious White play

GRONFELD DEFENCE 249

should be an early ... c5. Black's two other stan dard methods for resolving central issues are ... dxc4 (as in the Russian System) and ...c6. But ...c6 is infrequently played, and it can easily lead into variations that are properly Slav De fences. For example, l d4 lt:Jf6 2 c4 g6 3 lt:Jc3 d5 4 lt:Jf3 i..g7 5 e3 c6 can come from the Slav move-order 1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 lt:Jf3 lt:Jf6 4 e3 g6 5 lt:Jc3 i..g7, etc. The move ...c5 is therefore key to most Griinfeld lines, for reasons that are pretty obvi ous. First, it's easier for Black to attack d4 than e4. Then, you will notice that after the ex change ...cxd4 and cxd4, White's d-pawn is particularly vulnerable to the bishop on g7 and queen on d8, so that White can sometimes be pressured or even compelled to play either d5 or dxc5. The dxc5 option will often win a pawn, but it leaves White's pawn-structure shattered, with his c-pawn(s) exposed along an open c file; we shall see more about this below. The ad vance of White's d-pawn to d5 is critical in a wide variety of middlegame situations, and it will be discussed in context. Queenless middlegames appear more often in the Griinfeld than in other Indian systems. White's central majority may well be pitted against Black's queenside majority. In the Ex change Variation, without the c-pawns, Black is inclined to hold back his 2: 1 majority through out the opening and early middlegame. A fian- chetto by ...b6 is safe, and by comparison with ...a6 and ... b5, it reduces the impact of a4 and protects c5 from occupation by a knight or bishop. The further advance of Black's a- and b-pawns is usually weakening. In the Russian System, White is more likely to play d5 before .. . cxd4 occurs; in those cases, Black tempo rarily retains his 3:2 majority on the queenside, and we sometimes see a general advance by those pawns (for example, in the Hungarian Variation with ...a6 and ...b5 or the Prins Varia- tion with ... lt:Ja6 with ...c5 - see below). The moves ...c6 and ...e6 are often employed to iso late or eliminate White's pawn on d5. With or without the c-pawns, White's d-pawn can also become a passed pawn, and indeed in the queenless middlegames or endgames aris ing from our main lines it is very often the cen tre of attention. In more cases than not, the d-pawn is a strength with which Black must contend; even in the optimal cases in which he succeeds in securely blockading it, there may result only a stand-off, and White' s space ad vantage can still be a factor. Frequently, both White' s d- and e-pawns will survive long enough to be used to assist in space-gaining and attacking opportunities. We'll look at these and more specific issues as we move to the main variations. Exchange Variation The most popular variation of the Griinfeld has always been the Exchange Variation:

[diagram]
e4 tt:Jxc3 6 bxc3 i.g7 (

D)

[diagram]

250 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

10. .

[diagram]

GRONFELD DEFENCE 251

21  l e5 1h-1h Hillarp Persson-R6tSagov, Gothenburg 1999. 12 .O-O 13 l::t cl?!

13 O-O? cxd4 wins a pawn. Perhaps White

should already be willing to accede to a line like 13 l::t b5 ! 'ia4 14 l::t b2 ! in order to be able to castle. Then 14 ... .l::t fd8 (14. .. .tg4?? 15 i.b5) 15 O-O tL'la5 16 .th6 tbc4 17 .txc4 'ixc4 1 8 .txg7 @xg7 19 tbe5 'ie6 looks dynamically equal. 13 ... i.g4! 14 d5 l::t ad8! (D) A manoeuvre to remember. Black prepares ...e6 and his knight will go to e5 or d4 depend ing on the situation. 15 'ic2 White steps out of the pin. 15 O-O .txf3 1 6 gxf3 e6! 17 c4 'ia3 ! is slightly better for Black due to his control of d4 and White's weaknesses.

15. ..

i.xf3 16 gxf3 tL'Bd4 17 'iY'dl tL'lb5 18 .td2 tL'Bd6 (D) An ideal blockader. Black has won the open ing. It's important to remember that the usual counterplay for White in these positions comes from either f4 (and in this case e5) or a4-a5. But neither is available. 19 'ib3 Not so much to protect the a-pawn as to dis courage ...e6. 19 ...f5 20 exf5

20 c4 'ia6 is awkward to meet, since 21 O-O

fxe4 22 fxe4 l::t f3 ! is extremely strong.

20. ..c4! 21 i.xc4 l::t

xf5 22 .te2 (D) 22 ... l::t xd5 This leaves White with five isolated pawns ! 22 ... 'ixd5 would also be good, since 23 'ixd5+ l::t xd5 24 .te3 (24 c4 l::t xd2) 24 ... l::t c8 25 c4 l::t a5 dominates the queenside.

23 O-O 'it>h8 24 i.f4 l::t

f8 25 .tg3 l::t d2 26 l::t c2 l::t xc2 27 'ixc2 i.xc3 Black is winning . Yusupov - Khalifman Ubeda 1997 8 ...cxd4 9 cxd4 tL'Bc6 10 l::t dl 'ia5

10. ..

.tg4!? is a tricky alternative. Then: a) 1 1 f3 .td7 is considered equal. White can no longer bring his knight to f3, and must watch over the light squares as usual; e.g., 12 i.b5 O-O 13 tL'Be2 tba5 ! 14 .txd7 tL'Bc4! 15 'ic3 tL'Bxe3 16 'ixe3 'ixd7 with an edge, Krush-Lalic, Has tings 2000. Black has bishop vs knight and will be able to use his queenside majority before White can use her central one. b) 1 1 .te2! .txe2 12 tbxe2 and now: bl) 12 ...O-O 13 O-O e6 14 d5 !? exd5 15 exd5 tL'le5, as in Kofol-Avrukh, Belgrade 1999, is a typical d-pawn vs queenside fight. There could

252 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

have followed 16 l::t c l 'id7 17 d6! l::t fc8 1 8 i.f4 tbc4 19 'id5. b2) 1 2. .. tba5 ! ? (D). The fight begins for c4. Lputian-Kasparov, Wijk aan Zee 2000 went 13 'ib4! O-O 14 O-O b6

15 d5 (White must be slightly better after 15

l::t c l 'id7 16 d5 ! l::t fc8 17 l::t fdl ) 15 ... 'id6 16 'ib5 'ie5 17 l::t d4 !? 'ib8 !? 18 l::t a4?! l::t c8 19 ctJd4 l::t c5 20 'id7 l::t c7 2 1 'ib5 'ic8 22 h3 l::t c5 23 'iY'bl ? 'id7 24 l::t b4, and here Black neglected to play the obvious 24 ... tbc4 ! with much the better game. Then Black's bishop is stronger than White's knight, because tbc6 can be an swered by ... e6. Instead of this Kasparov played 24 ... l::t ac8 and ended up drawing a few moves later. But the overall lesson is that with accurate play, White's space and d-pawn seem to give him a small advantage. 11 'ixa5 tLixa5 12 i.d3 O-O 13 tL'Be2 .i.d7 14 l:!.bl! White intends .i.d2, so that a knight retreat would lose the b-pawn.

[diagram]

D)

Yusupov assesses this as clearly better for White. This is remarkable, since all he has is the big centre and centralized king. But that's the point: in the absence of other factors, it takes only a few small advantages for the 2: l central majority to beat the 2: 1 queenside ma jority. 23 .. tbc6 24 tL'Bb5 i.a6 25 @c3! 25 tbxa7 .i.xd3 26 tbxc6 .i.xe4 27 tbxe7+ 'it>f8 28 tbc8 .i.xg2 29 tL'Bxb6 is hardly clear due to Black's two bishops and White's four iso lated pawns. ... 'it>f8 26 a4!? .i.b7

26. ..h5 was widely recommended to stop

White's next move but for one thing allows 27 e5 ! e6 (27 ... .i.b7 28 .i.e4) 28 tL'Bxa7 ! i.xd3 29 tbxc6 i.e4 30 tL'Bb8 .i.xg2 3 1 tL'Bd7+ 'it>e8 32 tL'Bxb6. 27 g4! (D) This move, pinning down Black's kingside and gaining more space, allows White to con centrate on the queenside.

27. ..

@e8 28 .i.c4 tL'Bb8 29 'it>d3 a6 30 tbc7+ 'it>d8 31 tL'ld5 tL'Bd7 32 tL'Bb4! Threatening a6 and f7. 32 . a5 33 .i.d5! .i.xd5 34 tL'Bxd5 e6 35 tbc3 @c7 36 tL'Bb5+ @c6 37 'it>c4

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 253

White's mobile centre is ultimately the deci sive factor. 37  i..f8 38 i..f4 i..b4 39 f3 i..f8 40 d5+ 40 i..d6! i..xd6 41 d5+ is a clearer path to victory. 40 . exd5+ 41 exd5+ Rb7 42 lZ'Bd6+! i..xd6 43 i..xd6 The rest is fairly simple: bishop versus knight with pawns on both sides of the board wins more often than not. 43 .  g5 44 i..g3 lZ'Bf6 45 i..e5 lZ'Bd7 46 i..d4 Rc7 47 Rb5 f6 48 i..f2 Rd6 49 i..xb6 lZ'Be5 50 i.. xa5 ll:Bxf3 51 i..c3 1-0 7 i.c4 and the Classical Exchange 7 i..c4 (D) 7 ...

O-O

Over the next few moves there are many combinations of ...b6 and/or ... lZ'Bc6. We shall take time off for a couple of these because they show strategies unique to the Griinfeld which also contain themes and manoeuvres common to other chess openings. Theory from several sources approves of some of these lines to the extent that may worry players of 7 .i.c4. But Black must be careful; for example, 7 ...b6?! 8 'ii f3 (8 lZ'Be2 i..b7) 8 ...O-O 9 e5 i..a6! ? 10 .i.d5 ( 10 'ii xa8? .i.xc4 with terrific compensation: the bishop-pair, light-square domination, etc.; White is undeveloped, and passive rooks in the middlegame are often worse than bishops) 10 ...c6 l l i..b3 'ii d7 (D) ( l l . ..'ii c7 led to a se vere disadvantage after 12 h4! ? c5 1 3 h5 cxd4 14 cxd4, with an ideal attack, in Yusupov-Tim man, Tilburg Ct (7) 1986; the general rule is that h4-h5 can work if Black has made no prog ress against the centre). 12 e6! (theory talks only about 12 lZ'Be2 and 12 h4, which are only equal, but not this simple move, nor the seemingly effective 1 2 lZ'Bh3 e6 13 lZ'Bg5 !) 12 .. .fxe6 13 'iih3 Rh8 14 i..xe6 (or 14 lZ'Bf3) 14 ... 'ii c7 15 lZ'Bf3, etc. Maybe 7 ...b6 is just bad. 8 lZ'Be2 White played the variation with 7 i..c4 and 8 lZ'Be2 almost exclusively for decades. It rep resents a kind of classical logic: develop the bishop actively to c4 (as opposed to e2), and put the knight on e2, a square from which it sup ports the centre but cannot be pinned (as op posed to lZ'Bf3). White also castles as quickly as possible, something that is usually delayed in the variations with 7 lZ'Bf3. Now we briefly examine a variation without ...c5 (8 ... ll:Bc6), and then tum to the main move 8 ...c5. Playing without . . . cs Razuvaev - Stohl Burgas 1992 8 ... ll:Bc6 (

D)

Another option is 8 ... b6. Although we won't look at it here, theory's overall verdict seems to be that the move is playable with precise de fence. The attacking move 9 h4 is particularly dangerous and needs to be part of any prepara tion that one might make as Black. The text-move blocks the c-pawn, but con tains two other ideas to disturb White's game:

254 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) ... llla5, driving away White's aggres sively-placed bishop, often with ...c5 to follow; b) the central advance ...e5, to block the po sition.

9 O-O (D)

Natural. White has tried all kinds of things against 8 ... '2lc6 without achieving a great deal. The advance h4 is sometimes White's reaction in the Griinfeld if Black hasn't challenged d4 with a pawn; but here it looks as though 9 h4 llla5 10 .i.b3 ( 10 .i.d3 ! ?) 10. ..c5 1 1 h5 ctJxb3 12 axb3 cxd4 13 cxd4 isn't much of a problem; e.g., 13 ... .i.d7 !? (not the only move) 14 hxg6 hxg6 15 'ii d3 'iib6, Spassky-Stein, USSR Ch playoff (1) 1964. 9 . . .e5!? An entirely different structure from in the main lines. Black's move restricts the scope of his g7-bishop but changes the pawn-structure so that a plan like . . . b6, ... llla5, and either ... '2lb7-d6 or a well-timed ...c5 becomes possi- ble. 9 ... '2la5 10 .i.d3 .i.e6 is also played, when 1 1 .i.g5 followed by f4 has caused Black prob lems. This sort of aggressive expansion by White becomes possible when his centre pawns aren't attacked by ...c5. 9 ... b6 (D) is another popular move-order now that h4-h5 doesn't activate White's rook. The ideas are simple: ... .i.b7 and ...e5 or ... llla5 with ...c5. Quick development by White can be dangerous, although with accurate play Black should be OK: 10 .i.g5 .i.b7 (10. .. llla5 1 1 .i.d3 c5 is about equal; Black meets d5 with ... 'ii d7 and ...e6) 1 1 'ii d2 'ii d6?! 12 l:tadl llla5 13 .i.d3 c5 14 d5 e6 15 c4 (now Black has to watch out that White doesn't achieve f4 and e5) 15 ... .i.a6 16 'ii c l exd5 17 exd5 l:tae8 18 '2lg3 ! 'ii d7 19 l:tfel f5? (to stop '2le4, but it creates an easily-accessible interior weakness on e6) 20 '2le2 ! ctJb7 21 ctJf4 l:txel + 22 l:txel l:te8 23 ctJe6 with a dominant position, Beliavsky-Gulko, Linares 1990. We now return to the position after 9 ...e5

(D):

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 255

10 d5 This is the most instructive move, yielding a characteristic pawn-formation. a) Suffice it to say that the controversial se quence 10 i..a3 l:te8 1 1 i..xf7+! ? @xf7 12 'iib3+ @f6 1 3 f4 ! i..h6! 14 fxe5++ @g7 15 'iif7+ @h8 1 6 '2lf4 '2le7 is quite a mess, and might even make this move-order undesirable for Black. You'll have to look at these particu lars on your own time ! b) 10 i..e3 'ii e7 (or 10 ... llla5 1 1 i..d3 b6) 1 1 d5 ctJa5 1 2 i..d3 (D). 12 ...b6! ? 13 'ii d2 i..d7 14 l:tac l ctJb7 15 f4 i..h6 16 l:tcel lllc5 (we see the advantage of foregoing ... c5) 17 fxe5 i..xe3+ 18 'ii xe3 'ii xe5 and Black is equal with a firm blockade and the e5 outpost, Tisdall-Stohl, Gausdal 199 1 . 1 0. .. lllaS 1 1 i..d3 b6 1 2 c4 '2lb7 1 3 lllc3 .i.d7 14 i..c2 f5 15 .i.a4 l:tf7 16 .i.a3 '2ld6 17 i..xd7 'ii xd7 18 c5 lll xe4 19 lll xe4 fxe4 20 'iib3 1h-1h White has managed to keep the game open for his pieces, but he is also a pawn down and his centre isn't mobile. A possible continuation would be 20 ... i.. f8 2 1 'ii c4 bxc5 22 i..xc5 i..xc5 23 'ii xc5 'ii a4 with equality. Main Line with . . . cs

[diagram]
lll xc3 6 bxc3 i..g7 7 i..c4 c5 Black's thematic move, targeting d4. 8 '2le2 O-O 8 ... '2lc6 9 .i.e3 will usually transpose after 9 ...O-O, but can also be used to get into early ... cxd4 lines. One such is 9 .. .cxd4 10 cxd4 'ii a5+!? 1 1 .i.d2 'ii d8 ! ?, an implicit draw offer (or probing move) in that White can play 12 i..e3 and repeat. Regardless of the theoretical details, the game Kramnik-Svidler, Dortmund 1998 is a superb example of Exchange Griin feld themes, as well as the virtues of central pawn-masses: 12 d5 ! llle5 1 3 i..c3 O-O 14 .i.b3 'iVb6 (D). 15 f4! lll g4 16 i..d4 'ii a5+ 17 'ii d2 'ii xd2+ 18 @xd2 e5 (it looks as though Black has solved his central problems) 19 h3 ! exd4 (19. .. '2lf6 20 fxe5 lllxe4+ 21 @e3 shows the power of a cen tralized king, yet another recurring theme in the Exchange Variation!) 20 hxg4 g5 ! ? (20 ... i..xg4

21 e5 i..xe2 22 @xe2; 20 ...d3 21 ctJc3 i..xg4 22

@xd3 and in both cases the king supports the broad centre with a clear advantage) 21 g3 ! and now: a) Analysis by Kramnik continues 21 ...d3 22 ctJc3 i..xg4 23 @xd3 i..f3 24 e5 ! ? .i.xh l 25 l:txhl (D), which he assesses as winning for White:

256 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

The diagram position is a demonstration of the power of White's central pawns. Although White is a full exchange down, all of his pieces are centralized and he has available an assort ment of possible moves such as ll:Be4, Re4, d6 and lZ'Bd5, with Black's f7-pawn being particu larly vulnerable and his bishop on g7 shut out. Most importantly of all, the opposite-coloured bishops ensure that White's bishop on b3 can't be exchanged off. b) The game continued 2 l ...i..xg4 22 e5 ! i..xe2 23 Rxe2. Again, White has the big cen tre. and the opposite-coloured bishops contrib ute to the winning scenario. As so often in the Griinfeld, we get a d-pawn marching down to deliver the final blow: 23 .. J:tfc8 24 l:tadl l:tc3 25 .l:td3 ! l:!ac8 26 d6 b5 (26 ... l:!xd3 27 Rxd3 .:l.c3+ 28 Rxd4 l:txg3 29 d7) 27 l:txc3! dxc3 (27 ... l:!xc3 28 d7) 28 e6! (D). 28 ... Rf8? (but 28 ... i..f8 29 e7 i..xe7 30 dxe7 .l:te8 31 fxg5 l:!xe7+ 32 Rd3 is convincing) 29 e7+ ..t>e8 30 i..xf7+! 1-0, in view of 30 ... Rxf7 31 d7. A wonderful game.

9 O-O ll:Bc6 10 i..e3 (D)

Just in time. Now White has defended the d4-pawn. What are the characteristics of this main-line position? Both kings are safe, so it comes down to several factors. First of all, there's White's central majority, with pawns ideally placed on e4 and d4. That by itself isn't necessarily bad for Black, who may be able to restrain and then attack them. The question is whether the pawns can advance or cause other damage. With that in mind, let's consider what White would do if you gave him a move. The expansion via 1 1 f4 allows 1 1 ...i..g4. Playing h3 as a preparatory move can be considered, but at this point it looks slow. The advance 1 1 e5 is plausible, but creates central light-square weaknesses that Black is likely to be able to occupy. The move 1 1 d5 can be answered by l l .. .lZ'Be5 12 i..b3 b6 and ... i..a6 (or even 1 1 ...lZ'Ba5 12 i..d3 e6); in both cases White has difficulty in playing c4 to protect the centre. That suggests some ideas: l:tc 1, allowing d5 in many variations without the rook hanging, and/or a combination of 'ii d2 and i..h6. Some attack by f4 may follow later, all the more so if White can eliminate the pow erful g7-bishop by means of i..h6. If White achieves these things, his centre pawns and piece-play will control the board. What advantages does Black have? First, as usual, the c4-square is loose and a potential out post for a knight or bishop. The fact that ... lZ'Ba5 can be played with tempo is especially encour aging in that regard. Black also controls the open d-file and can play ... cxd4 to put pressure on the d-pawn and open his c-file. Since White is on the verge of consolidating as described above, that leads one towards two fundamental strategies. Black can get a rook to d8 and as sault White's centre straight on. That is the classical approach, which often begins with ... 'ii c7, giving Black the subsequent choice of ...e5 to challenge d4, or ...e6 and ...b6 to restrain White's pawns. No immediate action is taken to attack White's side of the board. Alternatively, Black can try to exploit the enemy queenside light squares as quickly as possible, ideally by moves such as ... ll:Ba5-c4 supported by the light-squared bishop, a rook on c8, pawn on b5, and so forth. One problem with this second plan

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 257

is finding a good square for the bishop on c8. Thus if Black wants to follow the light-squares strategy, he will probably require an early se ries of forcing moves to carry it out. Let' s look at both plans. Classical System 10 . . 'ii c7 (D) This is sometimes called the Smyslov Varia tion, and elsewhere the Shamkovich Variation. The traditional reason for this move is to follow up by .. J::t d8. A disadvantage to that policy is that it weakens f7, not only directly but in the long term if White plays for f4-f5. 11 l::t cl White is responding to an indirect threat of ... cxd4, although at the moment (were it Black's turn to move) 1 1 ...cxd4 12 cxd4 lZ'Bxd4 13 i..xf7+ and lZ'Bxd4 would favour White. Never theless, l::t c 1 gets off the long diagonal, protects c3, and most importantly serves as a strong dis incentive for ... cxd4. The immediate 1 1 i..f4 is also critical: l 1 .. .e5 12 i..g3 (compare 1 1 l::t c l J:i.d8 1 2 i..f4 e5 13 i..g5 !, hitting the rook) 1 2. .. lZ'Ba5 !? (12. .. 'ii e7 13 d5 lZ'Ba5 14 i..d3 f5 is equal) 13 i..d5 i.. e6! (grabbing light squares even if it means crippling one's pawns !) 14 i..xe6 fxe6 15 l::t bl a6, intending ... ll:Bc4, is equal. l l. .. l::t d8 (D) This position is strategically very rich and after many years no clear verdict has been reached. I'll give two classic but genuinely il lustrative game excerpts to demonstrate the main themes. Gligoric - Smyslov Yugoslavia-USSR 1959 This is one of the original, archetypal games that showed the latent strength of Black's posi tion. 12 h3 White wants to play f4 without facing ... .li.g4 with the idea of ... i..xe2. Since 12 h3 uses time. however, the immediate 12 f4 was nevertheless a main line for some years, with the idea 12 ... i..g4

13 f5 !? gxf5 (or 13. ..

lZ'Ba5) 14 h3 i..xe2 15 'ii xe2. This attack eventually seemed to peter out after, for example, 15. ..cxd4 16 cxd4 'ir'd6 (or 16 ... 'ii g3 17 l::t f3 'ii g6! 18 exf5 'ii f6, block ing the attack and targeting the centre, with equality) 17 exf5 ( 17 l::t xf5 lZ'Bxd4 18 i..xf7 + Rh8) 17 ... ll:Ba5 18 'ii g4 ll:Bxc4 19 l::t xc4 Rh8 with equality. Generally the disappearance of White's powerful light-squared bishop means an end to Black's problems. A logical alternative is 12 'ii d2, when Black can play the solid 1 2. .. 'ii a5 intending ... cxd4, or go for more with 1 2. ..a6!? 13 f4!? (White can also play 13 i..h6 b5 14 i..d3 'ii d7 15 i..xg7 Rxg7 16 d5; e.g., 16 ... lZ'Be5 17 c4 or 16 ...c4 17 .i.c2 e6 18 lZ'Bf4 ! ?) 13. ..b5 14 i..d3 f5 ! (compare the main game) 15 exf5 (15 lZ'Bg3 e6) 15. ..c4 16 .i.bl ? ! (16 i..e4! gxf5 17 .i.f3 with the idea ll:Bg3-h5) 16 ... gxf5 ! 17 lZ'Bg3 e6 18 lZ'Bh5 i..h8 19 l::t f3 ll:Be7 20 i..f2 i..b7 2 1 l::t e3 Rf7 ! , Haik Kouatly, Cannes 1986. This is a superb dem onstration of determined pursuit of the light squares by Black. Nevertheless, White could have played better and the whole line is unclear. 12 ... b6 13 f4 e6 First, Smyslov restrains the centre.

258 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

14 'tWel i..b7 Later the direct attack 14 ... ll:Ba5 15 i..d3 f5, with the same basic idea, was played in Spas sky-Fischer, Siegen OL 1970. 15 'tWf2!? ll:Ba5 16 i..d3 f5! (D) This is the key to Black's game. Without the move f5 at White's disposal, his bad bishop on e3 is reduced to defence and Black has greater pressure along the a8-hl diagonal. 17 e5 A real concession, because White no longer has an effective pawn-break. However, he main tains a space advantage. What's more, the alter native 17 exf5 exf5 would leave d4 vulnerable to the bishop on g7.

17.  .c4 18 i..c2 lZ'Bc6!

Heading for d5 via e7.

19 g4 ll:Be7 20 Rh2 'tWc6 21 lZ'Bg3 b5! 22 a4 a6

White has little to do, and Black's opening strategy has clearly won the day. Spassky - Fischer Santa Monica 1966 This game shows how White can sometimes use his centre to thwart Black's plans. 12 'tWel!? Getting out of the pin and planning some thing like f4-f5, 'tWh4, etc. 12 e6!? (D) As with other 1 2th moves in this line, White has not been able to get a forced advantage after 12 'tWel because Black can neutralize White's attacking plans by 12. .. 'tWa5 ! 13 l::t d l (13 dxc5 ll:Be5) l 3 ...cxd4 14 cxd4 'tWxel 15 l::t fxe l b6 16 d5 ( l 6 l::t c l !?) 16 ... lZ'Ba5 17 i..b5 i..d7 with equality. 13 f4 Another promising idea is 13 i..g5 ! ? l::t d7 14 d5.

13. . ll:Ba5 14 i..d3 f5 15 l::t

dl b6 Fischer has followed the Smyslov formula and hemmed in White's pieces. That's not the end of the story, however, because White's large centre is a potential force. 16 'tWf2! Although it's not always the case in the Griinfeld, 17 dxc5 is a real threat in this posi tion. 16 . cxd4

16. ..

fxe4 17 .i.xe4 i..b7 18 lZ'Bg3 gives White the edge. 17 i..xd4 i..xd4 18 cxd4 i..b7 19 lZ'Bg3 'tWf7 Every light square is guarded, but... 20 d5! (D) White's chances in these lines depend upon central activity, which in this case means break ing down Black's blockade. 20  fxe4 21 dxe6 'tWxe6 22 f5! 'tWf7

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 259

Not 22 ... gxf5? 23 lZ'Bxf5 exd3 24 'tWg3+ 'tWg6 25 ll:Be7+. 23 i..xe4 l:txdl 24 l:txdl l:tf8! Another mistake would be 24 ... i..xe4? 25 ll:Bxe4 gxf5 26 l:!d7 ! 'tWg6 27 'tWd2 ! and White's attack is irresistible. 25 i..bl (D)

White has a small but definite edge. I'll con tinue the game without notes.

25. ..

'tWf6 26 'tWc2 Rh8 27 fxg6 hxg6 28 'tWd2! Rg7 29 l:!fl 'tWe7 30 'tWd4+ l:tf6 31 ttJe4 i..xe4 32 i..xe4 'tWc5 33 'tWxc5 l:txfl + 34 Wxfl bxc5 35 h4! Spassky went on to win this famous bishop vs knight ending. With pawns on both sides of the board, the bishop has a substantial advan tage. 12 i..f4 (D) Kiselev - Epishin Barnaul 1 988 Here's the most difficult move for Black to meet. It turns out that the queen has trouble finding a good square.  'tWd7 This awkward move is explained by a look at the alternatives: a) 12 ... 'tWa5? strays too far from the second rank: 13 'tWb3 !, when 1 3. ..e6 14 d5 exd5 15 i..xd5 is awful. b) 12 ...e5?! 13 i..g5 puts the question to Black's rook and there's nothing satisfactory: 13 ... .i:td7 (13 ... l:!d6 14 'tWa4! ; 13 ... l:te8 14 d5 ll:Ba5 15 i..b5 i..d7 16 d6 'tWc8 17 l:tbl ) 14 d5 ll:Ba5 15 i..b5 l:td6 16 c4. Generally the achieve ment of c4 for White translates to some advan tage, assuming that Black's pieces can't use d4 effectively. c) 12 ... i..e5 !? 13 i..g3! i..xg3 14 fxg3! e6 15 'tWd2 launches a nice attack. Black's bishop on c8 doesn't participate in the defence.

13 d5 (D)

This is purely a case of space and centre vs restraint and counterplay. As usual, 13 dxc5 al lows compensation after 13 ... ttJe5 ! 14 i..xe5 i..xe5. 13 ... ll:Ba5 Or 13. .. ll:Be5 14 .i.b3 b5. 14 i..d3 b5!? Black's most positive try. Otherwise he tends to acquiesce to more passive defence; for ex ample, 14. ..e5 1 5 i..e3 (or 15 i..g5) 15 ... 'tWe7 (15. ..b6 16 f4! exf4 17 i..xf4 is clearly better for White) 16 'tWd2 b6 17 f4 exf4 1 8 i..xf4 i..g4 19 ttJg3 c4 20 .i.e2 ! .i.xe2 2 1 'tWxe2, Polugaev sky-Tukrnakov, Moscow 1 985. 15 l:tbl a6 (D)

260 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

16 'tWcl!? 16 i..e3 may grant White some advantage. Again, Black should stay active: 16 ...e6! 17 i..xc5 'tWc7 1 8 i..d4 exd5 19 exd5 .i.b7 20 a4 ! i..xd5 21 axb5 axb5, when White keeps some edge by 22 l:txb5 or 22 i..xb5.

16. .

ll:Bb7!? Black would like to play ...e5 and at some point blockade by ... ll:Bd6. A reasonable option is 16. ..e6. 17 'tWa3 e5! (D) It's too early for 17 ...c4 due to 18 i..c2 with the idea l:!adl and ll:Bd4. 18 i..g5 c4! 19 i..c2 l:te8 20 'tWcl lZ'Bd6 21 i..h6 'tWe7!? Easier is 21...f5 ! 22 exf5 gxf5 23 'tWg5 'tWe7 with no problems. 22 ll:Bg3 i..xh6 23 'tWxh6 'tWf8 24 'tWe3 'tWe7

25 Whl h5 26 h3 h4 27 lZ'Be2 f6 28 l:tgl @g7

and the game is level. Probably White has the edge in this variation by means of 12 .i.f4, but Black's position is certainly playable. Thus the Shamkovich Vari ation remains a viable option. Modern Main 7 i..c4 Line

[diagram]
ll:Bxc3 6 bxc3 i..g7 7 .i.c4 O-O 8 lZ'Be2 c5 9 O-O lZ'Bc6 10 i..e3 (

D)

10. ..

i..g4 This sortie has always been important, but has taken over modem theory for the last few decades. First let's mention the alternative 10 ... ll:Ba5 1 1 i..d3 cxd4 12 cxd4 at this point: a) It's interesting that 12 ... i..e6 looks very much like the main line 10 ... i..g4 1 1 f3 ctJa5 12 i..d3 cxd4 13 cxd4 i.. e6 below, except that White hasn't strengthened his centre by f3 (you may want to consider this again after you read the chapter). So how can it be that Black almost never plays this way? It turns out that by in serting 10. .. i..g4 1 1 f3, Black gains several ad vantages that arise in specific lines. The main difference is that he has the options of ... 'tWb6+, ... 'tWxd4+ and ... i..xd4+ (or ... i..xe3+) in some situations. Furthermore, the bishop on e3 can be attacked by moves such as ... 'tWa3 or in a few cases even ... i..h6. b) Black's attempt to force a draw by means of 12 ... ll:Bc6 (i.e. 13 i..c4 ll:Ba5, etc.) fails to do so after 13 i..b5 (13 i..c2 b6 14 i..a4 and l:tc l is also advantageous) 13. .. i..g4 (13. .. i..d7 14 l:!bl e6 1 5 'tWd2) 14 f3 .i.d7 15 l:tbl e6 16 'tWd2 with an edge. c) The most positionally interesting of devi ations with this order is 1 2. ..b6!?, with the in tention of ...e6 and ... l:te8. White has generally

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 261

gained a small advantage here by normal means ('tWd2, l:tadl and i..h6, for example), but it's not much. The game Gligoric-Tukmakov, Odessa 1975 illustrates another plan in the Griinfeld that we haven't seen. It comes up when ...e6 has been played: 13 l:!c l e6 14 e5 !? i..b7 15 lZ'Bf4 'tWe7 !? 16 'tWg4 ctJc6 17 h4! lZ'Bb4 18 .i.c4 b5 19 i..b3 (D).

White has a k:ingside bind and the better prospects. The question is one of timing: if Black can plant and keep a piece on d5 right away, he should be OK. The problem is that White not only threatens to attack on the king side but has the c5 outpost ( lZ'Bd3-c5), which en sures his superiority.

11 f3 lZ'Ba5

Issues of move-order are confusing here, but if you want to understand the position they are important. If Black now plays l 1 . ..cxd4 12 cxd4 ll:Ba5 (D) (this can also be arrived at by 10 ... cxd4 1 1 cxd4 i..g4 12 f3 lll a5), we reach this position: Then 13 i..d3 i..e6 will transpose to the main line in games below. There are, however. two differences. First, by capturing on d4, Black is allowing White the option of 13 i..d5 (D ), which is theoretically equal but can be annoying in practice.

13. ..

i..d7 14 l:tbl a6 15 i..xb7 ( 1 5 e5!? .i.h5 16 i..e4 ll:Bc4 17 i..f4) 15. .. .l:ta7 ! 16 .i.d5 .i.h5

17 a4 (17 l:tel !? e6 1 8 i..b3; these untested pos

sibilities for White are a bit worrisome to 8lact. which argues for delaying ...cxd4) l 7 .. Bxe2 18 'tWxe2 e6 19 i..c4 .i.xd4 20 :Cd l i.xe3+ 2 1 'tWxe3 l:td7. Theory calls this equal. although Black still has to play accurately. Then there's 13 l:tc l ll:Bxc4 14 .:.Xc4. to which a lot of theory is also attached. Again Black needs to be a little careful even if winning the bishop-pair can't be objectively worse for him. Neither of these options is a problem if the pawns on c5 and c3 are retained (seebelow ). A further significant difference between l 1 . . .'2la5 and l 1...cxd4 1 2 cxd4 ll:Ba5 is that in the 'Seville Variation' below with 1 2 i.xf7+. the pawns are still on c3 and c5. whereas with the l 1 . ..cxd4 order we have 1 3 i..xf7+ :xn 14 fxg4 and those pawns are traded. (You n have to jump ahead to make sense of this de scription.) At this point the question becomes whether Black prefers the i..xf7 + lines with the pawns still on the board. Unfortunately. one needs loads of specific study to answer that. But there's a possible saving grace. If Black believes that the best defence to the Seville ( or a good one) is to play ...cxd4 and ...e5 later (see below), then you will see that the move order is unimportant and that you don't need to

262 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

exchange now, thus avoiding 13 i..d5 and 13 l:tc l . Hopefully some or all these nuances will become clearer as you go through the following material. We now return to l 1 ...ll:Ba5 (D): This is the main-line position of the .i.c4 Ex change Variation. We now have two basic vari ations that have thus far been taken seriously. Seville Variation 12 i..xf7+!? It's pretty easy to see that 12 fxg4? l2Jxc4 (with tempo!) is positionally bad. We look at 12 i..d3 cxd4 13 cxd4 .i.e6 below.

12. ..

l:txf7 13 fxg4 The 'Seville Variation' was so named be cause of several games that Karpov played with it against Kasparov in their 1987 match in Se ville. The ideas behind it are intriguing, in part because they are superficially unprincipled. 13 ...l:txfl+ 14 Wxfl (D)

White has won a pawn, which is of some value even though it consists of a doubled g pawn. His centre is superior to Black's and, given time, potentially mobile. Black has his own advantages; for example, a wonderful out post on c4 for his knight and some play against White's rather draughty kingside. In spite of a large body of theory and experi ence with 1 2 .i.xf7+, the ensuing play is not of such a critical nature that one needs to commit much to memory. I'll look at two games that should cover the main ideas and strategies. Karpov - Kasparov Belfort 1988 This game has been used in many books, de servedly so. It is representative of White's ideas and beautifully played. To get a more balanced view of the opening, see the game excerpts within the notes. .. 'ii d6 14 ... 'ii d7 15 g5 (this is along the lines of Karpov's idea, to imprison the bishop on g7) 15 ... l:td8 (15. .. ll:Bc4! and 1 5. ..cxd4 16 cxd4 e5 are good alternatives) 16 Rg1 e5 17 d5 b6 18 h3 ll:Bc4 19 'ii d3 lZ'Bd6 20 a4! (D). We'll see this more than once: the problems that Black has when he sets up this blockade with ...e5, ...c5, ...b6 and ... lZ'Bd6 tend to come from a4-a5. That can be surprisingly difficult to meet, as here: 20 ...c4 (else White plays c4 and a5) 2 1 'ii c2 i..f8 22 Whl lZ'Bb7 23 lZ'igl i..c5 24 'ii e2 i..xe3 25 'ii xe3 'ii f7 26 ll:Bf3 with much the better game for White, Sakaev-Van Wely, Internet blitz 2004.

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 263

15 e5! 1Wd5 ( D) What's this? With 15 e5, White just ceded all those light squares Black loves so much! In addi tion, for a mere extra doubled pawn, White has exposed his king, given himself a bad bishop, and hardly attended to his development! For all that, there are some real dangers for Black. If, for example, White plays g5, his bishop's prob lem will be less important than that of Black's ' good' one, which is imprisoned indefinitely. Also, White has the easy-to-underestimate ad vantages of space and a central majority. Notice that if he gets moves like @gl and tl:Bf4 in, Black will have serious weaknesses to cover. For his part, Black's advantages are fairly obvious: a beautifully centralized queen on d5, an outpost for the knight on c4, and numerous possible open files for his rooks. One difficulty, however, is that he has to achieve any progress by use of his pieces alone, since he has no pawn-breaks. 16 .tf2! The immediate 16 g5 is worse for concrete reasons: 1 6. .. 1We4 17 .tf2 l::t f8 with serious pressure. ... l::t dS 17 1Wa4! b6 (D) 18 1Wc2 Having provoked a weakness, Karpov re turns to cover the central squares. A recent ap proach with the same ideas of pawn-structure versus piece-play went 18 tl:Bf4 1Wf7 1 9 tl:Bh3 ! 1We6 20 g5 (now White has the ideal pawn-for mation and needs to prepare for tl:Bf4 again) 20 ... 1Wf5 !? (here I think 20 ... 1Wc6! is more the matic, with the idea 21 1Wa3? cxd4 22 cxd4 l::t xd4! 23 j.xd4 1Wc4+, or 21 1Wxc6! tl:Bxc6 22 tl:Bf4 @f7) 21 @gl 1Wd3 22 l::t d l (or 22 dxc5 1Wxc3 23 l::t fl) 22 ... 1Wxc3 23 dxc5 l::t xdl + 24 1Wxd l .txe5 25 cxb6 axb6 26 .txb6 tl:Bc4 27 .tf2 with a small advantage for White in the game P.H.Nielsen-Sutovsky, Dortmund 2005, which was eventually drawn. 1s. ..:rs Later 18. .. l::t c8! was discovered to be better and fully satisfactory. The trade-off of activity for structure is a very difficult one to handle. 19 @gl 1Wc4 20 1Wd2

White would like to continue with tl:Bg3-e4. 20 ... 1We6 21 h3 tl:Bc4 22 1Wg5! (DJ One of the best moves of the game and still part of the opening strategy! White wants to keep the bishop off h6 and at the same time get ready to mobilize by tl:Bf4 or tl:Bg3-e4. This pro vokes the next move which further restricts Black's bishop:

22. ..h6 23 1Wcl 1Wf7 24 .tg3 g5

This move, trying to prevent tl:Bf4, has been criticized, although the suggested 24 ... 1Wd5 ! ?

264 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

25 tl:Bf4 1We4 isn't really better after 26 tl:Be6. Now the game is positionally won for White, so here are the moves alone: 25 1Wc2 1Wd5 26 .tf2! b5 27 tl:Bg3 l::t f7 2S l::t el b4 29 1Wg6 @rs 30 tl:Be4 l::t xf2 31 @xf2 bxc3 32 1Wf5+ @gs 33 1WcS+ @h7 34 1Wxc5 1Wf7+ 35 @gl c2 36 tl:Bg3 .trs 37 tt:::i rs @gs 3S l::t cl 1-0 Van Tilbury - Zadrima Moscow OL 1994 14  cxd4 15 cxd4 e5 (D) A completely different approach. In many cases Black will now play on the dark squares! 16 d5 Now the game once again takes on the char acter of superior pawn-structure (a dangerous protected passed pawn on d5) versus active piece-play. This time it will be difficult to pre vent Black's bishop from coming quickly into play via h6 or f8. White has often tried 16 @gl instead, when Black seems to have established equality by 16 ... l::t c8; for example, 17 d5 tl:Bc4 (heading for a blockade on d6) 18 ilf2 1Wd7 19 l::t c l b5 20 g5 a5 21 tl:Bg3 tl:Bd6! is equal, Van Wely-Leko, Monaco (Amber rapid) 2001. You can still have fun playing this type of position in practice.

16. 

tl:Bc4 17 1fVd3 ( D) For a while, 17 .tf2 was considered a more dangerous try, retaining the good bishop, but this costs time after 17 ... 1Wf6 18 @gl l::t f8 19 1We l .th6!, leading to equality.

17. bS

This is a relatively safe move that secures the powerful knight's position. Kasparov played the paradoxical 17 ... tl:Bxe3+ ! ? 1 8 1Wxe3 1fVh4 versus Kramnik in Linares 1999, this time play ing for dark squares and depending upon tactics in the face of White's extra and extremely dan gerous d-pawn. The theory on this line extends past move 30 and is very specific, so I'll ignore it except to quote that game: 19 h3 .th6 20 1Wd3 l::t f8+ 2 1 @gl 1Wf2+ 22 @hl 1We3 23 1Wc4 b5 24 1Wxb5 l::t f2 25 1We8+ .tf8 26 1We6+ (a very pretty line is 26 d6 1Wxe2 27 d7 1Wxe4 28 l::t g 1 l::t f3 ! 29 1We6+ @h8 30 g5 .te7 3 1 gxf3 1Wxf3+ 32 l::t g2 1Wfl + 33 @h2 1Wf4+ with a draw) 26 ... @h8 27 d6 1Wxe2 28 1Wxe5+ .tg7 29 1We8+ l::t f8 30 d7 1Wd3 3 1 e5 h6 32 e6 @h7 33 l::t g l l::t f3 34 1fVh8 l::t xh3+ 35 gxh3 1We4+ 112-112. lS g5 (D) Cutting off the bishop, but Black activates it the other way. 1S .. .tf8 19 tl:igl a6! 1 9. .. tl:Bxe3+ 20 1Wxe3 1Wb6 has been played, but then 21 1Wxb6 axb6 22 tl:Bf3 .tc5 ! ? 23 l::t d l might b e a serious problem.

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 265

20 tl:Bf3 .td6 with a very solid position and equality. Nei ther side can undertake much. The Gambit Lines 12 .td3 cxd4 13 cxd4 .te6 (D) w Now White really needs to do something about incursions on c4, because ... .tc4 threat- ens to win the light squares and ... tl:Bc4 would create immediate tactical problems. Since 14 'iVa4 a6! threatens ...b5, White has only two se rious moves that protect c4, both requiring ma terial sacrifice. The first is the gambit 14 l:i.c l .txa2 15 'iVa4. White also has the exchange sacrifice 14 d5 ! ? .txal 15 'iVxal , whose assess ment at the moment is not fully resolved. In spite of over 45 years of investigation into 14 d5 by hundreds of grandmasters, a few new ideas are still being found at the top levels. Neverthe less, the play is dependent upon countless tac tics which don't lend themselves to general understanding, so in this case there is only a limited amount to be gained through broad dis cussion of the opening as such. In fact, the spe cifics of the attack are really in the realm of the middlegame proper. Thus I shall limit my dis cussions of both 14 l:tc l and 14 d5, providing some general contours of the play. Geller's 14 :tel 14 l:tcl With this move White covers c4 and offers a pawn. Black must accept or be driven back by the move 15 d5. 14 . .txa2 (D) This position has fascinated players and theoreticians for many decades. After many years of intense scrutiny, Black seems to have solved his problems in the very main lines with the move 1 5. .. .tb3. Whether that will re main true is still an open question, and both sides can still experiment with little-played moves. I'm only going to show one game, because White hasn't made much progress in the last few years. H illarp Persson - Rowson Torshavn 2000 15 'iVa4 (D) This is the most popular move by a huge margin: White forces Black's bishop to move and gets his pieces out as quickly as possible. Black's light-square strategy, with which we are so familiar, should work well after the straightforward attack 15 f4 a6! 16 f5 b5 17 e5. Nenashev-Notkin, St Petersburg 1 995, when Notkin suggests 17. .. tl:Bc4! 1 8 .tg5 tl:Bb2 19 'iVd2 tl:Bxd3 20 'iVxd3 .tc4 2 1 l:txc4 (otherwise the d4-pawn falls) 2 1 ...bxc4 22 'iVxc4 'iVd7 23 f6 exf6 24 exf6 l:tfc8 and ... .tf8 with a winning advantage. This is an instructive example of a queenside pawn expansion supporting Black's pieces.

15. ..

.tb3 This move was discovered late in the devel opment of theory. It has challenged White to find something new in order to justify 14 l:i.c 1 as a winning weapon. The time-honoured line

266 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 26 7

[diagram]

268 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

so thoroughly analysed that it could easily be the subject of a whole book. The main defence is 16.J::t e8 17 @hl l::t c8 1 8 tl:Bf4 .td7 19 e5 ! (otherwise ... tl:Bc4-e5 would cut off the attack)

19. ..

tl:Bc4 20 e6 .ta4 2 1 tl:Bxg6! hxg6 22 .txg6 tl:Be5 (the computer says instantly that after 22 ... 1Wxd5? 23 1We l and 1fVh4 White wins with out any complications) 23 .te4 .tc2! (always light squares !) 24 .txc2 l::t xc2 25 1Wdl @h7 26 f4 @xh6 27 fxe5 1Wc7 (I' m skipping loads of burdensome games and analysis here, such as 27 ... l::t c4, 27 ... l::t c5 and 27 ... l::t c l ) 28 exf6 1Wc4, with further messy analysis to follow.

16. ..

.tf7 17 .th6 l::t eS 18 .tbs es 19 1Wf2 These are all the best moves, according to theory. Maybe 19 1We3 would establish a new direction. ... l::t e7 20 f4! (D) Way back in 1974, Gligoric played 20 .te3 versus Portisch, unsuccessfully. 20 f4 is now considered the only move.

20 .  l::t cS!'? An indication of the power of the bishops is that getting the queens off only enhances their effectiveness: 20 ... 1Wb6 2 1 1Wxb6 axb6 22 fxe5 l::t xe5 (22 ...fxe5 23 tl:ic 1 ! renders the a5-knight a prisoner) 23 tl:Bg3 f5 24 .tf4 l::t xe4 25 tl:Bxe4 fxe4 26 d6 and the d-pawn is very strong, Deg tiarev-Emst, Hamburg 2005. Nevertheless, Black can play 20 ...exf4 21 1Wxf4 1Wb6+ 22 @hl .txd5 ! 23 exd5 1Wxb5 24 1Wxf6 1We8, Nayer-Krasenkow, Saint Vincent ECC 2005; then, oddly enough, Black might be doing well enough after the seemingly best line 25 .td2 (25 tl:Bf4 l::t f7) 25 ... tl:Bc4 26 .tc3 tl:Be5 27 tl:Bg3 l::t d8. 21 fxeS .l::!. xeS 22 tl:Bg3 tl:Bc4 23 1Wxf6 1Wxf6 24 l::t xf6 Here White has more than enough compen sation for an exchange, and Black's practical difficulties make the situation worse for him. Van Wely went on to win. Right now the 16 1Wd4 line of the exchange sacrifice seems to have more possibilities than others, although this is a situation that is subject to change with the next novelty. One point of the last two sections with 14 l::t c 1 and 14 d5 is to show the sort of compensation required when one sacrifices material in a weakness-free posi tion. Modern 7 liJf3 System

[diagram]
tl:Bxc3 6 bxc3 .tg7 7 tl:Bf3 (D) In spite of the continuing popularity of the traditional 7 .tc4 among experts in the lines, 7 tl:Bf3 has taken over as the main line of the Ex change Variation at the grandmaster level. Its dynamic nature has led to many beautiful games and its appeal will be obvious when you see some games. Once again there's a tremen dous amount of raw material in the main lines that defies unified description and can't really be expressed in terms of strategic principles. Recently a 208-page book has been written solely about specifically recommended lines for White in the line 7 tl:Bf3 c5 8 .l::!. b l . Whether playing White or Black, average and/or aspir ing players needn't therefore avoid 7 tl:Bf3 vari ations, which are as rich as any in chess, but those who are less theoretically inclined may

GRUNFEW DEFENCE 269

[diagram]

2 70 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Lagowski - Shishkin Kazimierz Dolny 2001 8 ... 1Wa5 9 1Wd2 tl:Bc6 The famous game Kramnik-Kasparov, Lon don BGN Wch (2) 2000 went 9 ... .tg4 10 l::t b l a6 1 1 l::t xb7 .txf3 12 gxf3 tl:Bc6 1 3 .tc4 O-O (the immediate 13 ...cxd4 14 cxd4 1Wxd2+ 15 @xd2 tl:Bxd4 16 f4 or 16 .txd4 .txd4 1 7 'it>e2 favours White because of his active pieces and centralized king) 14 O-O cxd4 1 5 cxd4 .txd4 (15. .. 1Wxd2 16 .txd2 tl:Bxd4 l 7 'it>g2 gives White the two bishops) 16 .td5 (D). The bishop will remain a monster in the cen tre for a long time. 16. .. .tc3 17 1Wc l tl:Bd4?! (Black wants an endgame with opposite-col oured bishops, but maybe 17 ... l::t ac8 is better) 18 .txd4 .txd4 19 l::t xe7 l::t a7 20 l::t xa7 j,,xa7 21 f4 ! 1Wd8 22 1Wc3 .tb8 23 1Wf3 1Wh4 24 e5 ! (blocking the dark squares) 24 ...g5 !? 25 l::t e l ! 1Wxf4 26 1Wxf4 gxf4 27 e6 fxe6 28 l::t xe6. Now White goes a pawn up. The opening is certainly over, so I'll just leave you with the moves: 28 ...@g7 29 l::t xa6 l::t f5 30 .te4 l::t e5 3 1 f3 .l::!. e7

32 a4 l::t

a7 33 l::t b6 .te5 34 l::t b4 l::t d7 35 @g2 l::t d2+ 36 'it>h3 h5 37 l::t b5 @f6 38 a5 l::t a2 39 l::t b6+ 'it>e7 40 .td5 1-0. This was arguably the most important game in Kramnik's chess ca reer. 10 l::t cl 10 .l::!. bl has the drawback of allowing a tricky line stemming from Adorjan: 10 ...O-O 1 1 l::t b5 cxd4! 12 l::t xa5 dxe3 13 1Wxe3 tl:Bxa5 (D). Black has a rook and bishop for the queen, with the advantage of the bishop-pair and no weaknesses, while White's queenside pawns are weak. I'd be amazed if this weren't at least equal: 14 h4 (the only move that has had any success) 14 ... .te6 (I can't see any problem af- ter either 14. ..h5 or 14. ..h6) 15 h5 (or 15 tl:Bg5 .txa2 16 h5 l::t fc8 with equality) 15 ... l::t fc8 16 e5 tl:Bc4 17 .txc4 l::t xc4 ! 1 8 hxg6 hxg6 19 tl:Bg5 l::t ac8 20 tl:Bxe6 l:i.xc3 2 1 1Wg5 l::t c l+ 1/z-1/z Dau tov-Svidler, Istanbul OL 2000. 10 ... cxd4 1 1 cxd4 1Wxd2+ 12 @xd2 O-O 13 d5 .l::!. d8 14 @el tl:Bb4! Black needs some tempi so that he can orga nize the destruction of White's centre. a) Kramnik won an attractive and highly in structive game versus Leko in Budapest 200 1 after 14 ... tl:Be5?! 15 tl:Bxe5 .txe5 16 f4 .td6 (16. .. .tg7 17 @f2!) 17 @f2 e5 18 .tc5 ! (D) (breaking Black's hold on the centre). 18 ... .txc5+ ( 1 8. .. exf4!? 19 @f3 ! has some deceptively simple ideas, one of them being 19 ...g5 20 .txd6! l::t xd6 21 h4 h6 22 hxg5 hxg5 23 l::t h5 f6 24 .tc4 'it>g7 25 l::t chl , winning ! And after 18 .. .f6 19 .txd6 l::t xd6 20 fxe5 fxe5 2 1

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 271

.te2, White's rook can't be stopped from com ing to c7 - all this with White's bad bishop op posing Black's good one!) 19 l::t xc5 exf4 20 @f3 .td7 21 .td3 l::t ac8 22 l::t hcl g5 23 l::t c7 l::t xc7 24 l::t xc7 .ta4 25 @g4 h6 26 l::t xb7 l::t d7 27 l::t b4 .tdl + 28 @f5 (the king has done a lot of wandering, and now finds a dominant position) 28 ...@g7 29 h4 f6 30 hxg5 hxg5 31 e5 ! ! (D). 3 1 ...fxe5 (White's 3 1 st depends upon the astonishing line 3 1 ...l::t xd5 32 l::t b7+ @h6 33 .tbl ! !; for example, 33 .. .fxe5 34 'it>e6) 32 @xe5 f3 33 gxf3 .txf3 34 d6 (as always, it's the d pawn in the end!) 34 ... l::t d8 35 .tf5 .tc6 36 d7 l::t f8 37 l::t d4 1-0. b) 14. .. ll:Ba5 (D) tests White's large centre against Black's attempts to undermine it. It seems to work out satisfactorily for Black. Kramnik-Kasparov, Astana 2001 continued 15 .tg5 .td7 16 .td3 l::t dc8 17 @e2 e6 18 l::t xc8+ l::t xc8 19 l::t c l l::t xc l 20 .txc l exd5 21 exd5 b5 !

22 J..f4 tl:Bc4 23 .txc4 bxc4 24 .te5 .tf8 !

[diagram]

15. .

tl:Bxa2 16 l::t c2 tl:Bc3 17 tl:Bd2 .td7 18 .txe7 l::t e8 19 d6 a5! (D) Starting the queenside pawn advance. What's to stop them?

2 72 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

20 f4 a4 21 j.c4 b5 22 es b4 23 @r2 .i.rs 24

l::t b2 l::t eb8 25 d7 .i.f8 26 d81W l::t xd8 27 .i.xd8 .l:txd8 28 tl:Bf3 .i.cS+ 29 @g3 tl:Be4+ 30 @h4 .i.e7+ 31 tl:Bg5 tl:Bxg5 0-1 Black has his share of fun in these endings. Karpov - Kasparov New York/Lyons Wch (1 7) 1 990 8 ...O-O 9 1Wd2 .i.g4 Kasparov liked playing this move in various contexts. 10 tl:Bg5!? cxd4 The trick is 10 ...h6 1 1 h3 .i.h5 1 2 g4! . 11 cxd4 (D) 1 1  tl:Bc6 Again, 1 1 .. .h6 is answered by 1 2 h3.

12 h3 j.d7 13 l::t

bl l::t c8 14 tl:Bf3 tl:Ba5 As so often, Black skirts around White's centre and eyes c4. 15 .i.d3 .i.e6 16 O-O .i.c4 17 l::t fdl b5?! 18 .i.gS a6 (D) 19 .l::!. bcl .i.xd3 Black has systematically conquered the light squares but taken a lot of time. 20 l::t xc8 1Wxc8 21 1Wxd3 l::t e8 22 l::t cl 1Wb7 23 d5! (D) Here's Black's greatest enemy in the Gri.in feld: White's d-pawn marching steadily up the board! 23 .. tl:Bc4 24 tl:Bd2 tl:Bxd2 25 .i.xd2 .l:tc8 26 l::t c6! .i.eS 27 .i.c3! .i.b8 28 1Wd4 f6 29 .i.aS! .i.d6 30 1Wc3 l::t e8 31 a3 @g7 32 g3 .i.eS 33 1Wc5 h5 34 .i.c7 .i.al 35 .i.f4 1Wd7 36 l::t c7 1Wd8

37 d6 g5 38 d7

Through the breach!

38.  .:rs 39 .i.d2 .i.es 40 l::t

b7 1-0 One nice continuation goes 40 ...h4 41 .i.a5 ! 1Wxa5 42 1Wxe7+ @g6 43 1Wh7+! @xh7 44 d81W+. Modern Main Line with .l:.bl 8 l::t bl (D)

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 2 73

[diagram]

8 ..O-O

[diagram]

USSR 1984.

9 i.e2 At this juncture the material divides. I'll take a look at selected lines stemming from the two major moves: 9 ... lLic6 and 9 ...cxd4. a) A solid variation that many strong play ers have used and avoids massive theory, is 9 ... b6 10 O-O i.b7 (D). White's most common and logical response is to defend the d-pawn by 1 1 d3 (although 1 1 c2 deserves a closer look). Then: al) 1 1 . ..e6 can be countered in several ways but the obvious one is 12 i.g5. Then Black probably wants to avoid 12 ...d6 13 e5 ! ?, and 12 ... c7 1 3 e3 lLid7 can be met by 14 e5 !?, to restrict the knight on d7, or simply 14 .l::!. fc I lLif6

15 e5 lLid5 16 d2. Notice that the move e5

[diagram]

14 e5 ! (this is the essence of 8 .l:!.bl Grii

[diagram]

[diagram]

2 74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
20 .l::!. xd8 .l::!. xd8 21 b2 i.f2+! 22 'lt>fl gxf5 23 xb6 i.xb6 and White was hopelessly tied down in S.Ivanov-Greenfeld, Bugojno 1 999.

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 2 75

13 f4 i..g7 14 c4 l:!.e8

14 ...exd5 15 cxd5 i..d4 16 i..e3 gets rid of the intrusive bishop. 15 e5!? f6 16 f5! (D) The ultimate centre vs undermining pic ture ! 16 . .gxf5?! The situation is not necessarily hopeless for Black, but he surely must have been intimi dated! I won't even begin to go into the pages of notes that can accompany this game, but will just toss in a variation or two that shows how vi tal the initiative and two bishops are to White's attack. Here 16. ..exd5 can be met by 17 e6 !? or 17 fxg6, neither leading to a clear assessment. From now on White's initiative is almost im possible to deal with. 17 i..h5 l:!.e7 17 ... l:!.f8 l 8 l:!.g3 @h8 19 i..b2 fxe5 20 l:!.xg7 ! @xg7 2 1 i..xe5+ @g8 22 O-O gives White and his bishops a terrific attack.

18 d6 l:!.d7 19 l:!.g3 fxe5 20 i..b2! (D)

20.  @hS

Other moves like 20 ... @f8 may be somewhat better, but here are two that are entertainingly worse: 20 ... l:!.xd6? 2 1 l:!.xg7+! @h8 22 i..xe5 ! l:!.xd l + 23 i..xdl and White wins; and 20 ... e4? 21 'ii' al ! 'ii' f8 22 i..e8 ! 'ii' xe8 23 j_xg7 f4 24 l:!.g5, etc.

21 O-O l:!.xd6

[diagram]

14 O-O exd5 15 exd5 (D)

276 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

15 .  . i.a5 (D) It is strange to see a bishop so far away from the kingside and at such cost of time, but now that White's e-pawn is gone Black wants to combine forces on the c-pawn and White's queenside in general. Giving up a pawn by

15. ..i.f5?! 16 l:!.xb7 i.b6 hasn't panned out af

[diagram]

[diagram]

O-O (D)

This is the very main line of the Modem Ex change Grtinfeld. Given the back-and-forth na ture of chess fashion, that probably won't be the case in a few years; still, we have to work with

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 277

[diagram]

2 78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

that White's queen's bishop tends to go to e3, but sometimes to g5 or b4 to harass Black' s e pawn. The other bishop is an opportunist, head ing to c4 if possible, but being quite content on the long diagonal if there is an exchange of Black's bishop on g4 for a knight on f3. White's rook on bl likes to swim around on the fourth rank via b4, and his other rook on fl will often go modestly to e l to protect the e4-pawn, or to d l to help advance the d-pawn. For his part, Black simply needs to develop his pieces safely. His bishop on g7 is ideally placed, and his knight would usually like to at tack White's centre from c6, although ... lLid7- b6 is also played. Obviously, Black's rooks be long on open files, but the one on a8 may stay there in order to support and advance the a pawn. Finally, we have Black's light-squared bishop, which can go to d7 or b7, but in view of White's attack will usually go to g4 in order to exchange off a white piece. The ideas above are only starting points, and you'll need to look at a lot of games in various books to get a deep understanding for how to play these lines.

12.  .i.g4

[diagram]

[diagram]

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 2 79

[diagram]

[diagram]

d2! i.c7 27 l:!.bdl lLid7 (D)

280 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

28 i.xf7! A wonderful finishing touch. White heads for a winning ending. 28 .. l:!.xf7 The very same idea follows 28 ... @xf7 29 'ii' xd7 l:!.xd7 30 l:!.xd7+ @f6 3 1 l:!.xc7 a5 32 l:!.ccl ! a4 33 l:!.al 'ii' b3 34 l:!.fbl c2 35 @gl a3 36 l:!.b6+ @g7 37 l:!.a6 and the pawn falls. 29 xd7 .l:i.xd7 30 l:!.xd7+ @h6 31 l:!.xc7 d3 32 'lt>gl d4 33 .l:i.c2 1-0 If we know anything about lines like this we know that their theory will evolve, perhaps rap idly. Various innovations will leave the exam ples that I'm using marginally relevant if that. But I doubt if the nature of the play will be such as to invalidate the basic concepts we shall see. The following is one of the most compli cated and brilliant games in recent years. Again I won't delve into the details (which would fill a pamphlet!) but present a picture of White's space and centre battling Black's passed a-pawn. Gelfand - Shirov Polanica Zdroj 1 998 13 i.g5 h6 14 i.h4 After 14 i.e3 lLic6 15 d5 another beautiful game went 15. .. lLia5?! 16 i.c5 i.f6 17 e5 ! (there's that sacrifice again, and White doesn't even get the bishop-pair) 17 ... ..Bxe5 18 l:!.b4! (you get used to these ideas) 18 .....Bxf3 19 i.xf3 i.f6 20 l:!.a4 b3 2 1 l:!.xa5 'ii' xdl 22 I.txdl b6

23 d6! l:!.ac8 (23 ...exd6 24 ..Bxb6; 23 ...bxa5 24 dxe7 l'.1fc8 25 i.xa8 l:!.xa8 26 l:!.d7) 24 d7 l:!.cd8 25 i.xe7 i.xe7 26 l:!.xa7 l:!.b8 27 l:!.el i.d8 (27 ... i.f6 28 i.d5 b5 29 .l:i.e8 !) 28 l:!.e8 b5 29 .l:i.a8 l:!.xa8 30 i.xa8 b4 3 1 i.d5 @g7 32 @fl (zugzwang!) 1-0 Kramnik-Timman, Novgorod 1995. But again, Black is hardly forced to go into this sort of defensive nightmare. He should play

15. ..i.xf3 16 i.xf3 lLie5 17 l:!.xb7, and now

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 281

[diagram]

282 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

10. ..

[diagram]

13. .. 'ii'

[diagram]

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 283

[diagram]
12 a3 CiJd5 with equality, Gershon-Kariakin.

[diagram]

13 O-O b4 14 CiJdl c5 ! 15 dxc5 CiJd5 16 l:!.c l

[diagram]

284 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

8 ...b5 Continuing with the move-order discussion, Black can play S ...c5 ! ? ( D) here, which White could have avoided by S e5. White seems to be on top after 9 dxc5 (9 e5 lll g4!) 9 ...a5?! (9 ... lll bd7 ! 10 c6! bxc6 1 1 ile2 l:.bS 12 c2 is only slight worse for Black) 10 b6 xb6 1 1 cxb6 lt:lbd7 12 ile2 lll xb6 13 ile3 lllbd7 14 lll d4 lllc5 15 f3. This type of po sition arises fairly often in d-pawn play. Black's inferiority in the centre means that he has a hard time finding good squares for all of his pieces. Kasparov-Leko, Frankfurt (rapid) 2000 contin ued 15 ...e5 16 lll c6 bxc6 17 ilxc5 l:.dS 1 S @f2.

9 e5 (D)

[diagram]

9. . .

[diagram]

GRUNFELD DEFENCE 285

[diagram]

10. ..cS! (D)

10 ... lll b6 1 1 h5 lll c6 1 2 ile3 favours White. 1 1 e6! fxe6!? A safer and relatively 'positional' line is l 1...c4! 12 exf7+ l:!.xf7 13 dl lll b6. This has held up for Black and may be described as un resolved but dynamically equal. 12 h5 12 xe6+? @h8 leaves White's queen in poor shape. 12 ... cxd4 13 hxg6 The usual spectacular and chaotic play fol lowed 13 xe6+ @h8 14 hxg6 lllf6! (D) in Bass-Larouche, New York 1985: 15 e5 dxc3 16 l:!.xh7+! @g8 ! 17 h2 d6 18 l:!.xg7+ @xg7 19 h6+ @g8 20 g7 d8 21 i.d3 ilf5 22 h8+ @f7 23 lllg5+ @g6 24 i.e2 lll c6? (24 ...d5) 25 i.h5+ lL'Bxh5 26 h7+ @f6 27 h6+ ilg6 28 lll e4+ @f7 29 lllg5+ with a draw.

13. ..

[diagram]

286 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

14. ..

[diagram]

15.  .@hS 16 gxf3 d3

Black tries to compensate for his material by dominating the centre. He has to avoid

[diagram]
17 dl lll c6 18 ilh6? 1 8 ile3 ! is correct, when Black is in major trouble. 18 ... ilxh6 19 l:!.xh6 i.b7 20 ilg2 lll e5 (

D)

21 l:!.h3?! Losing the thread. White maintains the bal ance by 2 1 d2. 21 ... d4! Everything in the centre. The rest of the game isn't cleanly played, but eventually Black's d pawn and pieces combine for victory: 22 l:!.g3 lll c4 23 @fl J::i. f8 24 @gl l:!.f4 25 cl e5! 26 lll dl @xh7 27 l:!.bl i.c8 28 lll e3 d2 29 c2+ d3 30 xd3+ lll xd3 31 ilfl lll cl 32 ilxc4 bxc4 33 l:!.g5 ilf5 34 l:!.al l:!.xf3 35 lt:Jdl i.c2 36 @g2 ilxdl 37 l:!.h5+ @g6 0-1 The Smyslov Variation 7 ... ilg4 8 ile3 lll fd7 (D) Whereas 7 ...a6 and 7 ... llla6 tend to lead into disorderly channels, the Smyslov Variation (or 'System') is characterized by positional issues that can last throughout and beyond the open ing stage. Black's plan is as yet undefined but can consist of a combination of ... lll fd7-b6 and ... lllc6. He has the flexibility of a change of plans if necessary, by, for example, ... lt:lbd7, ...c5 or ...e5. The logic is essentially that the bishop on g4 (usually exchanged on f3) and the knight on c6 combine to put pressure on d4, pressure which is increased when ... lll fd7- b6 unmasks the g7-bishop. Black will some times choose to restrain White's centre by ... e6. Against all this White will normally play d5 at some point. But then we have the ideal under mining situation for Black: as opposed to many other variations in which Black plays ...c5 and White plays d5, here Black has both the c7- and e7-pawns in reserve to challenge the pawn on d5 or at least prevent it from becoming a passed pawn. That's not a bad collection of virtues. What does White have in return? Of course, the cen tre. In this case it's a centre that is reasonably easy to support with pieces and for the mo ment not attacked by any pawns. Furthermore, Black's ... lll fd7-b6 is slow, so White has the luxury of castling queenside or playing l:!.dl , and/or 'wasting' a tempo on h3 in order to fol low up ... ilxf3 with attack on the king side along the open file. Some specifics are also of interest: when Black plays ... lllc6 and ... lll b6, White doesn't always have to retreat but can make the more aggressive move c5 . All this makes for intriguing play. Now let's explore these ideas by exemplary games:

9 O-O-O

Sosonko - Smejkal Amsterdam 1 979

GRONFELD DEFENCE 287

[diagram]

288 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black employs the strategy of restraining White's centre. 11 ile2 tt:Jc6 12 e5!? (D) Remember that when Black plays ...e6 in this and the Exchange Variation, White's move e5, weakening in other variations, becomes more viable. First, White gains opportunities to control important dark squares around the king by means of i.g5 and tt:Je4. Moreover the ad vance ...f6, effective when there's still a pawn on e7, can simply weaken Black's e6, poten tially on an open file following exf6.

12. ..

tt:Je7! On the flip side, d5 has become a natural out post for Black's knights, and f5 has been freed for another, to put pressure on d4 or e3.

13 h3 i.xf3 14 ilxf3 t2Jf5 15 O-O (D)

15. ..

[diagram]

19 g4 tt:Jxd4!? 20 l:!.xd4 i.xe5

[diagram]

18. ..a5? 19 l:!.fel a4 20 l:!.e4 ilh6 2 1 ile5 a3 22

b3 tLia7 23 l:!.d7 ilc l 24 l:!.xc7 ilb2 25 tLia4! White won quickly in Karpov-Kasparov, Lon don/Leningrad Wch (17) 1 986. However, Black

GRONFELD DEFENCE 289

[diagram]

D)

[diagram]

15. ..

[diagram]

[diagram]
bxa6 20 i.xa6 lL'Be5! Activating all of his pieces. 21 f4 2 1 ilxc8 lL'Bd3+ 22 @dl lL'ixc l 23 @xcl l:!.xc8 leaves White struggling to defend.

[diagram]

9 Modern Benoni

1 d4 t2Jf6 2 c4 c5 (D)

[diagram]

MODERN BENONI 291

may be less productive to challenge White' s centre later b y means of . . .e6 for a few reasons, among them the fact that after an eventual ...exd5 White has the additional option exd5. There may also be times at which White's dxe6 is a good move. 4 lllc3 4 lll f3 is an important continuation, although it will usually arrive from the popular move order 1 d4 lllf6 2 c4 e6 3 lllf3 (to avoid the Nimzo-Indian Defence 3 lll c3 ilb4) 3 ...c5 4 d5. That move-order is particularly significant be cause White's choices are limited by the knight on f3, i.e., he can't play popular variations with the moves f4 and f3. See also the discussion of

1 d4 lll

f6 2 c4 e6 3 lll f3 in the Queen's Indian chapter. 4 ... exd5 (D) 5 cxd5 Instead, White can play the rare move 5 lll xd5, when 5 ... lllc6 6 ilg5 ile7 !? 7 lllxe7 Wixe7 gives up the bishop-pair but may be satis factory for Black because of his faster develop ment; e.g., 8 lllf3 (versus ... Wie5) 8 ... O-O 9 e3 .Md8 !?, intending ...d5. The normal and reliable line is 5 ... lllxd5. Then Black equalizes after 6 Wixd5 d6 (or 6 ... lll c6; also, 6 ... i.e7, to meet 7 b3 with 7 ... ilf6, is considered fine for Black) 7 lll f3 lll c6 8 e4 ile6 9 Widl ile7 with equality. White has created the d5 outpost but a piece is a long way from occupying it (llld2-fl -e3-d5) and a piece on d5 might be exchanged anyway. White's rarely-chosen option 5 lllxd5 lllxd5 6 cxd5 (D) is rather instructive: It turns out this particular simplification fa vours Black. White's knight is one of his best

pieces and after Black plays ...g6 and ... i.g7 (or ... ile7-f6), the exchange of the f6-knight will give Black' s bishop an open view along the a l-h8 diagonal. Indeed, in the main lines with 5 cxd5 d6 (i.e., without 5 lllxd5 lt:lxd5) Black of ten has to move the knight from f6 to a medio cre square, precisely to increase the bishop's range and in order to hold up e4-e5. 5 ...d6 (D) Black intends to play ...g6 and ... ilg7, but first he stops White's advance d6, and he also opens a diagonal for the c8-bishop. At this junc ture, we'll look at the main moves, 6 e4 and 6 lllf3 (with g3). It's also worthwhile to consider some of the lines involving the move ilf4 as we go along. At this point 6 ilf4 develops quickly and targets Black's weakest pawn on d6. A third-rank pawn that isn't on an open file is nor mally pretty easy to defend, but in the Benoni, Black's can be vulnerable, at least enough to disturb his development. A case in point is 6 ...g6 7 Wia4+!? (the most forcing continuation,

292 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

6 e4 (D)

Although the move 6 e4 is by no means the only one, White plays it in most games for the obvious reasons of development (allowing the fl-bishop to move) and central control.

6. ..

g6 Black prepares ... ilg7. At this point we again come to a major fork in the road. We shall look at 7 tt:Jf3, the Classical main line in which White develops normally and without delay; this generally leads to relatively quiet posi tional play. The resulting positions have been debated in more detail than any others in the Modem Benoni. Then we look at the pawn storm systems that follow from the aggressive 7 f4, which itself leads to several distinct attack ing formations. These lines will get their own relatively de tailed sections. I have made that decision based upon the desire to address the most fundamen tal issues inherent in the Benoni without clut tering the presentation. Keep in mind that the Modem Benoni is considerably less popular than the other 1 d4 openings that we deal with in this volume. Nevertheless, there are several other consequential variations that need to be addressed, if only in a selective manner:

MODERN BENONI 293

[diagram]
12 O-O O-O 13 l:tfe l , and here Palliser recom

mends a manoeuvre that pops up in several Benoni variations: 1 3. .. l:ta7 !?, with the idea ... l:te7 and ... l:tfe8. Although White looks better in that position, Black should always be on the lookout for the ... l:ta7 resource. b2) 9 'iVe2 !? .lle7! (not 9 ... .llg7 due to 10 e5)

10 e5 (10 'iVc2 !? O-O 1 1 a4 b4 12 lZ'ibl b3 !? is a

typical Benoni device to ruin the coordination of White's pieces) 10 ... dxe5 1 1 .txe5 lZ'ibd7 12 O-O-O lZ'Bxe5 13 lZ'Bxe5 (D). White's position looks powerful indeed; for example, d6 is threatened. Nevertheless, his kingside pieces are undeveloped, and 13 ... 'iVd6 14 lZ'Bc6 @f8 ! blockades the d-pawn. This re sults in a surprisingly good position because that pawn can be weak and Black has an effec tive queenside majority. Naturally White has a lot of options (the move 9 .td3 above is promis ing), although Black has done well in this varia tion as a whole. Although I won't be examining the 'Modem Main Line' with .lld3 and h3, I'd like to take a quick look at it in terms of pawn-chains. There are numerous orders to get to the basic position; for example, 1 d4 lZ'Bf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 e6 4 lZ'Bc3 exd5 5 cxd5 d6 6 e4 g6 7 lZ'Bf3 .llg7 8 h3 O-O 9 .lld3 (D). White has the mini-chain e4/d5, and Black has d6/c5. Let's talk about attacking these chains. White would like to get e5 in, attacking the base of the chain. Moves that might assist that are l:tel and .llf4. The alternative f4 is weakening and hard to implement, but not out of the question in the long run. On the queen side, White has the option of b4 to attack the front of the chain, a favourite positional device, most appropriate after Black plays ...b5. For his part, Black can't legally make pawn contact with the front of White's e4/d5 chain, and .. .f5 in such a position tends to be risky (the more so in this particular variation) because of the giant hole created on e6. Grabbing space by 9 . ..a6

294 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

MODERN BENONI 295

c) on b7, the bishop will run into White's well-guarded d5-pawn; d) even on d7, it can obstruct Black's devel opmental scheme, in which ... lZ'ibd7 is very of ten involved, and sometimes ... lZ'ifd7 will be desirable to prevent White's e5 advance. The good news for Black is that in any given opening situation, one of those squares tends to be both available and useful. For example, ... .tg4 is played in several main lines in order to release the pressure on e5. After an ex change on f3, it turns out that a combination of knights of d7 and f6 with a rook on e8 and bishop on g7 produces a harmonious set-up in which the knight-pair is often as good as the bishop-pair, and even better in terms of sup porting Black's goals in the centre and on the queenside. And a bishop on d7 can be surpris ingly useful in supporting ...b5 after Black's knight makes a typical journey from a6 to c7. Here's a common picture: Black has been trying to enforce ...b5 and White to prevent it. Now that this advance is imminent, White will often play a5, after which Black can play ... lZ'Bb5 (supported by the bishop on d7), a good move that eyes d4 and even the exchange on c3. Alternatively, after a5, ... .tb5 is sometimes played to contest the c4-square. 8 .te2 O-O 9 O-O (D) We've made a couple more moves. There arises a crucial issue: will Black be able to mo bilize his queenside majority? The move ... b5 is his most likely pawn-break, mainly to prepare ...c4 and/or ... b4, but also giving his pieces some space to work with. The less frequent move ...c4 (by itself, that is, without ...b5) can sometimes provide enough piece-play to compensate for the loss of the important d4-square. Then ... lZ'Bc5 attacks the e-pawn and puts pressure on the in terior weaknesses on d3 and b3 (assuming that White has played a4). Barring either ...b5 or ...c4, Black will suf fer a cramped position on the queenside. Thus White will concentrate his efforts in this area and of course look to e5, with the emphasis de pending upon the specifics of the position. White normally plays a4, which in conjunc tion with his light-squared bishop and knight on c3 is meant to hold down ...b5, at least until White implements his own goals. If White can suppress Black's principal freeing moves, he will have time to organize an attack of his own. Assuming that White has control of the sit uation just described, then Black will have to look to the kingside. Remember that waiting around is usually bad for him since White has the best long-term weapon, the central major ity. The other break against White's pawn chain is . . .f5, difficult to organize because it weakens the interior square e6 so badly. Nev ertheless, Black does succeed in breaking up the centre with ...f5 in a minority of positions, mainly because White's move exf5 will acti vate Black's bishop to f5, from where it can create threats. Finally, Black can try to launch some kind of effective kingside attack by, for example, ...g5-g4 or by some combination of ... lZ'Bh5, ... tt:Je5, . . . .te5, ... tt:Jg4 and/or ... 'iVh4. The latter attack arises surprisingly often be cause White is so concerned with the queen side and moves his pieces in that direction . Thus in the Modem Benoni we are faced with a situation that arises in many d-pawn

296 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

openings: Black' s flank threats pitted against White's long-term advantages of space and cen tral pawn-structure. From the position after 9 O-O, we'll look at a few games that involve ... lZ'Ba6. In this situation play tends to be entirely on the queenside. Kelecevic - Burgermeister Lenk 2000 9 ... tt:Ja6 This may not be the most accurate move, be cause White can play 10 .tf4 and the knight is perhaps not best-placed on a6. Nevertheless, numerous masters have played 9 ... lZ'Ba6, and this game introduces and illustrates the key ideas of the ... lZ'Ba6 strategy in general. 10 lZ'Bd2 tt:Jc7 11 a4 l:tb8 To begin with, Black aims for ... b5 and White tries to prevent it. 12 f3 White feels that he can prevent ...a6 and ...b5 with a timely lZ'Bc4 and .tf4, sometimes in con junction with a5. Black will have a hard time defending d6 and getting anything at all started on the queenside. 12 ...b6! (D) In response, Black introduces an alternate strategy. His c8-bishop can't find a good square in this position, so he simply trades it off and then expands on the queenside. 13 tt:Jc4 Why does White assent to Black's plan? For one thing, it may be that he will retain the ad vantage by doing so. Furthermore, a slow move like 1 3 @h 1 might encourage Black to return to the standard plan by 13. ..a6 14 lZ'Bc4 b5 15 lZ'Ba5 .td7 with quite an interesting position in which White needs to find a way to proceed. 13  .ta6 White's knight is awfully strong on c4, so it's worth giving up the bishop-pair to get rid of it. 14 .tgS h6?! This has been played in many games, but will lose a critical tempo. See the next game for a similar position in which Black plays ... 'iVd7, a move which should probably be considered at this point. 15 .te3 'iVd7 16 'iVd2! Even in a slow-looking positional line, every tempo counts. White attacks h6 and develops.

16. ..

.txc4 17 .txc4 @h7 Now how will White stop Black from ex panding by ...a6 and ...b5, which is his main goal in most Benonis? 18 l:tabl! (D) He won't, but he'll stop the black pawns cold by playing b4. The combination of l:tbl and b4 is another manoeuvre that is characteristic of Benoni positions. Note that this attacks the front of the pawn-chain, a mode of play quite as common as attacking the base. In the mean time, White's queen protects the knight on c3, so all his pieces are safe and Black has no funny tactics along the al -h8 diagonal. 18 ... a6 19 b4! bS 20 axbS axbS 21 .td3 c4 White was threatening the c-pawn. 22 .tc2 (D) Let's take a tally of the opening and early middlegame: White has a space advantage and can use the d4-square for his pieces. He can also operate with the idea of e5. In return, Black

MODERN BENONI

29 7 can brag about his passed pawn and great bishop on g7 compared to White's poor one on c2. This piece comparison is a bit of a wash, how ever, when we consider that Black' s knight on c7 also has no good moves. Finally, the rooks are equally able to use the a-file if needed. Alto gether, White has more advantages than Black and he will show how to use them. 22 .. l:ta8 23 .td4 l:tfe8 24 f4 This isn't subtle: White is aiming for an eventual e5. 24 .. 'iVe7 25 bdl a6 26 l:tfel 'iVd7 27 h3 hS To stop an attack by g4. 28 'iVf2 'iVe7 29 @h2 'iVd7 (D) It's a bad sign when Black is shuffling back and forth. 30 'iVf3 Slowly but surely, White prepares for the as sault. He has a won game.

30. ..

l:ta3? What can be wrong with a pin? 31 .txf6! .txf6 32 eS! dxeS 33 tt:Je4! It wasn't much of a pin after all ! 34 'iVxa3 is threatened and the fight is suddenly over. 33 .. l:txf3 34 lZ'Bxf6+ @g7 35 tt:Jxd7 l:tf2 36 .te4 fS 37 d6! lZ'Ba6 38 lZ'icS! fxe4 39 d7 1-0 The final blow is 39 ... l:td8 40 lZ'Be6+. Instead of 9 ... lZ'Ba6, Black's more accurate order is: 9 ... l:te8 Then White defends his pawn and prepares to head to the queenside: 10 lZ'Bd2 (D) We have arrived at an important and thematic variation that for years was the main battle ground for the Modem Benoni. As mentioned above, White can get to this position via the move-order 6 tt:Jf3 g6 7 lZ'Bd2 .tg7 8 e4 O-O 9 .te2 l:te8 I O O-O. In order to focus on explain ing ideas rather than covering as many lines as possible, I shall continue to examine the ... tt:Ja6-c7 defensive scheme. It is probably the best of Black's options. 10 ... tt:Ja6 (

D)

This is a stable variation, marked by ma noeuvring rather than tactics. As in the last game, Black is aiming for ...b5 via the moves ... lZ'Bc7, ... l:tb8 and ...a6 in some order. If White plays a4-a5, the knight on c7 may move to b5, exerting influence over d4 and c3. By playing

IO . ..

tt:Ja6 only after 9 ... l:te8 10 Clld2, Black has avoided the move .tf4 which might have dis turbed his plans in the last game (9 . .. lZ'Ba6 I O .tf4). With the order played, however, White has permitted the move ... l:te8 in return for lZ'Bd2, speeding up his plan of playing f3, lZ'Bc4.

298 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.tf4, and perhaps e5. He has an advantage in space and freer pieces, so he hopes that the re sulting positions will force Black on the defen sive. Neither side is consumed by the kind of tactics that characterize many main-line Benoni variations, so the underlying clash of ideas will be apparent throughout the opening stage.

11 f3 t:Dc7 12 a4 b6

Again, this is the distinguishing move. Pre paring ...b5 by ...a6 would allow t:Dc4 and .tf4, attacking d6, and let White invade on b6 (per haps with a5 first). To preface this with ... l:tb8 and ... b6 is slow and invites the move .tf4 fol lowed by e5, when the bishop on f4 strikes at the core of Black's position, through to c7 and b8. Therefore, as above, Black switches to the idea of a quick ... .ta6, both to get rid of the bishop that he can't use and to eliminate White's powerful knight. Of course this costs time and the bishop-pair, so a kind of positional balance results. We follow two games: Beliavsky - Portisch Szirak IZ 1987 13 t:Dc4 .ta6 14 .tgS Wfd7! (D) Black avoids ...h6, which only gives White a target. 15 l:tbl .txc4 16 .txc4 a6 17 b4 This is White's standard idea that we ex plained above; its purpose is to immobilize Black's pawns.

17. ..bS 18 .td3

18 axb5 axb5 would open the a-file for Black, who could fight for the initiative by ... l:ta3. Then the unprotected state of the knight on c3 makes it impossible to contest the a-file by l:tal , so Black could double or triple pieces on it.

18. .. c4 19 .tc2

Here White has achieved his goal of limiting Black's pawn advance. As in the last game, his bishop on c2 is as bad as Black's knight on c7. The difference is that the latter piece isn't stuck where it is, and White's knight on c3 is unpro tected. 19 ... bxa4! (D) This is a common theme: if Black can't win the a-file (in the case where White plays axb5), then he can often play ...bxa4 himself and win the b5-square for his knight on c7. 20 .txa4 Instead, 20 t:Dxa4 ! ? l:tab8 covers b6. There might follow 2 1 t:Dc3 t:Db5 22 t:Dxb5 axb5 23 .te3 l:ta8 24 .td4 W/c7 (24 ... t:Dh5 25 .txg7 @xg7 26 Wf d4+ f6 and ... l:ta2 is also good) 25 l:tal lDd7, when Black's knight is better than White's light-squared bishop; for example, 26

MODERN BENONI 299

ii.xg7 @xg7 27 'iVd4+ f6 with a positional ad vantage. 20 ... lZ'ibS 21 @hl Nothing stands out here for White; e.g., 21 'iVd2 'iVa7+ (or 21...'iVb7) 22 ii.e3 ii.h6! 23 ii.xa7 i.xd2 24 ii.xbS axbS 2S lZ'ixbS l:txa7 ! 26 lZ'Bxa7 ii.e3+ wins material.

21...'iVb7 22 ii.xbS!? axbS (D)

This kind of pawn-structure will often fa vour White if Black still has his light-squared bishop (on d7, for example). But here Black has no such bad pieces and he does have key advan tages: he controls the a-file, has great pressure down the long diagonal, and his c-pawn has the potential to be mobile if White needs to rear range his pieces in defence. 23 ii.e3 Black's g7-bishop finally shows its stuff af ter 23 'iVd2 l:ta3 24 i.e3 l:txc3 ! 2S 'iVxc3 lZ'Bxe4 26 'iVa3 4'1c3 27 l:tbel lZ'ixdS with two passed pawns for the exchange. This is close to win ning already. Black also stands better after 23 'iVc 1 lZ'Bd7 ! with the idea ... lZ'ieS-d3.

23.  .

tt:Jg4! (D) 24 ii.d4 White has major positional problems after 24 fxg4? ii.xc3 2S ii.d4 ii.xd4 26 'iVxd4 l:teS with a beautiful outpost in front of the back ward pawn. 24 ... lZ'Be3! 25 ii.xe3 ii.xc3 26 ii.d4 ii.xd4 27 'iVxd4 'iVa7! Black shows that he has won the opening. The exchange of dark-squared bishops has re vealed the superiority of Black's pawn-struc ture. White's pawn on b4 is a target and he is vulnerable to the break ... fS because after exfS his d-pawn will need tending. Those factors wouldn't be decisive but the passed c-pawn's power has grown with simplification. 28 'iVc3 a) After 28 'iVxa7 l:txa7, Black not only con trols the a-file but has ... fS as a break in order to weaken White's e-pawn (after ...fxe4) or reach the seventh rank (after exfS). b) The same trick works in seemingly less fa vourable circumstances following 28 'iVf6 'iVe7 29 'iVc3 'iVeS ! ? (29 ... l:ta2 also favours Black) 30 'iVxeS l:txeS 3 1 l:tal l:txal 32 l:txal fS ! (D). This is an instructive ending, so I'll take it a bit further: 33 l:te l (33 exfS l:txfS 34 l:tdl c3 3S @gl { 3S l:tcl l:txdS costs White a pawn due to 36 l:txc3?? l:tdl # } 3S ... l:txdS ! 36 l:txdS c2, etc.)

33. ..@g7 ! and the king will take over eS : 34

@gl fxe4 3S fxe4 @f6 36 @f2 (36 l:tfl + @gs 37 l:tf7 l:txe4 38 l:txh7 c3 39 l:tc7 l:tc4 wins for Black) 36 ... l:thS 37 h3 @es, threatening ...c3 and ...@d4. 28 . .'iVe7 29 l:tal

300 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

After 29 l:tfe 1 l:ta2 Black takes over the file.

29.  .

l:txal 30 'iVxal 30 l:txal f5 ! 3 1 l:te 1 'iVe5 and Black's advan tage is growing. 30  l:tc8 31 l:tcl 'iVc7 32 'iVc3 l:ta8 33 f4 'iVa7! 34 'iVd2

34 e5 'iVf2 ! 35 exd6 'iVxf4 36 d7 'iVf5 and

Black picks up a pawn. 34 .  . 'iVa2 35 'iVel 'iVb2 36 l:tbl c3! ( D)

37 h3 l:ta2 38 'iVfl c2! 39 l:tcl 'iVxb4 40 e5

l:tb2 41 'iVf2 'iVe4 42 @h2 'iVxd5 0-1 13 @hl (D) Pinter - Brynell Elista OL 1998 13 ... l:tb8 14 tt:Jc4 .ta6 15 .tg5 'iVd7! Again, this seems better than 15 ...h6. 16 l:tel 16 'iVd2 would resemble Kelecevic-Burger meister above. Then 16. .. .txc4 17 .txc4 a6 is natural. The fact that White never gained time by forcing ... @h7 would mean that he doesn' t get time for l:tb l and b4. Therefore he should leave his rook on the a-file and try to make prog ress on the kingside; for example, 18 .td3 ! ? b5? (a mistake; 1 8. ..h5 !? with the idea ... lZ'Bh7 is a good prelude to this queenside advance, and 1 8. .. l:tb7 !? to cover the 2nd rank is also useful) 19 axb5 axb5 20 l:ta7 ! b4 21 lZ'Ba4 'iVd8 22 b3 ! and White has a strong grip on the queenside squares. 16  i.xc4 17 i.xc4 a6 18 .!.. fl h6

I 8 ...

l:tb7 would prepare ...b5 without allow ing White's rook to a7. Black plays this in two more moves, but by then White has prepared for the event. Timing is the essence of strategy! 19 .lle3 @h7 20 'iVd2 l:tb7 21 l:tabl! b5 22 b4! (D) 22 . .  c4 Crucially, there's no time to keep things open by 22 ... bxa4? because of 23 bxc5 l:txbl 24 l:txbl (24 c6?? l:txe l ) 24 ...dxc5 25 i.xc5 and Black has no centre to oppose White's pawns with. 23 a5! (D) The difference between this and Beliavsky Portisch is clear: with the queenside closed, White can play in the two areas where he has superiority, the centre and the kingside. At this point the respective opening strategies have been played out, and White's has been the successful one.

23. ..

'iVe7 24 .td4 It's always nice when this square is avail able. If Black is going to play ...c4 in the Ben oni and give up d4, he needs to be able to put a piece on c5 or otherwise open up the game.

MODERN BENONI 301

24 ... tt:Jd7 25 ii.xg7 @xg7 26 l:tbdl 'iVf8 27 f4 @h7 27 ... f5 28 e5 dxe5 29 d6 lZ'Be6 30 fxe5 illus trates the dream position for White's centre. He even has a good bishop after g3 and ii.g2 (if necessary).

[diagram]
Normally White's worst piece in the Benoni, the bishop is now active and could even be ex changed to good effect. 29 . l:tbd8 30 l:te3 'iVg7 31 l:tdel h5 32 lZ'Be2!? Coming to d4. In fact, 32 e5 ! was already strong due to 32 ...dxe5 33 d6 ! lZ'Be6 (33 ... lZ'Ba8 34 ii.xd7 ! l:txd7 35 fxe5) 34 fxe5, when White dominates the position.

32. ..

lZ'Bf6 33 lZ'Bd4 lZ'Bg4 34 ii.xg4 hxg4 ( D) 35 f5!? A rather strange way of doing things, ceding an outpost to Black on e5. White feels that with his h3-bishop gone this will suffice, since it would take Black's knight five moves to get to e5 ! Instead, 35 lZ'Bc6 l:td7 36 'iVdl f5 ! is not so clear; e.g., 37 exf5 l:txe3 38 fxg6+ 'iVxg6 39 l:txe3 'iVf7. 35 .. gxf5? Giving away the f5-square is generally bad policy! He may as well make White prove that he has anything, by playing 35 ... 'iVh6, for in stance. 36 lZ'Bxf5 'iVg6 37 h3! This threatens l:te2-h2. Black has no good defence. 37 ... gxh3 38 g4 l:te5 39 l:txh3+ @g8 40 l:th6 1-0 A model game for White. Pawn-Storm Systems

7 f4 (D)

This move defines the basic starting posi tion for pawn-storm variations. Like other In dian systems that permit White to construct a large centre, a fundamental test of the Benoni is whether White's centre pawns can be used sim ply to roll over Black's position or at least cramp him beyond acceptable bounds. For ex ample, the King's Indian Defence essentially passes this test when confronted with the Four Pawns Attack. The Griinfeld Defence holds up well if, having established a d4/e4 centre, White plunges ahead with f4. In the Samisch Nimzo Indian, and in the 4 'iVc2 O-O 5 e4 variation, Black can defend against the blind advance of White's centre (with great care, to be sure). For all of these defences we find that White's ultra ambitious play can produce no more than dy namic equality. But interestingly, the Modem

302 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

MODERN BENONI 303

[diagram]

13. ..

[diagram]

15. ..c4, so White tries to dislodge the trouble

some knight on b6.

15. .

[diagram]

16 a5 hxg5 17 axb6 lllc6 or 17. ..a6 is hard to

[diagram]

304 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White to commit to lllf3, as in the line 1 d4 lll f6

2 c4 e6 3 lllf3, before playing 3 ...c5 4 d5 exd5,

[diagram]

9 a4 (D)

[diagram]

MODERN BENONI 305

[diagram]

12 O-O (D)

[diagram]

[diagram]

306 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]

(D)

24 lll xf5! lll xf5 25 lll xe6 lll xe6 26 .S.xe6 .S.xe6 27 xf5 .S.e8 28 .l:!.el 1-0 Development by 9 ... lll a6 9 .. lll a6 Kasparov - Nunn Lucerne OL 1 982 Black wants to move rapidly on the queen side. For a similar idea, see 9 ... O-O 10 lllf3 llla6 above. 10 lll f3 lllb4!? 11 O-O a6? This move just doesn't work out due to an unexpected idea by Kasparov. 1 1 ...O-O is the natural alternative, though then White has time to provide the fl -square as a convenient spot for his bishop to drop back to when hit by ...a6. 12 .Bxd7+! .Bxd7 13 f5! (D) It's surprising but logical (with hindsight!) to give up the bishop-pair, because White gives up his bad bishop while extending the range of his good one. In the meantime, although the knight on b4 hits some good internal squares, it doesn't manage to return to the centre, from where it would protect his kingside.

13 ..O-O

After 13 ...gxf5, 14 exf5 O-O 15 lll g5 sets up a nice attack, while 14 .Bg5 !? .Bf6 15 .Bf4 O-O 16 e5 dxe5 17 lll xe5 is also possible. 14 .Bg5 f6

[diagram]

[diagram]
10 ...e7 is also frequently played, just as it is in the lines 9 .Be2 h4+ and 9 .Bd3 h4+. From e7 the queen puts direct pressure on e4 but is somewhat more vulnerable to the e5 ad vance, because ...dxe5 might be answered by d6.

MODERN BENONI 307

[diagram]

14. ..

[diagram]

21...'2Jxe4 22 Cbxe4 axb5 23 i.g5 .S.xal 24

[diagram]

308 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

26 @g2 .S.ed8 27 ti:Jc7 'iff6 28 .l:!.fl 'ife5 29 .l:!.f2 h5! 30 'ifb3 .l:!.f8 Black stands better, even though these two world-class players eventually drew. We conclude with two games of interest: 13 i.d3 Palo - de Firmian Copenhagen 2001 This third retreat is the most popular one. 13 . ti:Jf6 (D) 14 .l:!.el We shall see 14 f5 in the game that follows this one. 14 i.d2 is another possibility, but l 4 ... i.h3 ! 15 .l:!.e 1 CDbd7 1 6 i.fl ? ! i.xfl 17 .l:!.xfl .l:!.e8 1 8 'ifc2 c4 ! 19 .S.ae 1 tl:Jc5 gave Black an excellent game in Hammer-Bronznik, Rommelshausen 2002.

14. ..

i.g4 15 i.e2 I suspect that 15 i.fl CDbd7 16 h3 i.xf3 17 'ifxf3 is better, as in Brasoy-Vik Hansen, Alta

2003. Now Emms suggests that 17. ..'ifa5 is

best, when Black will aim to advance with ... b5 or, less often, with ...c4.

15. .

ti:Jfd7!? 16 ti:Jd2 i.xe2 17 .S.xe2 .S.e8 18 ti:Jc4 ti:Jb6 (D) A knight on c4 tends to be so powerful that Black challenges it more often than not. The op posing knight on b6 is particularly well-placed to do so. 19 ti:Ja3 i.d4+ 20 'lt>hl '2J8d7 21 'iVd3 ti:Jf6

22 a5 CDbd7 23 ti:Jc2

Now, however, 23 tl:Jc4 'ife7 threatens to capture on c3 and e4, and 24 e5 dxe5 25 fxe5 ti:Jxe5 26 tl:Jxe5 i.xe5 27 i.f4 'ifd6 doesn't give White anything for his pawn. 23 .. i.xc3! 24 bxc3 (D) 24 c4! A characteristic sacrifice. 25 'ifxc4 .l:!.c8 26 'iVd3

MODERN BENONI 309

26 b4 lll xd5 isn't exactly inspiring either in view of 27 xd6 lll xc3 28 .l:!.el lll xe4.

26. .

[diagram]

31. ..

[diagram]

[diagram]
17. ..

[diagram]

7 g3 i.g7 8 i.g2 O-O 9 O-O (D)

310 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

We haven't examined many fianchetto lines versus Indian systems in this book. With this variation we have a solid approach that de fends d5, and to all appearances doesn't do much else. Of course that's not so. In the initial stages of the game, White proceeds along the principle of prophylaxis to counter Black's normal plans. Then he patiently reorganizes, implementing his own strategy of piece-play versus d6 and eventual expansion in the centre. This usually involves the manoeuvre llld2-c4, possibly in conjunction with .lli. f4. Of a sudden Black can be helpless against the threats, fre quently created by a delayed e4-e5. Remem ber that a central majority is often the last thing to be mobilized, but then it can prove deadly! On the flip side, White's bishop on g2 runs right into its own pawn on d5. Furthermore, Black's efforts to realize ...b5 and ...c4 benefit from the absence of the bishop from the fl -a6 diagonal. His most popular plan involves ...a6 and ... lll bd7 and, once White's knight gets to c4, he can play ... lll b6 or ... lll e5 to challenge it. There's also nothing wrong with ... llla6-c7 as long as Black is careful to watch the tactics. Finally, before White reorganizes his pieces Black can play for ... .l:!.e8 and ... lll e4. All this should be done as quickly as possible before White's pawns assert themselves. If White can fend off short-term threats, as he often can, he will normally remain with some advantage. Let's see games using these ideas. Play Down the e-File

9.  .l:!.e8 (D)

Black aims for ... llle4. Here are two games that show different treatments: 10 .lli. f4 Nikolic - Hracek Batumi Echt 1 999 White allows the following thematic intru sion because he wants to develop rapidly.

10. ..a6 11 a4 llle4! 12 lll

xe4 .S.xe4 13 lll d2 .l:!.b4 (D) So far, so standard. Black takes up an active post and attacks b2. If he can develop his other pieces he should have the superior game. That's a big 'if' . 14 .l:!.a2! fie7 If Black doesn't capture the b2-pawn his whole idea is in danger of failing. So the critical line goes 14 ... .lli. xb2! ? (taking an initiative by 14 ...g5 15 .lli. e3 f5 is a reasonable idea; on the other hand, after 14 ... .S.xb2? I 5 .l:!.xb2 .lli. xb2 1 6 lll c4 ! White wins the pawn on d6, after which

MODERN BENONI 311

[diagram]

15 b3 g5 16 !ii.

e3 !ii. d4 17 !ii. xd4 .l:!.xd4 18 e3 .l:!.b4 19 lll c4 lll d7 20 f4! White keeps Black's knight out of e5. He has space and the centre, while Black's unchal lengeable rook on b4 provides some definite compensation, but probably not enough.

[diagram]

15. .

[diagram]

[diagram]
.l:!.b8 and ... b5. In this old game the plan doesn't hold together, but with accurate play theory concludes that it's satisfactory.

312 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

10 h3 ti:Jc7 11 e4 ti:Jd7 12 .l:!.el ti:Je8 13 i.gS!

i.f6 14 i.e3 .l:!.b8 lS a4 a6 16 i.fl! fie7 17 ti:Jd2 ti:Jc7 18 f4 (D) A terrific picture of the two majorities collid ing.

18. ..bS 19 eS! dxeS 20 ti:Jde4 fid8 21 ti:Jxf6+!

[diagram]

4S 

fif7 46 @gS! fxg4 47 hxg4 i.d7! 48 .S.c4 a4 (D) Amazingly, what seemed a slaughter has turned into a race ! 49 .S.c7 a3 49 ...fixf6+ loses by a tempo: 50 @xf6 a3 5 1 e6 i.xe6 5 2 @xe6 axb2 5 3 d7. SO .S.xd7 fixd7 Sl e6! fia7 The most fascinating defence is 5 1 ...fib5+ 52 @h4 fib7 53 @g3 "fia7 54 @h2 axb2 55 d7 figl + 56 @xgl b l "ff + 57 @h2 fic2+ 58 @h3 fid3+ 59 @h4 g5+ 60 fixg5+ fig6 61 fixg6+ hxg6 62 e7. S2 "fies axb2 S3 e7 @f7 S4 d7 1-0 A wonderful game. The Flexible 9 . . . ti:Jbd7 Ligterink - Nunn Marbella Z 1982 9 ... ti:Jbd7 (D) Black plays traditionally, covering e5 before committing to ... .S.e8 or ...a6. 10 e4

10 h3 is more solid.

10 .a6 There's nothing wrong with this, but later the straightforward 10 ...b5 ! was discovered, with

MODERN BENONI 313

the idea of meeting 1 1 tt::l xb5 tt::l xe4 12 .l:te l by

[diagram]
11 .llf4 fke7 12 .l:tel tt::l g4! 13 .llg5 fke8 An instructive illustration of White fulfilling his ambitions in the Benoni is given by Nunn: 13 ... .llf6? 14 .llxf6 fkxf6 15 h3 tt::l ge5 16 tt::l xe5 ! tt::l xe5 17 f4 tt::l c4 1 8 e5 ! ; e.g., 18. .. dxe5 1 9 fke2 ! tt::l b6 20 fxe5 and White's centre is simply too powerful, especially in conjunction with weak squares like f6. 14 e5!? tt::l dxe5 This prepares a lovely queen sacrifice. Lig terink may have expected 14 ... dxe5 15 d6 with the d5 outpost and good prospects. Black can expand on the kingside, but his pieces aren't well placed for defence. 15 tt::l xe5 tt::l xe5 16 f4 tt::l g4! (

D)

17 .l:txe8 .l:txe8 18 tt::l e2 Black's ideas include ... .lld4+ and ... tt::l e3, so White attends to the former. Nunn gives a num ber of alternatives here, Black getting at least equality in all of them; e.g., 18 tt::l e4 .l:txe4! 1 9 .llxe4 .lld4+ 20 fkxd4 (on all other moves Black will fork the king and queen !) 20 ...cxd4 21 .lle7 .llf5! 22 .llxf5 gxf5 23 .l:tdl .l:te8 24 .llxd6 .l:td8 with a level game. 18. tt::l e3 19 fkd2 tt::l c4 20 fkc2 (

D)

20 .. b5!? Black daringly rejects the draw which was to be had by 20 ... tt::l e3. He only has a rook and pawn for the queen, but the bishops are a terror. This is more or less what the opening has led to(!), so I'll limit the remaining notes: 21 g4 An alternative is 21 tt::l c3 .llf5 22 .lle4 b4 23 .llxf5 bxc3 24 bxc3 tt::l e3 25 fka4 tt::l xf5. This is one of White's better lines, according to Nunn, but he'd still rather be Black.

21.. 

.llxg4! 22 tt::l g3 h6 23 .llh4 .llxb2 24 .l:tcl .lld4+ 25 @hl tt::l e3! 26 fkd2 tt::l xg2 27 fkxg2 27 @xg2 ! ? .lle3 28 fkb2 .llxf4 29 .llf6 is Vegh's suggestion, and it may improve; never theless, I would rather play Black.

27. ..l:te3! 28 .i:tn

Or 28 tt::l fl .llf3 ! 29 tt::l xe3 .llxg2+ 30 tt::l xg2 c4 and the three pawns are much stronger than the piece.

28. ..

.l:tae8 29 f5? Instead, 29 h3 ! offers more resistance.

29... g5 30 f6 @h8! 31 .llxg5 hxg5 32 tt::l

f5 .llxf5 33 .l:txf5 .l:tel+ 34 .i:tn .llxf6 35 fkh3+ @g7 36 .l:txel .l:txel + 37 @g2 c4 0-1 Play on Both Wings 9 .. a6 (D) Again aiming for ... b5, but delaying ... tt::l bd7.

314 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

10 a4 .l:te8 11 tt::l

d2 In this line White prevents ... tt::l e4 and pre pares to take over the queenside.

11. .. tt::l

bd7 This time we have two games: 12 e4?! R. O'Kelly - Mariotti Islington 1970 This doesn't go with White's philosophy in this variation. The advance e4 should only be played after White reorganizes to control that square, starting with the moves tt::l c4, h3 and .llf4. Better is 12 h3 !, with the idea that we shall see in Kovacevic-Nemeth below.

12. . tt::l

e5 Attacking d3 but also eyeing g4. You can see the usefulness of h3. 13 'ikc2 tt::l h5 ( D) Black prepares .. .f5. He has achieved equal ity and more out of the opening. 14 f4? An instructive error, because it demonstrates the extent to which the dynamic qualities of Black's position can dominate. That doesn't be come clear for a few more moves. 14 h3 was again better. .. tt::l g4 15 tt:Jf3 f5! This is arguably the move of the game. It's what White must have missed, and without it the attack would have petered out. 16 tt::l g5 A key variation is the advance 16 e5 dxe5 17 h3, which fails to l 7 ...e4! 1 8 hxg4 exf3 19 gxh5 fxg2 20 'ikxg2 gxh5. 16. .lld4+ 17 @hl fxe4 18 .llxe4 .l:txe4! This exchange sacrifice exploits White's light-squared weaknesses by eliminating their defender. 19 tt::l cxe4 .llf5 (D) Black has one internal weakness on e6; White has four of them! This marks the end of the 'opening' . 20 @g2 'ikd7 2 1 .lld2 h6 22 tt::l e6 This terrific outpost never compensates for Black's attack, in particular because of White's exposed king position. According to analysts, the best alternative was 22 h3 tt::l gf6 23 g4 tt::l xg4! 24 hxg4 .llxe4+ 25 tt::l xe4? ! (25 'ikxe4! ?) 25 ... 'ikxg4+ 26 @h2 .l:te8 ! (D) . Even though he's temporarily a rook down, Black is close to winning on the spot.

22. . tt::l

gf6 23 .l:tael tt::l xe4 24 g4!? tt::l xd2 25 gxf5 tt::l xn 26 f6 @f7! 27 @xn Black's idea is 27 tt::l xd4 cxd4 28 .l:te7+ 'ikxe7 29 fxe7 tt::l e3+. In a good position the tactics tend to work your way.

MODERN BENONI 315

27. . 

.llxf6 28 'ike2 tlJg7 29 'ikg4 ttJrs 0-1 The knight on f5 occupies a great outpost that almost equals White's on e6. As Black is a piece and pawn ahead, there's really nothing for White to play for.

12 h3 (D)

[diagram]

14. ..

tlJhS Sriram-Antonio, Calcutta 2001 continued 14 ... .lld7 ! ? 15 f4 tlJh5 16 fxe5 .ltxe5 17 .llf4!? tlJxg3 18 .llxg3 .llxg3 19 e4! with the idea of 'ikf3. White is better in this complex variation, although the last word may not have been spo ken.

15 e4 (D)

15 ...fS?!

[diagram]

21...tlJg4! 22 'ikxg4 'ikxg4 23 tlJxd6 .lle5 24

[diagram]

<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 3 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2008)
FILENAME: 5. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 3 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2008)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 5
SHA256: 55add2d6718740d0a4b2b7177d2664c9cf2415c2236bc83dcfc03ccbacbc313d
BYTES: 871020
Introduction to 2 lDf3 Variations with 2 ... lDc6 2 ... lDf6 and the Symmetrical Four Knights Four Knights with 6 a3 Four Knights with 6 lDdb5 Four Knights with 6 g3 Anti-Benoni Variations

9 Asymmetrical Variations

Nimzowitsch's 5 e4 and Griinfeld Relations The Knight Tour 5 ... lDb4 Exchange with 5 ... lDxc3 Keres-Parma Variation Rubinstein System

10 The Hedgehog Variation

Traditional Line with 8 ~xd4 Modem Line with 7 :tel

11 Mikenas Attack and Nimzo-English

Mikenas Attack: Introduction Central Challenge with 3 ... d5 Gambit Line with 3 ... c5 Nimzo-Eng1ish Variation: Introduction Classical 4 ~c2 Variation The 4 g4 Flank Attack

12 King's Indian Variations

Botvinnik Variation vs the King's Indian The Closed English Fonnation Index of Variations Index of Players

CONTENTS 5

Symbols + check ++ double check # checkmate !! brilliant move good move !? interesting move ?! dubious move ? bad move ?? blunder Ch championship 1-0 the game ends in a win for White liz-liz the game ends in a draw 0-1 the game ends in a win for Black (D) see next diagram Dedication uxorculae Acknowledgements Thanks to Graham Burgess for his patience, good advice, and brilliant editing. Special thanks to Tony Kosten of ChessPublishing.com for sending me material; also, his site was the single most important resource for this book. Bibliography This partial list doesn't include sources in which I found only one or two notes. Annotators are credited in the text. Periodical Publications ChessBase Magazine (up to 123); ChessBase New in Chess Magazine; New in Chess Infonnator (1-101); Sahovski Informator Chess Life; United States Chess Federation Chess; Chess & Bridge Kaissiber; Stefan Bi.icker Websites ChessPublishing; Kosten, A; www.chesspublishing.com; Flank Openings columns by Watson, J.; Hansen, Ca.; Rowson, 1.; Kosten, A; Motwani, P. The Week in Chess (up to no. 713); Crowther, M.; http://www.chesscenter.com/twic!twic.html Jeremysilman.com; Silman, J.; www.jeremysilman.com ChessCafe.com; Russell, H.; www.chesscafe.com CDs and DVDs Marin, M.; English I c4 e5; ChessBase 2003 Opening Encyclopaedia 2008; ChessBase 2008 Mega Database 2008; ChessBase 2008 Corr Database 2008; ChessBase 2008 Books Bagirov, y.; English Opening: Classical and Indian; Cadogan 1994 Benko, P. & Silman, 1.; My Life, Games, and Compositions; Siles 2003 Botvinnik, M.; Botvinnik's Best Games Volume 1: 1925-1941; Moravian Press 2000 Botvinnik, M.; Botvinnik's Best Games Volume 2: 1942-1956; Moravian Press 2000 Botvinnik, M.; Botvinnik's Best Games Volume 3: 1957-1970; Moravian Press 2000 Chetverik, M. & Raetsky, A; English ... e5: The Reversed Sicilian Lines; Everyman 2003 Cummings, D.; Symmetrical English; Everyman 2001 Dempsey, T.; English Opening: A Line for Black; The Chess Player 1985 Donaldson, 1. & Hansen, Ca.; A Strategic Opening Repertoire, 2nd Edition; Russell Enterprises 2007 Ernst, S. & Van der Stricht, G.; Tactics in the Chess Openings 6: Gambits and Flank Openings; New In Chess 2007 Euwe, M.; Theorie der Schach Eroffnungen: Indische, Reti, u.s.w.; Siegfried Engelhardt Verlag 1959 Franco, Z.; Chess Explained: The English Opening; Gambit 2006

8 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Hansen, Ca.; The Gambit Guide to the English Opening: 1. .. e5; Gambit 1999 Hansen, Ca.; The Symmetrical English; Gambit 2000 Karpov, A; How to Play the English Opening; Batsford 2007 Keene, R.; Flank Openings, 2nd Edition; British Chess Magazine 1970 Khalifman, A; Opening for Black According to Karpov; Chess Stars 2001 Korchnoi, Y.; My Best Games, Vol. 1: Games with White; Edition Olms 2001 Korchnoi, Y.; My Best Games, Vol. 2: Games with Black; Edition DIms 2001 Kosten, A; The Dynamic English; Gambit 1999 Kotronias, Y.; Beating the Flank Openings; Batsford 1996 Krnic, z. (ed.); ECO A - 4th Edition; Sahovski Informator 2001 McDonald, N.; Starting Out: The English; Everyman 2003 Nunn, 1.; Burgess, G.; Emms, J. & Gallagher, J.; Nunn's Chess Openings; Gambit/Everyman 1999 Pachman, L.; Geschlossene Spiele: Indische Verteidigung u.a.; Sportverlag Berlin 1965 Palliser, R.; Beating Unusual Chess Openings, Everyman 2007 Povah, N.; How to Play the English Opening, 2nd Edition; Batsford 1991 Pritchett, c.; Play the English: An active opening repertoire for White; Everyman 2007 Ribli, Z. & Kallai, G.; Winning with the English; Batsford 1992 Soltis, A; Winning with the English Opening, 3rd Edition; Chess Digest 1997 Suba, M.; The Hedgehog; Batsford 2000 Taimanov, M.; Slawisch bis Reti Erroffnung; Sportverlag Berlin 1976 Watson, J.; Chess Strategy in Action; Gambit 2003 Watson, J.; Secrets of Modern Chess Strategy; Gambit 1998 Watson, J.; English: 1. .. P-K4; Batsford 1979 Watson, J.; English: 1. .. N-KB3 Systems; Batsford 1979 Watson, J.; English: Franco, Slav, and Flank Defences; Batsford 1981 Watson, J.; English: 1 ... P-QB4; Batsford 1980 Watson, J.; Symmetrical English: 1 ... c5; Batsford 1988 General Introduction This is the third volume of a series which I originally intended to limit to two. Volume 1 examined the move 1 e4 and openings that derive from it. Volume 2 moved on to 1 d4 openings. Predictably, many readers and players were disappointed at the lack of coverage of the move 1 c4, otherwise known as the English Opening. 1 c4 is not only the logical partner to 1 e4 and 1 d4, but in itself a wonderful grounds for the study of positional ideas that encompass the entire range of chess prac- tice. It can be very useful as a complement to openings arising from 1 d4 and 1 lLlf3, since we find many overlapping themes; furthermore, transpositions from and to the English Opening abound af- ter those moves. Given all these considerations, this new volume seemed a good idea. Fortunately, I have an extensive history of writing about 1 c4, beginning with a set of four volumes in 1980 and continuing intermittently through my recent English Opening column for ChessPublishing.com. As in previous volumes, I shall work from the ground up, starting with very elementary choices on the first couple of moves, including ones that you will seldom or perhaps never see, in order to explain the elementary properties of the English Opening. For a primer or refresher on the first principles of opening play in general, see Chapter 1 of Volume 1. The next two chapters of that vol- ume may also be useful, since they identify the ideas and themes most often referred to in the book as a whole. This investigation of fundamentals is hardly the whole story, however. By the time that I get deeply into a given chapter, the complexity of my presentation increases and there will be mate- rial that should be sophisticated enough to appeal to players of all levels. Even in those sections, I have tried to talk about variations and typical positions on a very broad and basic level before plunging into details. Throughout the series I have tried to emphasize the variations which contain universal ideas and structures. Nevertheless, given the fact that fewer games are played with 1 c4 than 1 e4 or 1 d4, I have had the luxury of covering nearly all of its variations, as well as contributing much more up- to-date material and original analysis than in the previous two volumes. I hope that the latter proves useful on a practical level, as well as providing assistance with building a repertoire. Fortunately, although one should never pretend that a certain amount of memorization isn't essential to master any opening, the material in this book lends itself to a broader conceptual approach, and I have in- creased the role of verbal explanation accordingly. Taken as a whole, English Opening variations depend less upon tactical details than their king's and queen's pawn counterparts. I beg the reader's pardon for the dull repetition of assessments such as 'with equality', 'Black stands slightly better', and so forth. These inexact and ambiguous phrases are sadly necessary when presenting opening material with its necessarily truncated lines. There is nothing worse than consistently leaving the reader hanging with no conclusion, and yet it would only confuse matters to use a set of invented phrases to express finer distinctions. My compromise has been to provide verbal and/or analytical justifications whenever a position is significant enough to merit it, or when the assessment might be puzzling on the face of it. Regardless, you will have to put some effort into understanding the assessments and, hopefully, disagree with the inevitable set of mistaken ones. In that regard, almost all complex unattributed notes are my own. Incidentally, one convenient way to study this book is to find the main games in a large database. Then you can follow them in ChessBase (or a similar program) as you read. Having come this far, there's no getting around a Volume 4. Some of it will be devoted to a se- lection of the remaining chess openings; for example, the Rti Opening (1 lLlf3) , various systems involving fianchettoes and f-pawn moves, as well as some gambits and so-called 'irregular open- ings'. A large portion of Volume 4, however, will be given to special topics such as choosing

10 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

openings, preparing openings, how to study openings, and broader discussions of practical issues facing the everyday player. My objective with this work is to provide instruction and analysis ranging from that appropriate for a low-rated developing player with, say, one or two years' experience, to a long-time player who is familiar with a good deal of theory. That is an ambitious goal, to be sure, and whether this volume fulfils it is a matter I leave for you to judge.

1 Introduction to the English Opening

1 c4 (D) is called the English Opening.

I first wrote about this opening three decades ago. Even then, it took me some 800 pages and four volumes to cover the relevant material, of- ten superficially. Since then, the theory and practice of the English has expanded to such a degree that previously minor lines provide ma- terial for lengthy articles, and major ones are almost unmanageable except on a conceptual basis. Professionals follow some theory up to and beyond the 20th move, just as in other openings. In addition, entirely new lines crop up on a regular basis. Fortunately, to a much greater extent than with 1 e4 or 1 d4, games in the English Opening tend to follow smoother contours as they de- velop, in that structures and strategies persist rather than dissolving into unstable imbalances or tactical melees. While there are many more independent subvariations to cover because the play is so fluid, it takes fewer games to become familiar with their properties. Let's start with the move 1 c4 and ask what White wants. His first goal is to control dS, ob- viously, and in particular, to discourage ... dS. In the most general terms, we can say that the move d4 is White's next objective. In other words, given a free move, White would ordi- narily play 2 d4; indeed, Black's main replies

1.. .eS and 1...cS are designed to prevent that.

This is analogous to the way in which, when White plays 1 e4, he is aiming for d4. Similarly, when he begins with 1 d4, he has in mind play- ing e4. Why, then, not play 1 d4 in the first place? To begin with, White might be disinclined to al- low 1 d4 dS; by playing 1 c4, he discourages l...d5?! 2 cxdS, which deprives Black of a cen- tre pawn and gains a tempo after 2 ... 'ilVxdS 3 ttJc3. Secondly, White may not want to expose himself to some of the annoyances that an early d4 brings; for example, a pin by 1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 e6 3 ttJc3 Bb4 or a pawn confrontation by 1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 cS. In contrast, after 1 c4 ttJf6, White can abstain from that kind of confrontation by 2 ttJc3 e6 3 e4 or 3 ttJf3 (see Chapter 11). Like- wise, after 1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 g6 3 ttJc3 Bg7 4 e4, White has a broad centre to defend and Black's counterplay is usually directed against the d4- pawn (by ... eS or ... cS). By playing the English Opening, White has the opportunity to choose 1 c4 ttJf6 2 ttJc3 g6 3 g3 Bg7 4 Bg2 and then S e4 or S ttJf3, in both cases foregoing an early d4 and leaving his pawns less subject to direct at- tack (see Chapter 12). Naturally, this comes without the advantages of controlling d4 and eS that 1 d4 brings. Let's talk about Black's first move and some move-order issues associated with it. The pri- mary and overwhelmingly-played replies to 1 c4 are 1...eS, 1...cS and 1...ttJf6, as examined in the body of this book. I won't be discussing other replies except as they relate to remaining flank openings in Volume 4 (including ... b6 systems, ... g6 systems and .. .fS systems). Most importantly for the practical player, Black can make his first move with the intent of transpos- ing into other openings entirely. For example, he might respond to 1 c4 with 1...e6, intending to play 2 d4 dS with a Queen's Gambit De- clined. That order may suit White, however, who by using it has sidestepped a number of Queen's Gambit options such as (after 1 d4 dS 2

12 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

c4) 2 ... dxc4 (Queen's Gambit Accepted), 2 ... c6 with a Slav Defence, or 2 ... tDc6 with a Chigorin Defence. White can also play 1 c4 e6 2 tDf3, and upon 2 ... d5, he has entered a Reti Opening with- out having to face an early ... ~g4 or ... ~f5. The Reti is investigated in Volume 4. Also with a mind toward transpositions, Black might answer 1 c4 with 1.. .c6, aiming for the Slav Defence that would follow 2 d4 d5. That may well be satisfactory to White, or he can again choose 2 tDf3, meeting 2 ... d5 with 3 g3 or 3 b3, entering what is called a Reti Slav variation. These lines appear in detail in Volume 4. Another important idea after 1 c4 c6 is 2 e4. Formally speaking, that is a Caro-Kann Defence (beginning with 1 e4 c6 2 c4), and can be found in the books under that move-order. It can transpose, after 2 ... d5, to the Panov Attack following 3 exd5 cxd5 4 d4 (see Volume 1), or to a set of less frequently-played continua- tions; for example, 3 cxd5 cxd5 4 exd5 tDf6 5 ~a4+, a line that will be discussed in the next volume in the context of hybrid systems (along with 2 e4 e5). Naturally there are other trans- positional ideas, such as those stemming from l...d6, when 2 d4 tDf6 3 tDc3 g6 is a King's In- dian, while 2 tDc3 e5 is seen in Chapter 3 via 1 c4 e5 2 tDc3 d6. I was surprised to see that contemporary lit- erature on 1 c4 assigns such different weights to Black's main replies. Each of the three books that I would describe as primarily white reper- toire books allots far more space to the Re- versed Sicilian variations (1 c4 e5) than to the Symmetrical variations (1 c4 c5), ranging from 50% more pages to twice as many. This seemed odd to me, since 1 c4 c5 variations are played as often as 1 c4 e5, until I realized how many more variations a player is responsible for when play- ing either the white or black side of l...e5. In addition, looking over the range of the English Opening and trying to decide upon a distribu- tion of material, I found that there was a more coherent structure of positional types arising from 1...e5, which is important in an instruc- tional tome. As described in the next chapter, study of the English Opening with 1 c4 e5 serves double duty because of the insights that it gives into the Sicilian Defence, which be- gins 1 e4 c5; the latter, of course, is Black's most popular response to 1 e4. Apart from gaining a greater understanding of the charac- teristic structures common to both openings, we can learn a great deal about the advantages of having an extra move in chess; after all, White is playing the Sicilian Defence with an additional tempo. What may prove surprising to some is that there are various disadvantages of having an extra move. All of the chapters in the l...e5 section deal with this issue, Chapter 2 in the most fundamental manner possible. For all that, the incredibly rich history of the superficially less dynamic 1 c4 c5 variations demands close scrutiny. This is especially so because the extremely common move 1 tDf3 precludes 1.. .e5 and very often leads to a Sym- metrical English; for example, after 1 tDf3 c5 2 c4 or 1 tDf3 tDf6 2 c4 c5. Two recent non- repertoire books which cover only a limited se- lection of English Opening variations, chose to present more lines with 1 c4 c5 than with I c4 e5, probably because they were written with no overt agenda for either colour. As it turns out, the main lines after 1 c4 c5 are quite as exciting as those following 1 c4 e5. I have given less expansive coverage to the group of variations beginning with 1 c4 tDf6. The practical and theoretical material produced by these is only a fraction of that generated by l...e5 and l...c5, in part because the move l...tDf6 so frequently transposes to the Sym- metrical or Reversed Sicilian lines following an early ... c5 or ... e5. One policy of the first three volumes of this series has been to concentrate upon 'important' openings, and in particular those whose structures and tactical ideas over- lap as much as possible with other openings. Of the l...tDf6 lines, I decided that variations re- lated to ... e6 systems and ... g6 systems best fit the bill, and have chosen to investigate a num- ber of those. I should warn the reader from the outset that in the English Opening, transpositions and ques- tions of move-order abound, so much so that they will sometimes prove annoying to all but the most sophisticated of players. Working out and drawing attention to these myriad issues is also no fun for the author. But I would be remiss to ignore transpositions that have a significant practical effect. Understanding move-orders means no less than getting the position you want, instead of one you don't like or know

INTRODUCTION TO THE ENGLISH OPENING 13

nothing about. What is the point of studying and understanding openings if you can't get them on the board in the real world of play? Furthermore, knowing how to channel the game in the right direction can mean a tremendous advantage over your opponent in terms of time on the clock and energy expended. So, while you don't want to turn your study into drudgery, you should ab- sorb what you can of these move-order issues in a first reading, and then use this book as a reference when you find the need to sort things out later - for example, after playing a game. Finally I should say that in working through this volume, I found myself marvelling at the extent to which the English Opening embraces the many types of positions and structures that permeate chess practice in general. The term 'cross-pollination', which I describe in Volume 1, applies to the English Opening at least as much as to any other.

2 Reversing the Sicilian: 2nd Moves

Like other first moves, 1 c4 can evoke a sym- metrical response, in this case 1...c5, or a vari- ety of unbalancing replies that range from the highly committal to the very flexible. The un- wavering counter to 1 c4 is 1...e5 (D), establish- ing a direct and classical presence in the centre. w Not surprisingly, 1...e5 is the first move that occurs to players of little experience. But it turns out that masters also trust this naIve intu- ition and answer 1 c4 with 1.. .e5 as much as with any other move. Black's e-pawn advance has the same good points that 1 e4 does, that is, it fights for control of the centre while freeing his king's bishop and queen for development. By playing 1 ... e5, Black sets up a reversed Si- cilian Defence (l e4 c5), which has some pe- culiar implications. In the most basic sense, White's idea with 1 c4 is to control the central square d5 without letting his central pawns be- come targets. If you think about it, the Sicilian Defence is effective precisely because White has committed to 1 e4, i.e., White has presented Black with a target of attack, and he has fore- gone the chance to use his e-pawn in defence of d4. Given the enormous popularity of the Sicil- ian Defence (1 e4 c5), and in particular its repu- tation as a defence that creates Black's best winning chances, it may surprise you that so many top competitors (including most World Champions) have used 1 c4 e5 as Black, often exclusively. After all, any player of 1 e4 knows how difficult it is to generate chances in the Open Sicilian (i.e., those lines consisting of the moves 1 e4 c5 2 lDf3 followed by 3 d4 cxd4 4 lDxd4), without risking serious positional infe- riority. And they also know that when White avoids the Open Sicilian, even by using logical developing moves, Black still gets an opportu- nity to exert pressure upon White's position and create winning chances. He might do so by means of central control (for example, by play- ing ... lDc6, ... g6 and ... iLg7) combined with ei- ther queenside or central expansion. If there were a 'safe and solid' way to deny dynamic play to Black in the Sicilian, it would have changed the course of chess history. So you might ask (and many players have done so) why anyone would subject themselves to playing against the Sicilian Defence with a tempo less? It turns out that not only does 1 c4 e5 lead to a vast network of opening variations and diverse structures, it also provides a case study of the issues associated with reversed openings. This is a complicated subject only touched upon in the two previous volumes. If you understand the subtleties of reversed posi- tions, you will better appreciate the inherent imbalances in chess, and understand why Black can have so many positive winning chances in a game where the odds seem to be stacked against him. Naturally I've looked at this issue in other parts of the book, but it will be of prime impor- tance throughout the first few chapters. As it happens, many players intending to play an English Opening will use the move IlDf3, pri- marily to avoid lines with 1 c4 e5, and then fol- low with 2 c4. There are several basic reasons why Black can play the 'White' side of an opening a tempo down. The most important one has to do with the concept of 'information'. White gets an ex- tra move, to be sure, but Black has a look at that move and can thus adjust his strategy with the

REVERSING THE SICILIAN: 2ND MOVES 15

benefit of his extra information. In this sense, almost all of one's moves in chess come with the disadvantage oftipping one's hand. Natu- rally, the positive value of a move usually out- weighs this drawback, but the two factors can combine in unpredictable ways. Having an extra move in a reversed position can also put White in the odd situation that he has little positive to do. It turns out that many respectable openings for Black are essentially reactive, such that Black is waiting for White to make a committal move, perhaps an ambitious one, in order to get positive counterchances. When White takes on the reversed position, it is as though he is waiting for Black to do some- thing definite before he can respond with real effect. It may come as a surprise how often the tempo is of only moderate value to White. Finally, White sometimes feels that he should be playing for a win by virtue of moving first. But in a good number of chess openings, the best move for Black in a given position may lead to a dull equality without serious chances for either side. This might be acceptable for Black, but is not what White is looking for. Even defences generally thought of as dynamic when played as Black are sometimes revealed to be without bite when White tries to employ them with an extra move. Naturally, all of these advantages for Black in a reversed opening don't always compen- sate for the stark reality that White has an extra move. A tempo is, after all, a gain of time, and most practitioners of the English Opening en- joy taking up the challenge that 1...e5 implies. A skilful handler of the white pieces will often gain a comfortable advantage, simply because Black is not equipped to protect his centre at the same time as he wards off attacks in other sectors. Alternatively, White will sometimes achieve a typical Sicilian Defence advantage (for example, an advanced queenside attack) which might otherwise be impossible to achieve in the Sicilian itself. The variations arising from 1 c4 e5 are also more instructive than any others in the English Opening. Playing 1 c4 e5 is as basic to develop- ing chess skills as playing 1 e4 e5. In both cases, study and practice will increase your flu- ency in classical chess principles while dramat- ically improving your game. Working From the Ground Up White's most popular moves after 1 c4 e5 are 2 lLlc3 and 2 g3. Indeed, they account for a stag- gering 98% of all master games stemming from

1 c4 e5. In fact, if you factor in transpositions,

variations I assign to 2lLlc3 make up 94% of the total. In this chapter we look at why that is, and whether it should be so. Of course, one might say the same thing about other initial opening moves. For exam- ple, after 1 d4 d5, White pretty much sticks to 2 c4 or 2lLlf3. And 2lLlf3 really dominates play after 1 e4 e5. Still, 1 c4 e5 looks much more flexible, and superficially, at least six other moves seem reasonable, most of which are used in the reverse Sicilian position (following 1 e4 c5). Why then is 2 lLlc3 so overwhelmingly chosen and why is it practically automatic to play either 2 lLlc3 or 2 g3 ? The answer to this question can only be found by looking at other logical and consistent second moves for White. I'm going to do that in much more detail than standard books do be- cause White's second-move alternatives reveal much about what's going on in the Reversed Sicilian variations, particularly in terms of pawn-structures and associated strategies. Fur- thermore, we find that these alternatives have not been fully explored, so they may have a bit more practical value than has generally been thought. You will see that a knowledge of other openings is very useful in understanding these lines. 1 c4e5 (D) w

16 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

From this fundamental position, I shall look at the moves 2 d3 and 2lDf3 in their own sepa- rate sections. Before doing so, I think that we B can learn a lot by considering these rarely- played alternatives: a) 2 e4?! (D) may not be an out-and-out mistake, but it creates an outpost for Black on d4, one that is easily occupied. Unless White can get d4 in, his bishop on fl will be bad and his development will be cramped.

The most natural move is 2 ... lDc6, and if 3 lDf3 (in order to enforce d4), then 3 ... lDf6 4 lDc3 is a respectable line of the English Four Knights (Chapter 5) that goes 1 c4 e5 2 lDc3 lDf6 3 lDf3 lDc6 4 e4!? We shall see something about that position in Chapter 5. One important tactical theme in that case is that 4 ... .i.c5 can be met by 5 lDxe5!, with the idea 5 ... lDxe5 6 d4, forking two pieces and breaking Black's stran- glehold on the centre. Not surprisingly, that re- sults in a very unclear position. In the line we are currently considering, after 1 c4 e5 2 e4 lDc6 3lDf3, Black needn't bother with 3 ... lDf6, because he can clamp down further on d4 by 3 ... .i.c5!, and if 4 lDc3, 4 ... d6 prevents lDxe5 and has 5 .. .l Df6 or 5 .. .f5 in mind. Still better, Black can play 2 ... .i.c5(!) right away, to keep open the idea of ... c6, which would repel a knight from d5. Then 3 lDf3 can be answered by 3 ... d6, when a natural continua- tion is 4 d4?! exd4 5lDxd4 (D). White has gained some space but is slightly behind in development (it's Black's move), and his dark squares are vulnerable to attack. For example, Black has 5 ... ~f6!? (5 ... lDf6 6 lDc3 transposes to the next paragraph) 6lDf3 (after 6 .i.e3? lDc6 7 lDxc6 .i.xe3 8 fxe3 bxc6, White has a bad bishop and some very weak pawns) 6 ... ~g6!? 7 lDc3 lDf6 8 lDh4 ~g4 9 ~xg4 lDxg4 10 lDdllDc6 11 f3 lDge5 with the better development. To avoid trouble with ... ~f6, White can play 4lDc3 lDf6 and now 5 d4 exd4 6lDxd4. Then a natural sequence is 6 ... O-O 7 .i.e2 ':e8 8 f3lDc6 9 i.e3, which looks exactly like a King's Indian Defence, except that Black's bishop is on c5, where it went in one move, instead of g7! A standard idea from that opening is also good here: the move 9 ... lDh5! (D) intends ... lDf4 with ... ~g5, and in some cases ... f5. w A beautiful variation is 10 g3lDf4!!; for ex- ample, 11 gxf4 (11 lDxc6 lDg2+!) 11...lDxd4 12 .i.xd4 ~h4+ 13 'it'fl? (13 'iitd2 .i.xd4 fa- vours Black) 13 ... .i.h3+ 14 'iitgl ':e6 15 f5 .i.xf5! and so forth. And 10 lDxc6 can be met by 1O ... ~h4+! 11 g3? lDxg3, etc. In conclusion, it's not as though 2 e410ses by force, but there's no effective way for White to

REVERSING THE SICILIAN: 2ND MOVES 17

contest the outpost on d4 without falling dan- gerously behind in development. That is proba- bly obvious to most readers; nevertheless, the B details are instructive. b) 2 e3 is an acceptable move, imitating the Sicilian Defence with 1 e4 cS 2 liJf3 e6, but it commits White to a particular central pawn- formation early on, thus giving Black useful in- formation. Black can continue, for example, 2 ... liJf6 (D). w Then Black will have no complaints if White tries 3 d4!?, because 3 ... exd4 4 exd4 dS gives him a full share of the centre. After 2 e3 liJf6, the more flexible 3 liJc3 will be seen under the move-order 1 c4 eS 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 e3 in the first game of Chapter 4 (Van Wely-Kasparov). I should point out that 3 a3!? tries to transpose into a reversed Paulsen Sicilian after 3 ... dS 4 cxdS liJxdS, but Black needn't be so coopera- tive and, for example, the move a3 isn't terribly useful in lines beginning with 3 ... c6, or against a King's Indian structure following 3 ... d6 4 d4 liJbd7 S liJc3 g6 6 liJf3 i.g7, etc. Compare the alternative 2 a3 below. After 1 c4 eS 2 e3, 2 ... c6 can also be played; for example, 3 d4 exd4 4 ~xd4 (4 exd4 dS is fine for Black) 4 ... dS S liJf3 liJf6 6 liJc3 (D), when we have a reversed variation of the Ala- pin Sicilian (1 e4 cS 2 c3). When the queen is on d4, we find that varia- tions with the move e3 are less pointed than those in which White has played i.gS (the rele- vant comparison is with the reversed line in the Sicilian Defence, 1 e4 cS 2 c3 dS 3 exdS ~xdS 4 d4liJf6 sliJf3 e6, which is rather unambitious in comparison with S. .. i.g4). Of course, White has an extra tempo here and there will be plenty of chances to make such an unbalanced posi- tion interesting. Incidentally, the frequent rela- tionship between seemingly disparate openings is shown by the following Slav Defence varia- tion: 1 d4 dS 2 c4 c6 3liJc3 eS (this is called the Winawer Counter-Gambit) 4 e3 exd4 S ~xd4 liJf6 6 liJf3, with precisely the position we are discussing! c) 2 a3 is one of those semi-waiting moves that doesn't commit to a strategy, but has some point. It prepares a timely b4, for one thing. Think about it: after 1 e4 cS 2liJf3 followed by

3 d4 cxd4 4liJxd4, it's hard to find a variation in

which ... a6 isn't useful for Black. The problem is that, again, Black needn't co- operate with an early ... dS. Thus, for example, 2 ... liJf6 (D) (also fine are 2 ... g6 and 2 ... d6, among other moves). w 3liJc3 (3 b4 isn't very pointed when there's no black knight on c6 to kick around; an exam- ple would be 3 ... g6 4 i.b2 d6 S e3 i.g7 6liJc3

18 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

O-O with equality) 3 ... c6!? (Black might play this way in order to stir the pot; a simpler solu- tion is 3 ... g6 followed by a King's Indian set- up with ... d6, ... i.g7 and ... O-O) 4 d4 (4 ttJf3 is met by 4 ... e4 5 ttJd4 d5 6 cxd5 cxd5 {or even 6 .. :i!i'xd5}, when a3 isn't helping matters; Black can also answer with 4 ... d6, when the move a3 is again fairly meaningless) 4 ... exd4 5 ~xd4 d5

w Now we have a position very similar to that arising from 2 e3 c6 3 d4 exd4 4 ~xd4 d5 above, except that White has the opportunity to play the desirable move i.g5, since the bishop isn't cut off by a pawn on e3. Unfortunately, he has invested time on the unimpressive move a3, and he has a knight on c3 which isn't as well- placed as one on f3. Within the next few moves, Black threatens to gain space a tempo by means of ... c5 and ... d4. With that in mind, White might continue 6 ttJf3 (6 cxd5 cxd5 frees a square for Black's knight on c6, which will at- tack White's queen with gain of time; naturally that's not the end of the world for White, but it means that he is very unlikely to get anything out of the opening; furthermore, the immedi- ate 6 i.g5 can be answered by 6 ... i.e7, threat- ening ... c5, when 7 cxd5 cxd5 8 i.xf6 i.xf6 9 'ili'xd5?? loses to 9 ... i.xc3+) 6 ... i.e7 7 g3?! (or 7 cxd5 cxd5 8 e3 ttJc6) 7 ... c5 8 'iVd3 d4. You might compare this with I c4 e5 2 g3 ttJf6 3 i.g2 c6 4 d4 exd4 5 'iVxd4 d5 6 ttJf3 in Chapter 4; in that case, White can abstain from capture on d5 in some lines until the right moment. And even if White does exchange on d5, then after ... ttJc6 he can move his queen without having to suffer a direct attack from ... d4. If all that sounds obscure, a look at the variations in Chap- ter 4 will help. I should also note that Black can take his chances with an early ... d5; for example, 3 ... d5, even if that seems cooperative. We shall see lines with ... d5 below, and in future chapters. d) 2 b3 is perfectly good, but it lacks punch. White can, for example, combine it with g3 and i.g2 (a double fianchetto), to get a game with mutual chances. But when the king's bishop has to settle for a place on e2, it's highly unlikely that White will get any real prospects. Accord- ing to theory, one easy solution is 2 ... ttJf6 3 i.b2 ttJc6 (D). w

4 e3 (4 ttJf3 e4 5 ttJd4 i.c5 6 e3 O-O is equal;

Black can even play 6 ... i.xd4 7 exd4 d5, in spite of ceding the bishop-pair, since White's bishop on b2 is ineffective and his d4-pawn re- quires tending) 4 ... d5 5 cxd5 ttJxd5 poses White at least as many problems as Black. For exam- ple, 6 i.b5?! ttJdb4! is not pleasant, because of the attack on the d3-square. Of course, Black has many other replies to 2 b3. e) Finally, you may be wondering about the direct 1 c4 e5 2 d4?!. Then 2 ... exd4 3 'ili'xd4?! ttJc6 develops smoothly with gain of time. A trickier move is 3 ttJf3!?, when Black can play simply 3 ... ttJf6! (White's only real point is that he can meet 3 ... c5?! by 4 e3! dxe3 5 i.xe3; then, for the pawn, White has complete control of d5 and the d-file, and his pieces are coming out rapidly - this is a type of position worth re- membering, and parallels a similar gambit in the Sicilian Defence) 4 ttJxd4 d5!? (an ambi- tious freeing move; simple moves like 4 ... i.c5 should also equalize) 5 cxd5 'ili'xd5 6 ttJc3 (6 e3

REVERSING THE SICILIAN: 2ND MOVES 19

is too passive to present a challenge: 6 ... i.c5 7 tbc3 ~d6 8 i.e2 O-O with equality) 6 ... i.b4 7 ~a4+!? (7 a3? i.xc3+ 8 bxc3 O-O gives White B two bishops at the cost of development and the assumption of weaknesses; compare, for exam- ple, the Chigorin Queen's Gambit in Volume 2) 7 ... tbc6 with the idea 8 tbxc6 (8 ~xb4 'iixd4!) 8 ... i.xc3+ 9 bxc3 i.d7! and Black probably even has the better game. Najdorf and Dragon Aspirations

[diagram]
For those who like the Najdorf or Dragon variations of the Sicilian Defence, which both begin with 1 e4 c5 2 tbf3 d6, it's only natural to consider the move ...

2 d3 (D)

Why isn't this played more often? The main problem, as opposed to 2 tbc3 and 2 g3, is that 2 d3 forfeits the chance to play d4 in one move. Let's see what that implies for both sides. 2 ... tbf6 a) Another logical move for Black is 2 ... tbc6, which is not quite as flexible in the sense that he relinquishes the option of ... c6. But it is flexible in another way if he intends ... g6 and ... i.g7, because in that case Black retains the options of playing ... tbge7 and/or ... f5 at some point. The Dragon or Najdorffan will most likely respond with 3 tbf3 (D). Then Black can highlight the drawbacks of 2 d3 by playing 3 ... g6 (alternatively, 3 ... tbf6 4 tbc3 is a main-line Four Knights Variation of Chapter 5, with White having played the rela- tively harmless 4 d3; see below). The best an- swer to an early ... g6 is often d4, but here 4 d4!? is a loss of a tempo, which means that Black will equalize easily. Play might go 4 ... exd4 5 tbxd4 i.g7 6 tbxc6 bxc6 and Black has free and easy play, a natural continuation being 7 g3 tbe7 8 i.g2 O-O 9 O-O d5, or 9 .. ..l:1b8. Take away d3 and ... tbc6 and we can see why such an early ... g6 can be risky: 1 c4 e5 2 tbc3 g6?! 3 d4! exd4 4 'iixd4, and now 4 ... tbf6? is disastrous due to 5 i.g5 with tbd5 next, winning a piece. White's best line, instead of 4 d4, is probably 4 tbc3 i.g7 5 g3, which is a kind of reversed Closed Sicilian (or 'Closed English') that we shall run into in Chapter 6. b) In a more original vein, notice how 2 ... c6, another Alapin Sicilian reversed, is perfectly playable for Black. In large part this is because Black hasn't committed his king's knight; for example, 3 tbf3 d6 4 tbc3 f5! (D) is a familiar kind of position except that White would like to have the move d4 in. This should be compared with a line that arises in Chapter 3: 1 c4 e5 2 tbc3 d6 3 tbf3 f5 4 d4 e4 5 tbg5 c6. In the diagram, White can only play d4 with loss of time. If he doesn't chal- lenge the centre, Black has few problems; for example, a logical continuation is 5 g3 tbf6 6 i.g2 i.e7 (there are other moves, but I'll show this for simplicity's sake) 7 0-00-08 l:tbl a5 9 a3 tba6 10 b4 axb4 11 axb4 tbc7 12 b5 i.d7 with a safe queenside and a nice central posi- tion. White could insist upon playing 5 d4!? a tempo down, when a sample line that parallels

20 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w the Chapter 3 variation is S ... e4 6 lDgS h6 (Black assumes some weaknesses, as White wants, but with a gain of time and space) 7lDh3 gS 8 e3 lDf6 9 .te2 fIIe7 (in order to be able to answer 10 .thS+ with 1O ... lDxhS 11 fIIxhS+ Win) 10 O-O .tg7 11 b4 O-O with equality. Watch out for 12 .tb2? (12 ~hl! is better) 12 .. .f4! (D). w Black intends .. .f3, winning a piece. And he has the idea 13 exf4 g4, when the knight is trapped! Also losing is 13 f3 exf3 14 .txf3 g4. You should know this attacking theme, which comes up in periodically in a variety of open- ings. Very often the 'victim' of the tactic has fianchettoed; for example, in the Pirc Defence when Black answers eS with ... lDg4 and is chased back to h6 by h3; subsequently, White plays g4 and, with a great deal of luck, gets to use the fS trick. You may want to check out that opening to see what I'm talking about. Granted, all this is not very meaningful in terms of precise chess theory. Nevertheless, some useful ideas arise when we consider such lines. We now return to 2 ... lDf6 (D); w 3lDf3 With this move White is still hoping for a Najdorf or Dragon with reversed colours (e.g. 3 ... lDc6 and now 4 a3 dS or 4 g3 dS). The alter- native 3 lDc3 can be met by various moves, in- cluding the simple 3. .. lDc6, when 4 lDf3 is analysed in Chapter S under the move-order 2 lDc3lDf6 3 lDf3 lDc6 4 d3. If White chooses to play 4 g3, Black has new possibilities. The move 4 ... .tb4, for example, should lead to an equal game, even though someone wishing to get away from the beaten path as White might want to play S .td2 followed by a3 or lDdS and take it from there. Perhaps the most interesting comparison with a normal Sicilian Dragon is in the line 3 lDc3 lDc6 4 g3 dS S cxdS lDxdS. White's 'extra' tempo is d3 which, as so often, is committal in a partially detrimental way. That's because after 6 .tg2 .te6, Black can keep his knight on the desirable square dS. To explain that, let's con- tinue with the normal Dragon moves 7 lDf3 .te7 (D). Experienced English Opening players can compare 1 c4 eS 2lDc3 lDf6 3 lDf3 lDc6 4 g3 dS S cxdS lDxdS 6 .tg2 in Chapter S. In that case, White is threatening 7 lDxeS!, so Black usually plays 6 ... lDb6, because after 6 ... .te6 7 O-O, White is ready to play the advantageous move 8 d4. By contrast, in our present example, White has already committed to d3; this means that he can only advance the d-pawn to d4 at the cost of a tempo. This is a rather sophisticated point,

REVERSING THE SICILIAN: 2ND MOVES 21

w especially for those who don't play the Dragon; however, it's illustrative of the nuances that arise in reversed openings. Black can also play something solid versus 3 tbc3 such as 3 ... c6 4 tbf3 d6, after which he can choose either ... g6/ ... i.g7 with a standard posi- tion, or ... tbbd7, holding out for possibilities of ... d5 or ... g6. Instead, 4 ... d5? 5 cxd5 gives White the advantage, because 5 ... cxd5? loses a pawn to 6 tbxe5 d4 7 ~a4+!, and 5 ... tbxd5 6 tbxe5! tbxc3 7 bxc3 ~a5 8 tbf3 ~xc3+ 9 i.d2 favours White due to his better development and central pawn-majority. But watch out for the standard trap 5 tbxe5?? d4, winning a piece, because if the c3-knight moves, 6 .. :iVa5+ will win the knight on e5! A handy trick to know. We now return to 3 tbf3 (D):

3 ... tbc6 After 3. .. i.b4+!? 4 i.d2 i.xd2+ 5 'it'xd2, we have a type of Moscow Sicilian reversed (1 e4 c5 2 tbf3 d6 3 i.b5+, etc.); Black stands solidly enough if he continues 5 ... d6. As previously indicated, what are equalizing lines when play- ing Black in the Sicilian Defence are often less attractive for White in the English Opening, since he expects to retain an advantage. The question is always whether his extra tempo has real significance. In this particular case, White has enough interesting options that the reversed Moscow Variation may be satisfactory for him, regardless of whether equality is the technical verdict. 4a3 A typical Sicilian Defence move. Again, White hopes for 4 ... d5 5 cxd5 tbxd5 with a re- versed Najdorf and a tempo in hand. Black will usually not oblige, but see the next note. The 'Dragon-esque' 4 g3 allows moves such as 4 ... g6 (again because d410ses a tempo), or 4 ... i.c5, or 4 ... i.b4+. We shall also see that re- versed Dragon positions following 4 ... d5 5 cxd5 tbxd5 are satisfactory for Black. Finally, 4 tbc3 is a line of the Four Knights Variation, considered relatively harmless, which is not to say that White can't try it out. Black might have avoided this by 2 d3 tbc6 3 tbf3 g6, al- though that's hardly necessary. 4 ... g6 Solid play. Fianchettoing the king's bishop tends to be a reliable equalizer if White plays slow moves. Still, it's instructive to see what happens if Black cooperates by playing the provocative 4 ... d5!? 5 cxd5 tbxd5 (D). w If there's any position involving 2 d3 in which White should be able to exploit an extra tempo, it would be this one. Now the move from the Najdorf 'proper' is 6 e4 (6 g3 is a reversed

22 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Dragon structure in which a3 may not help much; 6 e3 is a reversed Scheveningen, likely to provide interesting but not inspiring play if Black responds ultra-solidly; 6 b4! is more am- bitious, when the game can go in many direc- tions, but White does well to put his knight on d2 and not c3, just as Black chooses ... lLlbd7 in the great majority of Najdorf variations) 6 ... lLlb6!? (this is normal in the reversed position, but 6 ... lLlf6 maybe be a safer course; you need to study the theory of the Najdorf to understand this line) 7 .lie3 (D) (7 .lie2 and 7 lLlbd2 are also logical moves, when b4 and .lib2 frequently follows).

After 7 .lie3, White is a tempo up in a re- versed Najdorf Sicilian. Nothing that he has done has tipped his hand in a negative way, so the real issue is whether Black has a modest way to avoid entering into the time-critical dy- namic lines which characterize the Najdorf. For this purpose, the careful 7 ... .lie7 is appropriate (rather than the energetic 7 ... f6 8 lLlbd2 .lie6 9 .lie2 ~d7 10 O-O O-O-O 11 b4, when White is a tempo ahead of the 'English Attack' of the Si- cilian Defence; that is a line characterized by dynamism and attacking ideas, so an extra move will be very important and therefore 7 .. .f6 is not a smart choice for Black). After 7 ... .lie7, we might see 8 .lie2 (8 d4 exd4 9 lLlxd4 lLlxd4 leads to the kind of simplification with which Black can be content when playing the Sicilian; of course, White wants more in the reversed position) 8 ... O-O 9 O-O .lie6 10 lLlbd2 as and Black's game is solid enough. Naturally, there are options here for both sides, as well as issues of move-order that I haven't mentioned. You can see that the play stemming from 4 a3 dS is flexible and balanced. White may like this idea of a reversed Najdorf, but he needs to keep in mind that few players of Black will do their opponents the psychological favour of playing 4 ... dS. Let's follow a game with our main-line move, 4 ... g6: w Wahls - Rabiega German Ch, Altenkirchen 2001

1 c4 eS 2 d3 lLlf6 3 lLlf3 lLlc6 4 a3 g6 (D)

Sb4 This queenside advance is the most inde- pendent move, consistent with 4 a3. Instead, S lLlc3 .lig7 6 g3 O-O is a kind of Anti-King's In- dian variation from Chapter 12, in which you will see that .l:r.bl is generally more useful than a3 in supporting the queenside advance b4-bS. S.. d6 6 bS lLle7 7 .lib2 .lig7 8 g3 O-O 9 .lig2

(D)

REVERSING THE SICILIAN: 2ND MOVES 23

A fairly typical English Opening position has arisen, in the sense that White is exerting pres- sure with his g2-bishop along the long diagonal, and that he has reinforced his light-square con- trol by means of b4-bS. Black, in tum, is set to attack, either on the kingside by ... fS or in the centre by ... dS (often preceded by ... c6). In gen- eral, White has two related ideas that have been hampered (or delayed) by the insertion of a3. Normally he gets his best attacking chances by playing the move cS, at some point capturing on d6 and opening lines on the queenside. To im- plement this, however, White would ideally have the moves a4 and i.a3 in, and in the situation be- fore us, they both take two moves to implement instead of one. That's quite a loss of time, and guarantees Black reasonable chances regard- less of whether he plays on the kingside or in the centre. Another of White's customary strategies is a4-aS-a6; again, playing a3-a4 would lose a tempo in carrying out this plan. 9 ... a6 Black makes a tough decision that you will confront time and again in the English Open- ing, and in this book. If he opens the a-file and exchanges the aI-rook, that can either make it easier to defend his queenside (one less pawn there) or else help White to penetrate favour- ably down the a-file. Generally this is a matter of judgement, and the consequences are not im- mediately evident.

10 a4 axb5 11 axb5l:!.xal12 i.xal c6

Also plausible are l2 ... i.g4 and l2. .. h6 (pre- paring ... i.e6 without allowing ttJgS in reply). 13 bxc6 bxc614 O-O (D)

14  ttJd7 A move characteristic of such positions: by doubly protecting the eS-pawn, Black prepares a possible ... dS, and his f-pawn is also freed to advance. The knight on d7 can also be well- placed for defence if it gets to cS. 15 ttJc3 'Wic7 IS ... dS and IS ... fS are decent alternatives. 16 ttJd2 White wants to strengthen his control of the hl-a8 diagonal. 16 'iWc2 also makes sense, in order to bring the fl-rook to the queenside. 16  ttJc5 Or 16 ... fS, when Black's mobile centre serves as a counterweight to White's queenside pres- sure. 17 ttJa4 ttJxa4 18 'Wixa4 i.g4? This move is logical, but falls for a sort of 'trick'. 18 ... dS is safe enough, possibly fol- lowed by ... i.e6 and .. .fS. After 18 ... i.g4? White could have played 19 cS!, when the queen on a4 attacks the g4-bishop, giving White time to play cxd6 and seriously weaken Black's pawn-structure. Sometimes the simple moves are the easiest to miss. The rest of the game was not of interest in terms of opening ideas. Improved Alekhine-Sicilian

1 c4 e5 2 ttJf3 (D)

By playing 2 ttJf3, White enters into an Ale- khine Defence (1 e4 ttJf6) with the extra move c4 in. The move 2 ttJf3 is also a reversed form of the Nimzowitsch Sicilian, which goes 1 e4 cS 2 ttJf3 ttJf6. Looked at from that perspective,

24 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White has an extra tempo, that is, Black hasn't played ... liJf6 yet. Can White get an advantage in this way? While 2 liJf3 is hardly a super- weapon, I think that it is better than generally recognized, both as an independent variation and a transpositional tool. 2  e4 This aggressive move is easily the most im- portant one. Instead, 2 ... d6 is rather passive af- ter 3 d4. The alternative 2 ... liJc6 is a sound choice, aiming for transposition. Then White can play 3 liJc3, returning to a main line of the English Opening which goes 2 liJc3 liJc6 3 liJf3, while having eliminated a couple of pos- sibilities for Black. For example, had White played I c4 eS 2 liJc3, Black's intent may have been 2 ... d6, a popular move that can transpose into the King's Indian set-up after ... g6, but can also involve a sequence such as 3 liJf3 fS 4 d4 e4, which has a decent reputation for Black (see Chapter 3). Or Black might have prepared 2 liJc3 ..tb4, a move which has been approved of at the highest levels of play (this is also ana- lysed in Chapter 3). Since these options aren't available to Black after 2 liJf3 liJc6 3 liJc3, he will probably settle for the main lines, namely, 3 ... liJf6, or 3 .. .fS, which are analysed in Chap- ters S and 6 respectively. Alternatively, White can deviate by playing 3 d4, intending 3 ... exd4 4 liJxd4 liJf6 S liJc3, transposing to the 4 d4 variation of the Four Knights main line, which goes 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 liJf3 liJc6 4 d4 (see Chapter S). By this means, White would bypass one of Black's important options, 4 ... e4. After 3 d4, however, the immediate 3 ... e4! (D) is the truly independent continuation. w Then White should abstain from 4 liJgS?! (remarkably, this is already dubious; the inno- cent-looking 4 liJfd2 can be met with 4 ... e3!? S fxe3 liJf6, an apparently sound gambit that is unclear, but at least interesting for both sides; White can also consider 4 liJeS) 4 ... ..tb4+! S liJc3 (S i.d2?? 'iixgS) and Black can exploit the very lack of ... liJf6 to play the unique S. .. dS! (intending ... h6) 6 cxdS 'iixdS 7 a3 (pretty much forced in order to defend d4 without losing the knight on gS) 7 ... ..txc3+ 8 bxc3 liJf6 with excel- lent central control, very quick development, and the prospect of ... h6. This is not so different from other lines we shall see in this book that emphasize space and light-square control by Black. Players familiar with the Chigorin Queen's Gambit will see that Black very likely stands better than after I d4 dS 2 c4 liJc6 3 cxdS 'iixdS 4 e3 eS S liJc3 ..tb4 6 a3 ..txc3+ 7 bxc3 liJf6 8 liJf3 e4, a position which is itself quite playable for Black. One point of knowing a variety of openings is to be able to make such comparisons and therefore intuitive assessments about a position's worth. 3 liJd4 Who wouldn't want this type of reversed Alekhine Defence (1 e4 liJf6 2 eS liJdS), having the move ... cS already in? That would discour- age White from d4, which is his main move ver- sus the Alekhine. Of course, it's never that simple. Let's follow some games: Murey - Heran Condom 2004

[diagram]
A developing move like this can't be bad, al- though it appears to give White the reverse po- sition that he wants. See the next game for the generally recommended alternative 3 ... liJc6. 4 liJc3 (D) 4  c6!? 4 ... liJc6 S e3 liJxd4 transposes to the note af- ter S exd4 in the next game. 4 ... ..tcS could lead to a wide variety of unique and even unknown positions; for example, S liJb3 ..tb4 6 'iic2 (White attacks e4; 6 g3!? O-O 7 ..tg2 ne8 8 fic2 is another way to do so) 6 ... "fIIe7 (6 ... dS!? 7 cxdS O-O 8 liJxe4 liJxdS 9 a3 ..te7 10 e3 and Black is short of compensation)

REVERSING THE SICIUAN: 2ND MOVES 25

7 a3 (7 g4!? would be a typically modem flank

attack) 7 ... i.xc3 8 dxc3, which is a standard structure pitting two bishops against the cramp- ing pawn. Compare the main-line Four Knights variations in Chapter S. Finally, 4 ... i.b4 is a natural-looking contin- uation, when White can take aim at e4 by S 'iic2

At first glance, this doesn't look too bad for Black, but it turns out that defending his e-pawn is a bother. For example, S ... tL'lc6 (S ... i.xc3 6 dxc3! sets up quick development by i.gS or i.f4 and perhaps O-O-O; alternatively, the gam- bit S. .. O-O?! looks dubious after 6 tL'lxe4tL'lxe4 7 'iixe4 .:!.e8 8 'iif3) 6 e3 (6tL'lxc6 dxc6 7tL'lxe4!? i.fS 8tL'lxf6+ 'iixf6 9 'ii'b3 looks a little greedy, although White can continue with e3 and d4, challenging Black to prove his case) 6 ... O-O (6 ... tL'lxd47 exd4 i.xc3 8 dxc3 with two strong bishops) 7tL'lxc6 dxc6 8tL'lxe4 i.fS (8 ... tL'lxe4 9 'iixe4 'iigS 10 i.e2) 9tL'lxf6+ 'iixf6 10 i.d3 and Black has little to show for the extra pawn.

5 d3 exd3 (D)

w 6e4! An ambitious attempt to take over the centre. 6 i.gS!? is another dynamic move. 6 . d5?! Probably not best, but otherwise Black has to be careful not to become too passively placed. 7 cxd5 cxd5 8 e5 tL'le4 9 i.xd3 The safe 9 'ii'xd3 is also good.

9. .. tL'lxc3 10 bxc3tL'lc611 O-O i.e7 12 'iVh5!?

g6 On a slow move such as 12 ... a6, 13 e6! is strong. 13 'iih6 i.f8 14 Wie3 i.e7 Black would be stuck in the middle after 14 ... i.g7 IS i.a3. 15 i.b5 Wic7 16 "ilkh6 (D)

16 i.d7 Upon 16 ... i.f8, White plays 17 'iif4 intend- ing 18 ~f6 or 18 e6!. 17 i.f4?!

26 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White is in control after 17 i.xc6! bxc6 18 'Wig7, with the idea l8 ... .:.f8 19 i.h6!. 17. i.f8 18 'Wih4 i.e7 19 i.g5 i.xg5 20 'Wixg5 O-O 21 i.xc6 bxc6 22 f4?! c5? Here 22 .. .f6! 23 exf6 'Wid6 improves, by cha1- lenging White's attack upon the weakened dark squares. After the text-move, White stands dis- tinctly better. 23 lLlf3 'Wid8? 24 'Wih6 f6 25 ':'adl i.a4 26 exf6 ':'xf6 27lLlg5! i.xdl? 28 'Wixh7+ 'I?o>f8 29 ':'ell-0 w Mate follows quickly. Heruti - Motwani Netanya 1987

1 c4 e5 2 lLlf3 e4 3 lLld4 lLlc6 (D)

This solution is approved by the conven- tional wisdom; in fact, 3 ... lLlc6 is often adorned by'!'. Black forestalls White's planned attack on the exposed e-pawn and compels a response. 4e3 White continues to follow the main idea from the Sicilian Defence (l e4 c5 2lLlf3lLlf6 3 e5 lLld5 4 lLlc3 e6). 4 lLlc2!? appears passive, but White plans to harass Black's e-pawn by means of lLlc3, g3 and i.g2, with lLle3 and sometimes d3 to follow. An approved solution goes 4 ... lLlf6 5lLlc3 .Bc5 6 g3lLle5!, but 4 ... d5 5 cxd5 1iVxd5 6lLlc3 "iVe5 also looks playable. White's main alternative is 4 lLlxc6 dxc6 5 lLlc3 lLlf6 and now 6 e3 or 6 ~c2, yet there is a danger of becoming too cramped. Black wants to prevent d4; for example, 6 ~c2 .Bf5 7 e3 (af- ter 7 f4!? i.c5 8 e3 Wile7 9 b3, 9 ... lLlg4! is diffi- cult to counter; but 7 h3 doesn't achieve much after 7 ... h5 or Sax's 7 ... i.g6 with the idea ... i.d6-e5) 7 ... 'Wid7! 8 b3 O-O-O 9 i.b2 h5 10 h3 (10 O-O-O lLlg4) 1O ... 'I?o>b8 110-O-O i.h7!? (pre- paring ... 'Wif5 in some lines) 12 i.e2 i.e7 and Black controls more space while White has lit- tle positive to do. I should add, however, that this variation is not as easy as I've painted it, and will repay a closer look. 4 . lLlxd45 exd4 (D)

Here, by analogy with the reversed position from the Sicilian Defence, Black would a1ready have a knight on f6. If he catches up with that position now, White will be glad to break up the centre; for example, 5 ... lLlf6 6lLlc3 d5!? 7 d3! exd3 (7 ... i.b4?? 8 'Wia4+; 7 ... i.f5 8 i.g5) 8 i.xd3 dxc4 9 i.xc4 with a pleasant isolated queen's pawn position which may favour White and is at any rate easier to play for him (O-O, l:tel and i.g5 are typical follow-up moves). However, precisely because Black is a tempo behind the Nimzowitsch Sicilian line (that is, because ... lLlf6 hasn't been played), he can oc- cupy that square, as follows: 5  JWf6! This simple move hits d4, which can be hard to defend. This is essentia1ly the reason why 2 lLlf3 is so seldom played. We have the typica1 case where playing with a tempo less has its ad- vantages, because f6 is free. The issue remains whether that benefit outweighs, or is outweighed by, the value of an extra move. 6d5?! Usually this is the only move given by play- ers and theoreticians. But since it turns out to be extremely perilous, White might look to con- test the initiative by 6 lLlc3!, giving up a pawn

REVERSING THE SICILIAN: 2ND MOVES 27

for quick development and a central attack. Af- ter 6 .. :~xd4, I think that White should try the patient 7 .Jte2 (D). W

This delays the break d3 until White's king is out of the way. White intends to exploit Black's poor development, but he wants to get his pieces out before playing to win the centre and evict the queen. The prospect of ltJbS or ltJdS can be bothersome for Black. The only other source that I know of that mentions 6ltJc3 recommends 7 d3, which can be met by 7 ... .Jtb4; for example, 8 'iVb3 .Jtxc3+ 9 bxc3 'iVeS (or 9 ... 'iVd6). Then White controls the dark squares, yet needs to prove compensation for the pawn (which is not to say that it is lacking). Mter 7 .Jte2, the game might proceed 7 ... ltJf6

8 O-O, and now Black has to decide what to do

about the centre, as well as keep an eye on pos- sibilities like ltJbS and d4. A sample line might be 8 ... .Jtb4 (8 ... dS 9 d3 activates White's pieces, one point being 9 ... exd3 10 ltJbS! 'iVb6 11 .Jtf4; 8 ... .Jte7 can be met by 9 d3 exd3, when 10 .Jtxd3 d6 11 .nel gives White excellent com- pensation, especially since 11.. . .Jte6?? fails to l2l:!.xe6 fxe6 13 .Jtg6+; here 10 ltJbS!? 'iVb6 11 'iVxd3 is also possible) 9ltJbS 'it'eS 10 d4! exd3 11 .Jtxd3 O-O 12 'iVf3 intending .Jtf4 with more than enough play for a pawn. The moral seems to be that it is better to give up a pawn than to receive one! In the game, White makes the latter decision, to his regret. 6 .. .Jtc5 (D) 7 'iVe2

7 f3 allows 7 ... exf3 8 'iVxf3 'iVxf3 9 gxf3 d6,

after which Black continues simply ... ltJf6, ... O-O, ... .ne8 and ... .JtfS or even ... ltJe7-fS, in both cases with an obvious superiority. White's pawns are weak and his structure is a mess. 7 .. 'it'g6 8 ltJc3 ltJf6 9 d3 White wins a key centre pawn in the hopes of compensating for his inferior development. 9 d4!? is a bail-out attempt: 9 ... .Jtxd4 (9 ... .Jtb6!? 10 cS .JtaS) 10 ltJbS .Jtb6 (10 ... .JteS!? 11 f4! .Jtd6 produces a highly charged tactical posi- tion) 11 cS! a6 12 cxb6 axbS 13 bxc7 ltJxdS. This is unclear, but probably better for Black because of his strong centre. 9  O-O! 10 dxe4 White does no better by playing 10 ltJxe4 ltJxe4 11 dxe4 (11 'i!Vxe4 'it'b6! 12 'i!Vf3 .Jtd4 or 12 ... 'it'b4+!) 1l....l:te8 12 f3 fS!. Black's point can be seen after 13 eS d6 14 e6 .Jtxe6!, a clas- sic example of central collapse. ... ltJg4 llltJdl 11 .Jte3 ltJxe3 12 fxe3 d6 (D) is a picture of frustration for White. w In return for his miserable extra pawn, dou- bled and backward on a half-open file, White

28 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

has a terrible light-squared bishop, while Black has an active bishop-pair. 1l  d6 W Now Black is threatening to play ... f5, rip- ping White's position to shreds. 12f3 This position has arisen quite a few times, with good results for Black. Sometimes White has defended badly, but I'm not sure that it mat- ters against accurate play.

12. . .l::te8! (D)

The most enterprising move. For some rea- son, the cautious 12 ... ttJe5?! has been the most popular try at this point, when 13 i.e3 is the best and probably an adequate defence. l2. .. ttJxh2! is another good move, and a tactical device to remember. Black threatens ... 'ilVg3+ (which is naturally the answer to 13 !txh2?). The best reply is 13 g4! ttJxf3+! 14 ~xf3 i.xg4 with an attack that should at least result in some ad- vantage for Black after 15 'iii'g2! !tae8!. w 13 i.e3 Other tries are: a) 13 ttJe3 ttJxh2! 14 g4 ttJxg4! 15 .J:tg1 (15 fxg4 'ilVxe4) l5 ... f5! with a very strong attack that seems to defy a successful defence; for ex- ample, 16 i.h3 (16 fxg4 f4) 16 ... ~f6 17 i.xg4 (17 fxg4 f4) 17 ... 'iiVh4+! 18 'iii'f2 'iii'xf2+ 19 'ifo>xf2 fxg4. b) 13 h3 meets with a different response: l3 ... ttJf6! (D) with the powerful idea of ... ttJh5. If White plays 14 g4, l4. .. ttJxe4! 15 fxe4 !txe4 should win; e.g., 16 i.e3 i.d7 and either ... .l:.ae8 or ... !txe3 followed by ... !te8 can't really be stopped: 17 i.g2 (17 'ifo>d2 !tae8 18 ~d3 i.a4! 19 b3 'iii'f6) 17 ... !txe3 18 ttJxe3 !te8 19 O-O-O i.xe3+, etc.

13. . ttJxe3 14 ttJxe3 fS IS g3

Following 15 O-O-O 'iii'h6 16 !tel fxe4 17 f4 lWxf4, Black has an extra passed pawn and two bishops. IS. 'iii'h6 Or 15 ... i.b4+ 16 'ifo>d1 fxe4. 16 'ifo>d2 bS!? Black finds a nice idea to activate more pieces; 16 .. .fxe4 17 f4 'iii'f6 would also result in a winning game. 17 i.g2?! After 17 cxb5 i.d7 18 a4 fxe4 19 f4 a6! Black opens lines everywhere.

17. .. fxe4 18 f4 ~f6 19 'ifo>c2 !tb8! 20 cxbS

i.xe3 21 lWxe3 !txbS 22 !tabl !tcS+ 23 'ifo>d2 !txdS+ Now it's quickly over. 24 'ifo>el cS 2S i.n 'ifo>f8 26 i.e2 !td3! 27 ~c1 ~d4 28 !tn !te3 29 !tf2 i.a6 30 ~d2 .l:.xe2+ 0-1 A beautiful example of sustained initiative by Black. But the gambit idea with 6 ttJc3 and 7 i.e2 might attract your interest in the obscure move 2 ttJf3. By normal standards, this has been an ex- tremely long introduction to White's second- move options. But a student can't truly under- stand 1 c4 e5 without appreciating why a Re- versed Sicilian is palatable for Black at all.

3 Introduction to 2 tDc3:

Black Plays Flexibly

1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 (D)

Having looked at some other moves in the last chapter, you can see how 2 ttJc3 might be favoured. It controls the key squares e4 and d5, yet doesn't commit White to a central pawn- structure. For example, 2 ttJc3 leaves open the possibilities of playing d3, d4, e3 and e4, which is not the case with 2 d3 and 2 e3 (at least not in one move). Nor does it create a hole (as does 2 e4), or allow for an answer which renders it slow or irrelevant (for example, 2 a3 lets Black use a ... g6 solution, and most of the moves we considered in the last chapter were vulnerable to 2 ... c6). After 2 ttJc3, Black's traditional main lines begin with 2 ... ttJf6 and 2 ... ttJc6. But masters and grandmasters are very fond of some other replies, especially 2 ... d6 and 2 ... i.b4, ultra- flexible moves which have been proven to give good counterplay. The assorted variations stem- ming from them contain an astonishing number of themes and ideas which are common to the rest of the English Opening. Furthermore, the elastic nature of 2 ... d6 and 2 ... i.b4 allows Black to have an equal say in the pawn-formations that result out of the opening, something he may not be able to do in variations growing out of 2 ... ttJf6 and 2 ... ttJc6. At the same time, White has exceptional leeway in picking his own way through the opening. Some would say this is chess as it should be. Before turning to those moves, let's continue to pursue the philosophy that less frequently played alternatives can be as instructive as the normal ones. I think that a glance at rare and even inferior moves will help us understand what White wants from these positions, and what it is that Black should avoid. Following these moves I shall take a fairly close look at 2 ... f5, a periodically-played move which is use- ful to understand because of the typical struc- tures that it leads to. a) 2 ... b6?! doesn't go well with ... e5 (better with ... e6, to add to the bishop's influence along the long diagonal). 3 ttJf3 is the simplest reply: 3 ... ttJc6 (3 ... d6?! 4 d4 exd4 5 ttJxd4 gives White space and superior development while weaken- ing Black's light squares to boot) 4 e3 with d4 next is an excellent course for White. Naturally

4 g3 is also good, if unassuming.

b) 2 ... c6 (D), which is perfectly fine after 2 d3, 2 e3 and 2 a3, gives White two good re- sponses. w

30 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

First, according to the ideas discussed in the first two volumes, the move ... c6 should be a red flag for 3 d4, since a queen on d4 cannot be attacked by a knight on c6. Thus, should Black play 3 ... exd4 4 'iWxd4, he ends up short of space; e.g., 4 ... l2Jf6 (Black achieves nothing after 4 ... l2Ja6 S e4l2Jb4 6 'iWdl and 7 a3; 4 ... 'iWf6 may be best, although even the exchange of queens by S l2Jf3 'ii'xd4 6 l2Jxd4 is awkward for Black because of his weakness down the d-file and White's greater command of territory) S e4 d6 6 iLf4 followed by O-O-O, when the pawn on d6 has to be tended to. Instead of 3 ... exd4, 3 ... dS! may be best. Per- haps you remember the line 1 d4 dS 2 c4 c6 3 l2Jc3 eS from Volume 2, the so-called Winawer Counter-Gambit (and also mentioned on page 17 of this volume). By strange means, we've transposed to it! I believe that White gets some advantage here; theory also leans that way, but isn't definite on the point. Finally, the most obvious move after 2 l2Jc3 c6 is 3 l2Jf3. There follows 3 ... d6 (the alterna- tives are uninspiring) 4 d4, when Black does best to go for a type of Old Indian Defence by 4 ... l2Jd7 S e4 l2Jgf6. That position is of course playable, but White is generally thought to stand better with his space advantage. c) 2 ... g6 runs into a similar problem: 3 d4! exd4?! (3 ... d6 4l2Jf3l2Jd7, but again, not every- one wants to playa set-up with so little space) 4 'ii'xd4 'ii'f6 (best, in view of 4 ... l2Jf6?? S iLgS and l2JdS, winning) S 'iWe3+! (D) (this may be the best of many moves that have been played here).

S ... 'iWe6 (S .. :iVe7 6l2JdS transposes; after any other move, 6 l2JdS is too strong, the best try being S ... 'iti'd8!? 6 l2JdS 'ii'g7 7 iLd2! l2Je7 8 iLc3l2JxdS 9 cxdS f6 10 'ii'd4 i.e7 11 e4, etc.) 6 l2JdS 'ii'xe3 (but 6 ... l2Ja6 7 ~d4 f6 8 l2Jf3 c6 9 l2Jf4 is very pleasant for White) 7 iLxe3l2Ja6 8 iLd4! f6 9 O-O-O 'iti'f7 10 l2Jf3 c6 11 l2Jf4 with a clear advantage for White. Now let's move on to some more important answers to 2l2Jc3. Advancing the f-Pawn

1 c4 e5 2l2Jc3 f5 (D)

w In many variations that stem from 1...eS, Black can contest the centre and grab space with the move ... fS. Generally, Black would like to maintain his e- and f-pawns on the 4th rank for a while, building up with moves like ... l2Jf6, ... d6, and perhaps ... g6, ... i.g7 with ... l2Jc6 or ... c6; we'll see that in several lines. The immediate 2 ... fS has been played by some strong players, but it requires that Black shift strategies if White makes a direct challenge. 3d4! This seems to lose a tempo after 3 ... exd4 and ... l2Jc6, but note that Black's .. .fS is a non- developing move. In addition, advancing the f- pawn creates weaknesses, with the result that Black's control of e4 comes at the cost of a cer- tain looseness. Compare 2 ... d6 3 d4!? exd4 4 'ii'xd4 l2Jc6 below.

3 e3 followed by d4 is less pointed but reason-

ably effective. This may afford White a small advantage (although that's not clear), simply because Black has to respond to d4-dS. The

INTRODUCTION TO 2 tiJc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 31

classic game Reti-Romih, London 1927 shows model play versus a kind of ... e4 structure that we'll see repeatedly in variations to come: 3 ... ttJf64 d4 e4 5 ttJh3! i.b4 6 'iVb3 i.xc3+ 7 'iVxc3 ttJc6 8 i.e2 d6 9 O-O O-O 10 b3 i.d7?! 11 i.b2 'iVe7 12 ttJf4l:tae8 13 l:tac1 i.c8 14 ttJd5 'iVd8 15 f4! a6 16 ttJxf6+ ':'xf6 17 d5 ttJb8 18 c5 c6 19l:tfdll:te7 20 cxd6 'iVxd6 21 dxc6 'iVxc6 22 l:td8+ ':'f8 23 'iVb4 ':'xd8 24 'iVxe7 'iVd7 25 i.c4+ 1-0. After 3 d4, we'll look at two game excerpts expressing different philosophies by Black: w Duczynski - R. Novak Czech Team Ch 1995 3 ... e4 (D) This is a standard pawn-structure, but nor- mally Black's e-pawn advance either comes with tempo (attacking a knight on f3) or when White's c1-bishop is shut in by a pawn on e3. Here White has a number of good moves (such as 4 ttJh3), two of which directly exploit Black's slightly overextended pawn-structure. 4g4!? White plays the most radical (and fun) move, undermining Black's structure immediately. 4 f3 is also promising, because 4 ... exf3 surrenders the centre; White can choose between 5 ttJxf3 and 5 exf3, having in mind i.d3, ttJge2, etc. Nor does 4 ... ttJf6 5 i.g5! look desirable for Black. Maybe 4 ... i.b4 is best, when 5 ttJh3! introduces the idea of i.g5, as well as planning ttJf4. 4 ... fxg4 Upon 4 ... g6 5 gxf5 gxf5 6 ttJh3!, f4 becomes a pure outpost for occupation by White's knight or other pieces; he is better developed and can easily exploit the g-file and Black's weak king- side squares. 5 i.g2 ttJf6 6 i.g5! i.e77 e3 d6 (D) w 8 h3! gxh3 8 ... g3, preventing the opening of the h-file, is often the way to cut down White's attack in such positions. Here, however, after 9 fxg3, Black's e-pawn won't last long and he'll end up with no compensation. 9 ttJxh3 Even 9 i.xh3 i.xh3 10 ttJxh3 would be good. The point of White's pawn sacrifice is to take over the light squares, with a few important side benefits such as accelerated development and the open h-file. 9 ... c610 ttJf4 (D)

Threatening i.xf6 and 'iVh5+, as well as simply ttJg6. ... i.f5 11 i.xf6 i.xf6 12 i.xe4! i.xe4 13 ttJxe4

32 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White has a winning advantage. Black can hardly defend against 'iVh5+, whereas White also has ideas such as tDg6, tDe6, d5, etc. The W idea of the h3 sacrifice is one that recurs in vari- 0us environments, notably in the Dutch De- fence. Banas - Westerinen Gausdal1988 3 . exd4 4 'iVxd4 tDc6 Instead of 3 ... e4, Black more often tries to gain time by this means. 5 'iVe3+ (D) Among several options, this check is the most awkward for Black to meet, because it doesn't accede to a pure loss of tempo and de- lays his desired development by ... tDf6.

5 .. .'~f7!? Black's king sidesteps; this is the standard solution to his problems, logically hoping for ... tDf6, ... .Bb4 and ... %:reS with rapid develop- ment and counterattack. Instead, 5 ... .Be7?! 6 tDd5 leaves Black tied up, when White has tDf3/tDh3 and .Bd2-c3 as plausible follow- ups. Furthermore, 5 ... tDce7?! is strongly met by 6 tDf3 tDf6 7 "iVd3; White intends .Bg5 and

O-O-O.

But 5. . :Wfe7 is playable, and only mildly in White's favour after 6 tDd5 (6 ~g3!? tDf6!) 6 ... 'iVxe3 7 .Bxe3 .Bb4+! S .Bd2 (S 'it>dl .Bd6! has done all right in a few games) S. .. .Bxd2+ 9 ~xd2 'it>dS (D). This position is noteworthy: the pawn-struc- tures are mirror images of each other, both sides have one knight out, and both kings have moved! Black's bad bishop, restricted by the pawn on f5, is analogous to White's on fl, blocked by c4. Of course, White's knight is already on d5, whereas Black will have to work to get his on e4. Play might go 10 tDf3 tDge7 11 g3 d6 12 .Bg2. Here White can reorganize in various ways (for example, tDf4, %:rhdl and 'it>c3) and maintain some pressure. 6 tDh3! Naturally there are other moves. This one keeps both the options of tDg5+ and tDf4 (fur- ther controlling d5) alive. 6  tDf6 (D) w 7 "iVd2!? White both increases control over d5 and gets out of way of ... %:reS. 7 ~d3!? is another way of doing the same thing. 7 ... .Bb4 8 a3 .Bxc3 9 "iNxc3 Now White has the two bishops, so Black should develop quickly and try to play dynami- cally to open things up: 9 . d5

INTRODUCTION TO 2 !Dc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 33

9 ... ltJe4 10 "iVc2 isn't completely clear, but assuming that White can hold the fort for a few moves, the bishops will be a real force in the long run. Again, Black should hurry. A crazy variation is 1O ... d6 11 f3 ltJcs 12 b4 ltJd4 13 "iVc3 "iVf6! (13 ... ltJce6 14 ~b2) 14 bxcSltJxf3+ IS "iVxf3 "iVxal 16 ~dS+ ~f6 (16 ... ~e8 17 'iii>d2! with the idea 17 ... "iVa2+ 18 ~c3) 17 ~d2 dxcS 18 e4! or 18 g4!. Over the board, I wouldn't count upon all this happening! 10 ltJgS+ ~g8 11 cxdSltJxdS 12 ~3 h6 (D) w 13 e4! hxgS 14 exdS?! Not a terrible move, but Shatskes suggested the extremely strong 14 ~c4!; for example, 14 ... l:t.h4!? (14 ... ltJce7 IS exdS grants White a large advantage: IS ... ltJg6! 16 d6+ 'iii>h7 17 dxc7.l::f.e8+ 18 ~fl "VIIixc7 19 ~xgS) IS .i.xdS+ (or here IS O-O ltJd4 16 ~xdS+ 'iii>h8 17 "VIIidl c6 18 g3!) IS ... ~h7 16 ~e3 with O-O-O to come, when White's in charge, since 16 ... f4 17 ~cS does Black no good. All this comes from analysis from over 30 years ago and it seems to hold up in every par- ticular! 14 ... ltJd4 IS ~c4? IS "iVc3 keeps some advantage. IS ... .l::f.h4! Black has the initiative and better game, so we'll stop at this point. The Bishop Sortie 2 ... i.b4

1 c4 eS 2ltJc3 ~b4 (D)

It wasn't that long ago (relative to the history of the English Opening) that 2 ... ~b4 would w have been looked upon as a questionable if not downright weak way for Black to respond to 2 ltJc3. True, the move ... ~b4 is at least an option at some point in many main lines of the 1 c4 eS English, but not before a black knight is devel- oped, and not when the bishop can immedi- ately be attacked by ltJdS! But in the 1990s, the world's elite grandmasters began to play 2 ... ~b4 on a regular basis, such that it became one of the most popular variations of the Eng- lish Opening at the top ranks. Today 2 ... ~b4 is alive and well among grandmasters, and is a line that has to be coped with by most 1 c4 players (those who play 1 c4 eS 2 g3 notably excepted). Clearly, one of Black's plans is to play ... ~xc3, doubling White's pawns. This idea is seen in future chapters after 2 ... ltJf6; for in- stance, 3 g3 .i.b4 or 3 ltJf3 ltJc6 4 g3 (or 4 e3 .i.b4) 4 ... iLb4. Why is Black bypassing 2 ... ltJf6? In a word: flexibility. With a knight on f6, Black can't expand on the kingside by ... fS. Nor can he follow the often-desirable move ... e4 with ... fS, supporting the advanced pawn. Black might want to place the knight on e7, and there are other considerations. For example, in cases where White plays ltJdS and Black responds with ... c6, the advanced knight doesn't have the option of ltJxf6 and will often have to retreat. Looking on the bright side for White, 2 ... ~b4 is a committal move that gives him the opportu- nity to set up pawn-structures that he normally won't be able to. Furthermore, while the obvi- ous 3 ltJdS may eventually lose time, for the moment it attacks the bishop and paves the way for an early d4. A study of 2 ltJc3 iLb4 is extremely useful for the practical player. It can lead to positions

34 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

whose basic pawn-structures and themes are not only the same as in many other English Opening variations, but also very close to what we find in the Nimzo-Indian, Bogo-Indian, and even the King's Indian! Let's look at a series of games to get a feel for what can happen in this rich variation, and as a consequence, what can happen in the main lines of the 1 c4 e5 English. Before investigat- ing the main line with 3 lLld5, we'll look at games with a couple of moderately out-of- favour (although sound) moves, in order to clarify what the main issues are. I should mention that the natural 3 g3 will often transpose to other lines. For instance, 3 ... lLlf6 is the main-line variation 2lLlc3lLlf6 3 g3 iLb4, which is an attractive choice; see Chap- ter 4. Black can also go his own way; for exam- ple, 3 ... iLxc3 4 bxc3 d6 5 iLg2 f5!? when in Hodgson-Psakhis, Metz 1994, White tried the exotic 6 c5!? dxc5 (6 ... d5! seems safe enough, and Bf7lLlf3, 7 ... lLlc6) 7 iLa3lWd6 8 d4! exd4 9 cxd4 lWxd4 10 'iVc1 ! (D).

Here White had a powerful bishop-pair, open lines, and a big lead in development for his two pawns. The c-pawn isn't really defensi- ble in view of 1O ... lLld7 11 iLb2 'iYg4 12 iLf3 lWg6 13 lLlh3! threatening lLlf4. Lau - Mainka Budapest 1990

1 c4 e5 2lLlc3 iLb4 3 e3!? (D)

3  iLxc3! 4 bxc3 Which way to recapture is always a major decision. We'll run across this repeatedly in this

book, so it's worth setting the stage now. Re- capturing towards the centre by 4 bxc3 gives White a valuable extra centre pawn, a factor which should never be underestimated. Never- theless, the resulting pawn-structure has its own drawbacks, especially if Black can exploit the light squares (for example, by ... e4, controlling d3). It's also a bit difficult for White to get his bishops out to productive squares because the centre is congested. The alternative recapture 4 dxc3 has its own pluses and minuses. Again, getting White's bishops out is a key consideration, and the c1- bishop will be served best if White can achieve the e4 advance. Black will generally try to pre- vent this and cramp White's game by 4 ... lLlf6

w Now there can arise varied and instructive situations: a) 5 'iVc2, to cover e4, can be answered nor- mally by 5 ... d6 or aggressively by 5 ... e4; com- pare White's other 5th moves. In fact, 5 ... d5!?

INTRODUCTION TO 2 !Dc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 35

6 cxdS 'iVxdS is also unclear (bishops versus space). b) S i.d3!? e4 6 i.c2 d6 (D). Black's cramping pawn counteracts White's bishop-pair, so White will try to undermine it. Typical play would be 7 ttJe2 O-O 8 ttJg3 flie7. Now White can only free himself by f3, but then there are new weaknesses which compensate Black for White's bishops: 9 f3! exf3 10 'i!Vxf3 ttJc6 11 O-O ttJeS 12 'iVf4 i.d7 and Black's eS outpost makes his position too solid to break down directly, whereas White has some weak squares on the e-file. Probably White should combine e4 and ttJfS, when ... i.xfS levels things. c) Maybe White should insist upon S e4, when Black could simply play S ... d6 or S. .. O-O, leading to a standard type of position in which White's lost tempo of e3-e4 helps Black con- solidate, with an interesting game ahead. Al- ternatively, Black can choose to liquidate by S. .. ttJxe4!? 6 'i!VdS! ttJf6 (6 ... ttJgS!? 7 'i!VxeS+ ttJe6) 7 'ii'xeS+ 'ii'e7 8 'ii'xe7+ <J;xe7. This pro- duces a position in which White's bishops in the open field are a force, all the more so if an endgame arises. In positions with bishops ver- sus knights, the side with the knights should generally try to create outposts for them by means of pawn-breaks, which is not possible here. And although White's pawn-structure is not ideal, it takes a little experience to under- stand that it meshes reasonably well with the bishops. This structure comes up in other open- ings, most famously on the black side of the Ruy Lopez. Having said all that, White's ad- vantage is a limited one. Let's return to the game with 4 bxc3 (D):

4 ... d6 4 ... ttJf6 S d4 (S d3 e4!? 6 dxe4 d6 7 i.d3 O-O leaves White a pawn up, but his c-pawns are weak) S. .. e4!? (in this kind of position, Black often simply defends, reasoning that dS or dxeS only hurts White's pawn-structure; for exam- ple, S. .. ttJc6, and on 6 dS ttJe7 7 d6!? cxd6 8 i.a3, White's undeveloped kingside indicates that Black must have good play after 8 ... dS) 6 cS? (it's instructive that this move, liquidating White's doubled pawns, is usually a mistake, because of a ... b6 response) 6 ... 0-07 ttJe2 b6 8 cxb6 axb6, Cebalo-Barlov, Yugoslav Ch, Budva

1986. Black opens the a-file vis-a-vis White's

isolated a-pawn, and ... b6 allows Black to con- centrate upon light squares with some combi- nation of ... i.a6, ... dS and/or . ..lijc6-aS. The game was disastrous for White, and entertain- ing: 9 ttJg3 dS 10 c4 i.a6 11 ~3 cS 12 dxcS ttJbd7! 13 cxb6 dxc4!? 14 'i!Vb4?! ttJxb6 IS i.a3 l:te8 16 i.e2? ttJbdS 17 'i!Vd6 'i!Va5+ 18 <J;f1 c3 0-1. Black wins a piece and then some. S d4 ttJc6 6 ttJf3 ttJf6 7 i.a3 (D) A seeming advantage of bxc3 over dxc3 is that the bishop can come to the dynamic diag- onal a3-f8. Sometimes this is effective, al- though often that diagonal can be blocked by ... d6 or ... cS. The question is whether White's bishop can find a target, for example by cS and cxd6. 7  e4! 8 ttJd2 O-O 9 i.e2lIe8 10 h3 White is anticipating answering ... i.fS with g4 and perhaps h4. As it happens, Black's bishop is also effective on the other diagonal: 10 b6 11 'iic2 'iVe7 12 O-O i.b7 13lIael!

36 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Preparing f4 by protecting e3. 13  ttJb8! Intending ... ttJbd7. White's pieces are cramped and his queenside pawns are looking increas- ingly stuck, so he correctly grabs some space.

14 f4 exf3 IS iLxf3 iLxf3 16 .l::!.xf3 ttJe4

Black wins the outpost. White gets it back, but at the cost of further simplification and ex- posure of his other weakness on c4: 17 :!.f4! ttJxd2 18 ~xd2 ttJc6! 19 'iHd3l'!ad8 20 ~f1 f6 (D) w This move both restrains White's mobile pawn-centre and clears a square for the queen. Black has no need to open the position because he already has a weak point on c4 to focus on.

21 e4 "Wif7 22 .l::!.fS ttJaS 23 dS

Now c4 is protected, but White's pawns are immobile, including the backward e-pawn along the open file. Furthermore, e5 is a wonderful outpost, whereas if White's bishop strays, Black might put a knight on the other outpost on c5. 23  :!.d7 24 iLb4 ttJb7 2S g4! Correctly trying to disturb things with g5 be- fore Black puts him utterly on the defensive. 2S . .l::.de7 26 ~f4 .l::.eS 27 h4 'iWd7 28 .l::.e3 ttJd8!? (D) The knight heads for f7. 28 .. :~a4! is also good. w 29 gS? .l::!.xfS?! A decisive tactic was available in 29 .. .fxg5 30 hxg5 ~xf5! 31 exf5 .l::!.xe3 with material and a killing position. The opening themes have ex- tended well into the middlegame. Now I'll sim- ply show the moves; notice how the occupation of the e5 outpost becomes decisive in the end: 30 exfS:!'xe3 31 'iWxe3 fxgS 32 ~xgS ttJf7 33 ~e3 ttJeS 34 cS bxcS 3S iLxcs ~xfS 36 iLxa7 Wib1 + 37 ~g2 'iVxa2+ 38 ~g3 WixdS 39 iLd4 cS 0-1 Krasenkov - Kiselev USSR Ch semi-final, Moscow 1989

1 c4 eS 2 ttJc3 iLb4 3 'iVb3 ttJc6 4 e3!?

[diagram]
INTRODUCTION TO 2 tDc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 37

and Black prevents castling while controlling the light squares; l3 ... fS will come almost re- gardless of White's move, with a real advan- tage. S. .. ..txc3 6 "iVxc3 (D) This position could also have arisen by the move-order 2lbc3 lbf6 3 e3 ..tb4 4 ~c2lbc6 S a3 ..txc3 6 "iixc3. White has the two bishops, but has invested time in their acquisition.

6 ... O-O

Black can try to take the initiative immedi- ately by 6 ... dS. White best responds with 7 cxdS, opening a path for his king' s bishop (oth- erwise, ... d4 will disturb his development still further). Then we have an important type of po- sition closely resembling a Sicilian Defence in reverse, but where White has two bishops and Black an extra knight. Both recaptures have their own justification: a) 7 ... lbxdS 8 "iic2 (D) is a TaimanovlKan Sicilian without Black's f8-bishop and White's bl-knight.

That is, the Sicilian Defence line goes 1 e4 cS 2lbf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4lbxd4 a6 Slbc3 "fiIc7. In the English Opening position, whom does this trade-off favour? It's a difficult question, because White has the bishop-pair and Black is able to castle very quickly. Notice that the f8- bishop would be Black's 'bad' bishop, which would tend to get stuck on the passive square e7, or be blocked by the e-pawn on f6 or d6. For White's part, he has a central pawn-majority, and the usual fortification versus attack that the TaimanovlPaulsen variations afford (Black's knights are limited by the pawns on e3 and a3). He can also launch his minority attack (b4) quickly without a knight on the queenside get- ting in the way. You could play either side of this unique position. b) Katrein-Sherzer, Philadelphia 1990 went 7 .. :~xdS!? 8 b4 (White expands and inciden- tally prevents ... lbaS-b3) 8 ... O-O 9 ..tb2 .l:Ie8! (D) (now bS can be answered by ... lbd4!). w 10 lbf3 ..tg4! 11 ..tc4 ~d7 12 ..tbS!? lbe4, and here instead of 13 ..txc6?, ceding the light squares, 13 "fiIc2! ..txf3 14 gxf3lbgS IS O-O-O lbxf3 16 h4! has the idea 17 ~e4. There might follow 16 .. Jbd8 17 ..te2! e4 18 d3 with com- plications in which White has open lines and some advantage.

[diagram]
lbd4! (D) A standard piece sacrifice that rips open lines against White's king. The same idea fre- quently occurs in the Sicilian Defence. 11 exd4 exd4+ 12 lbe2 ~f6 Black threatens ... d3. 13 d3?!

38 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Better is 13 ..tb2! ..tfS (13 ... lDf4 14 d3 a6)

14 d3 cS!? and Black has an attack, but nothing

definite (1S bxc6 is answered by IS .. JIac8). 13. ..tg4 14 f3 ..txf3! IS gxf3 'iWh4+ 16 'it>d2 Even two pieces ahead, White's position is dubious; the twin ideas of ... lDc3 and ... lDe3 are particularly irritating. We're well out of the opening and the play became error-ridden, so I'll stop here. IIIescas - Sisniega Novi Sad Olympiad 1990

[diagram]
Instead, 4 ... lDc6 S e4 d6 6 ..td3 introduces an alternative scheme in which the bishop is more ambitiously placed than on g2. White tries to get a head-start with his kingside action. One exam- ple went 6 ... lDge7!? 7 lDh4! (White prevents ... fS, and prepares lDfS at the right moment) 7 ... O-O 8 'iWf3 'iWe8 9 ..te3 b6! (Black plays to stop cS, which would extend the range of both white bishops) 10 lDfS lDd8!? 11 h4 lDe6 12 'iWg4 'it>h8 13 O-O-O f6 14 g3 ~f7 IS hSlDcs 16 ..tc2 ..te6 17 b3 a5 18 a4, Milov-Supatashvili, European Ch, Baturni 2002. White has success- fully prevented any action by Black, but it's not clear how he can make progress either. S e4 b6 6 g3!? (D) This safe move can't be wholly bad, but White's bishop is too passively placed to fight for a real advantage. 6 ..td3 would resemble the last note. 6 .. ..tb7 6 ... lDf6 7 'iWe2 ..tb7 seeks to prevent White from playing lDh4. Then 8 ..tg2!? ..txe4!? 9

lDxeS 'iWe7 10 ..txe4 lDxe4 11 'ili'xe4 ~xeS 12 'iWxeS+ dxeS leaves White with an immobile queenside, somewhat offset by his bishop- versus-knight advantage. It's probably about equal. 7 "iVe2lDd7 8 ..tg2lDe7!? Black arranges his pieces to render lDh4 in- effective (fS is covered) and keep .. .fS in re- serve. The obvious alternative is 8 ... lDgf6 9 lDd2 (9lDh4!?) 9 ... O-O (9 ... a6 with the idea ... bS is fully playable) 10 O-O as 11 b3lDcs. Then the position is only a tempo away from the much- played Sicilian line 1 e4 cS 2 lDf3 lDc6 3 ..tbS g64 O-O ..tg7 S ..txc6 dxc6 6 d3 eS 7lDbd2 'fiIe7

8 b3 lDf6 9 ..tb2lDd7 (9 ... lDhS!?) 10 a4, which

is roughly equal with either colour. 90-00-010 b4 as! 11 a3 'fiIe8!? 12lDh4 fS! 13lDxfSlDxfS 14 exfS ..txg21S 'it>xg2 ::'xfSl6 'iWe4! (D)

Black has the better long-term pawn-struc- ture, so White tries to scare up play on the weak light squares.

INTRODUCTION TO 2 !Dc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 39

16 ... l:!.f717 ~c6l:!.a7!? 17 ... ttJf6 18 '(i'xe8+ l:!.xe8 is natural and the- oretically a touch better for Black, although without outposts for his knight it's hard to do any damage. 18 c5!? dxc5 19 bxc5l:!.f6 20 ~d5+ ~f7 21 ~xf7 + <3;;xf7 22 cxb6 cxb6 liz_liz Black decides that his advantage is too small to pursue. A logical game with clear-cut posi- tional themes. Now let's return to the most popular move after 1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 ~b4, namely: 3 ttJd5 (D) This has the obvious point of attacking the bishop to gain a tempo.

Our main games will involve the moves 3 ... ~c5 and 3 ... ~e7. Black has several alterna- tives, a few of which are perfectly playable; for example: a) The English Opening can support some strange ideas; for example, 3 ... ttJa6!? (retaining the idea of ... c6) 4 a3 (4 ttJxb4 ttJxb4 5 a3 ttJc6 is one of those many positions in which White's two bishops are neutralized by Black's quicker development, with a likely ... ttJf6 and ... d5 to come) 4 ... ~aS!? 5 b4 c6 6 ttJc3! ~c7 7 d4!. R. Cook-H. Williamson, correspondence game

2004. Black should probably accept a space dis-

advantage by 7 ... ttJe7, since 7 ... d5?! 8 cxd5 cxd5 9 dxe5 ~xe5 10 ~b2 followed by ttJf3 and e3 (or even e4) leaves him with a bad isolated pawn. b) 3 ... ~a5 is in disrepute at the moment, al- though I'm not sure that it can't be reinvigo- rated. At any rate, the established games seem to show how the two bishops can outweigh other factors if they're just given a little time; for example, 4 b4 c6 5 bxaS cxd5 6 cxd5 'iYxaS

7 e4 (7 'i!Bb3 has also had success, supporting

.i.a3 and in some cases planning ~g3) 7 ... ttJf6 8 i..d3!? (to get castled quickly) 8 ... ttJa6 9 f3 d6 10 .i.b2 ttJc5 11 .i.c2 ~d7 12 a4 O-O 13 ttJe2 .l:Iac8 14 ~c3 'iWa6 15 d4 exd4 16 .i.xd4 ~a5+, Lautier-Kotronias, Khalkidhiki 1992, and now 17 ~d2! ~xd2+ 18 <3;;xd2 (D) was probably the right way to go.

Then White enjoys a standard advantage with two bishops and space. Although Black has a fine outpost on c5 which should not be dis- counted, he can't easily coordinate to play ... ttJfd7 in the near future. Meanwhile, White can put great pressure on the queenside by ttJc3, ~fbl and in some cases a5. In addition, he has better prospects in the centre and can even expand on the kingside at some point should it come to that, in order to open a second front. Poldauf - Kasimdzhanov European Clubs Cup, Rethymnon 2003

1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 ~b4 3 ttJd5 i..c5 (D)

No mystery here: Black puts his bishop on a natural square and prepares ... c6. 4 ttJf3 The obvious 4 b4leads to a variety of unique positions; for example, 4 ... i..d4 (4 ... .i.f8!? is also played - the third move with the bishop and it's back home! The idea is ... c6, of course, getting the tempo back while attacking b4) 5 l:tbl c6 6 e3 cxd5 7 exd4, and now the clever 7 ... d6!? is a suggestion by Karolyi. Then White has to abstain from excessive materialism; e.g.,

40 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w 8 cxdS lbf6 9 ..ltb2 O-O 10 ..ltc4 lbbd7 11 ~3 lbb6 12 d3 ..ltfS, when Black has more than equalized. Although White can hardly stand worse at move 8, Black's central presence gives him a good share of the play. 4  e4!? This is the most critical move. The primary alternative is 4 ... c6 slbc3; for example, S. . :f1e7, when White should strike in the centre by either

[diagram]
d4 exd4 7 lbxd4 d6 8 g3 (or 8 ..ltf4, with per- haps a small pull based upon greater control of space) 8 ... lbf6 9 ..ltg2. White's position is pref- erable, but only just so. 5lbg5! This leads to some craziness. Similarly in- triguing structural issues arise from S d4..ltf8!? 6 lbd2 c6 7 lbc3 dS 8 e3 (D) with a kind of re- versed French Defence, a combination of the Tarrasch and Advance Variations!

By comparison with the Advance French, White is well ahead on time, but the knight on d2 isn't as effective as one posted on f4 (by way of e2 or h3), as happens in that line. Also, Black's knight on b8 is arguably better-placed than it would be on d7 (as is the case in the Tarrasch French). So White will probably exert pressure the centre by means of f3, with unclear consequences. 5  e3!? (D) This exotic interference move looks like the best one! Instead, S. . Ji'xgS?! 6 d4 is not what Black wants, nor is S ... c6 6lbxe4. Finally, after S .. .fS 6 d4 ..lte7 7 ..ltf4 lba6, White has the clever idea 8 e3 ..ltxgS?! 9 'ii'hS+ g6 10 ~xgS with a genuine bishop-pair advantage. It's curi- ous that the same idea occurs in the Philidor Defence, which begins 1 e4 eS 2 lbf3 d6! w 6d4 6lbh3 exf2+ 7lbxf2 ..ltxf2+ 8 ~xf2 would be an interesting alternative. 6 . exf2+ 7 ~xf2 ..lte7 8lbxe7 Wixe7 9 e4 d6 10 b3?! An error in an instructive middlegame situa- tion. More logical is 10 ..ltd3! lbc6 11 ..ltc2!? (lllbf3 ..ltg412 ..lte3) 11...lbf6 (D). This is Lautier-Kramnik, Cannes 1993. Be- cause of the idea of ., .h6 followed by ... i.g4, the best move is 12 h3!, when White has space and the bishops. If he can consolidate by ne1 and lbf3, which seems likely, he will stand better. 10 .. lbc6 lllbf3 f6? Trying to restrain the bishops and lock the position. But with the knights, you need the ini- tiative, development, and, hopefully, outposts. Black should move fast by 11...lbf6! 12 ..ltd3 lbg4+ 13 ~el (not 13 'it>gl? lbxd4! with the

INTRODUCTION TO 2 tiJc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 41

w idea 14 lbxd4 'iff6) 13 ... O-O 14 ~e2 .tIe8. In this case, White is overextended; for example,

15 h3 f5! 16 exf5 .lixf5! 17 ~xe7 nxe7+ 18

~d2lbf2 19 .lixf5lbxhl 20 d5lbg3!. 12 .lid3 'iff7 13l:tn lbge7 14 ~gl White keeps the bishop-pair and centre. Al- ready this is a near-winning advantage. 14  JWhSlS a3 White should play the conventional central- izing move 15 .lie3!, since it gives him time for 'tlYd2, connecting rooks. IS ... O-O 16 b4 (D) Again, 16 .lie3 secures a comfortable advan- tage. The following moves are irrelevant to the opening, but White's 25th move is typical and noteworthy:

16 .. a6 17 l:ta2! 'ife8 18 l:te2 lbg6 19 'ifel .lid7 20 ~g3 lbce7 21 l:tfell:td8 22 .lib2 .lie6

23 h4 hS 24l:te3 b6 2S cS! bxcS 26 bxcS dxcS

27 dS. The point. Both of White's bishops are acti- vated. 27 ... .lig4 28 'ifxc7 .lixf3 Now 29 l:txf3! was very strong, because af- ter 29 ... lbxh4 30 l:th3 lbeg6 31 .lic4, Black can hardly move. w Poldauf - Timman Bundesliga 2006f7

1 c4 eS 2 lbc3 .lib4 3 lbdS .lie7 ( D)

Here Black takes a modem approach to the position, voluntarily giving up the bishop-pair without apparent compensation! But on closer examination, we find a concrete explanation. Let's assume that White captures the bishop, as he normally will on one of the next few moves. This means that three moves of the knight have been consumed to capture a bishop that has moved twice. And if Black recaptures with his queen, he is another piece ahead in develop- ment - notice that it is practically unassailable on e7, so the problems associated with getting a queen out too early don't apply here. More im- portantly, White has no easy way to get his kingside pieces out without subjecting them to attack (lbf3 is met by ... e4), so he can quickly get a cramped position. Black, on the other hand, is just two moves away from castling, and can play for ... d5. Of course, we needn't feel sorry for White, either. After all, many a master has made a liv- ing off using the bishop-pair. Notice too that, as yet, Black has no outposts for his knights. The trade-offs are similar to some lines of the Bogo-Indian and the Nimzo-Indian, in which Black gets ahead in development but White gains the bishop-pair without conceding any

42 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

weaknesses. Two standard examples after 1 d4 7 . l:tdS! SltJe2 dS 9 cxdSltJxdSl0 a3 (D) ltJf6 2 c4 e6 are 3ltJf3 .tb4+ 4ltJbd2 O-O 5 a3 .txd2+ and 3 ltJc3 .tb4 4 'iVc2 O-O 5 a3 .txc3+ 6 ~xc3.

4~ B

White wants to control e4 and d5 from g2. 4 ltJf3 is a perfectly good move that I won't treat independently. 4  ltJf6 S ltJxe7 Oddly enough, winning the bishop-pair makes White's life a bit difficult, because once the slow move g3 is in, White will have trouble get- ting his gl-knight out. Instead, White can catch up in development by 5 .tg2 O-O 6ltJf3; never- theless, Black experiences few problems follow- ing 6 ... ltJxd5 7 cxd5 d6 and ... c6 ( .. .f5 is another idea). Equality is the logical result of 4 g3. S. . ~xe7 6 .tg2 O-O (D) w A recurring situation: two bishops versus development and a stronger central presence. How does White get castled? 7 e3? Preparing ltJe2, yet it creates weaknesses on the squares d3 and f3. a) The problem is that 7 ltJf3 e4 gives Black the initiative and central play following 8 ltJg5 (after 8 ltJd4? 'iVc5 Black wins the c-pawn) 8 ... d5! 9 cxd5 h6 10 ltJh3 ltJxd5 11 O-O ltJc6. b) 7 d3! looks correct, when it's consistent for Black to strike in the centre; for example, 7 ... c6 (7 ... l':!.d8 8 ltJf3 d5 9 cxd5 ltJxd5 10 O-O ltJc6 is also about equal due to Black's greater command over the centre) 8 ltJf3 (or 8 .tg5 h6 9 .txf6 ~xf6 10 ltJf3 d5) 8 ... d5 9 .tg5 (9 O-O?! dxc4! 10 dxc4 e4 is awkward for White) 9 ... h6 10 .txf6 ~xf6 and the game is level. White feels compelled to stop ... ltJb4; this comes at the cost of another tempo and a weak light square on b3. 10  ltJc6 11 O-O e4! 12 'iVc2 .tg4 13ltJc3 White's position is inferior, and he should accept a small disadvantage by liquidating the cramping e-pawn with 13 f3 exf3 14.txf3. 13.. ltJxc3 14 dxc3 Instead, 14 bxc3? .te2 15 l:tel .td3 is very ugly. After 14 dxc3, Black should play 14 ... .tf5! and maintain his bind. Instead, there followed 14 ... .tf3 15 .txf3 exf3 16 'iVf5! ltJe5 17 e4 with some counterplay. Cu. Hansen - I. Sokolov Groningen 1995

[diagram]
This is the most ambitious and consistent move, grabbing space and preventing ... e4, which might otherwise be a problem. S  ltJf6 Black develops as quickly as possible and forces the pace. 5 ... c6!? 6ltJxe7 'iVxe7 (D) is thought to be inferior, perhaps incorrectly. Now White should stay away from 7ltJf3?! ltJf6 8 .td3 exd4 9 ltJxd4 d5!. Likewise, 7 dxe5?! dxe5 is not to be recommended, as Black's d4 outpost is a more important posi- tional factor than any other on the board. Black is happy to be rid of his bad bishop, and even more so to retain both knights in order to ensure occupation of that square. And 7 d5 f5! is in the spirit of 2 ... .tb4, opening lines before White catches up in development.

INTRODUCTION TO 2 0,c3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 43

w With those ideas in mind, the recommended course for White is 7 tDe2!. Nevertheless, Black should be able to get a playable game with 7 ... tDf6 8 tDc3! (after 8 f3 dS! 9 dxeS 'iVxeS 10 1Bc2!? dxe4 11 .ltf41ifS!? 12 O-O-O O-O Black was developing smoothly in Smirin-Stisis, Israel 1999) 8 ... tDa6!? 9 dS (upon 9 .ltgS, 9 ... exd4 10 1Bxd4 1ieS! looks best) 9 ... tDcS 10 1Bc2 as 11 .lte2 O-O 12 O-O .ltd7, and White may have a slight edge because of his bishop-pair and space, although that's not clear, because Black has dy- namic possibilities on the queenside involving ... cxdS, ... J:::.fc8 and/or ... bS, as in the King's In- dian Defence. 6 tDxe7 "ilixe7 Black has given up his dark-squared bishop and retained his 'good' one, blockading with the ... d6/ ... eS pawn-structure. This is also common in the Nimzo-Indian and Bogo-Indian varia- tions that I referred to above, but in those cases the e-pawn takes two moves to travel to eS ( ... e6-eS). 7 f3! (D)

There arises a clash of fundamental strate- gies. White leaves himself completely undevel- oped but seeks to limit Black's counterplay. 7  exd4!? In response, Black tries to force the pace and create favourable spots for his knights. We'll see 7 ... tDhS in the next game. 8 'iVxd4 tDc6 9 'iVc3 O-O (D) w Current theory likes White in this line, and the main game is a fine illustration of White's strategy in these positions. However, the notes will show that Black's dynamic resources are underrated.

10.lte3

White develops and prepares to consolidate by O-O-O. a) 10 tDe2 has also been successful, al- though Black can play for ... fS in a number of ways; for example, 1O ... tDhS (1O ... tDe81?) 11 g4!? (to stop ... fS) 1l...~h4+ 12 ~dl tDf6, as in Lali6-Shirov, Moscow Olympiad 1994, isn't easy to assess, but with ... .lte6 and ... tDeS on the cards, Black should come out all right. b) Karpov gives 10 .ltgS Ite8!? 11 ~d2, but then ll...h6 effectively wins if White plays 12 i.e3? tDxe4! 13 fxe4 'iVxe4 14 ~f2 ~h4+ IS g3 ~f6+ or 12 .lth4? tDxe4!, so White should go for equality by means of 12 .ltxf6.

10. . l:te8?!

This puts a rook on an open file, but does lit- tle to break down White's dominating centre. 1O ... tDe8! with the idea .. .fS is better. Play might continue 11 O-O-O (11 g4? is a mistake because of 1l....ltxg4! intending 12fxg4? ~xe4) 11...fS 12 exfS .ltxfS 13 tDe2, when 13 ... a5 14 a3! tDf6! has the idea of ... tDb4!? or simply .. J1ae8.

44 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

A duller but sound line is 13 ... tLlb4!? 14 'iVxb4 'it'xe3+ 15 'iVd2 'iVb6!? 11 tLle2 tLleS 12 tLlf4?! Technically, 12 O-O-O should preface this move, transposing after 12 ... tLlg6 13 tLlf4. 12. tLlg6?! Missing his chance for 12 ... tLleg4!, although even that's not clear if White declines the sacri- fice by 13 i.d2.

13 O-O-O tLlxf4 14 i.xf4 a6 IS h4!

The usual space-grab, and beginning of a pawn assault. IS  i.e6 16 g4! tLld7 17 gS bS 18 hS ~f8?

19 h6 g6 20 l:!.xd6!

This tactical shot crowns White's model strategy. 20  b4 After 20 ... cxd6??, 21 i.xd6 wins the queen. 21 ~d4l:!.ad8 At this point, instead of 22 l:!.xd7?, White had 22 l:!.xa6! tLlc5 23 'iVf6, with two extra pawns as well as the better position. A. Ledger - Hebden Hastings (open) 199415

[diagram]
tLlf6 6 tLlxe7 'it'xe7 7 f3 tLlhS!? (D) w Another forcing move; Black's initial idea is ... 'iVh4+, and ... f5 is also in the air. 8 i.e3 8 tLle2 isn't played as much, perhaps due to 8 ... exd4 (8 ... O-O 9 d5 f5!? 10 exf5 i.xf5 11 g4!? e4!? occurred in a blitz game Marin-Christi- ansen, 2001; the sacrifice appears to be sound) 9 'iVxd4 tLlc6 10 'iVd2 f5. Black is breaking down White's main asset, his broad centre, and 11 exf5 tLle5! is effective.

8 . O-O!?

If he wants to prevent d5, Black can play 8 ... exd4 9 'iVxd4 (9 i.xd4 f5 with ... tLlc6 to fol- low) 9 ... tLlc6, trying to bring about dynamic complications. Then White's best move is 10 'iVc3 (D).

Theory has looked down upon 8 ... exd4 be- cause of the game Smirin-Lehner, Vienna 1998, which went 1O .. :iVe5 11 tLle2 i.d7 120-0-00-0 13 g4! tLlf6 14 h4, launching a kingside ad- vance. However, Black could keep developing by 1O ... O-O! and if 11 g4?! (versus .. .f5, but it's too slow), then 11...i.xg4! 12 fxg4 tLlf6 with a very strong attack. The critical move is 11 O-O-O, when a sample line is 11...a5!? (or 11...f5 12 exf5 z:txf5!, when 13 g4l:!.e5 14 i.d2 tLlf6 15 i..d3 a5! is unclear) 12 a3! (12 g4 i.xg4! 13 fxg4 tLlb4!) 12 ... f5 13 exf5 i.xf5?! (better is 13 ... l:!.e8 or 13 ... l:!.xf5!? 14 g4l:!.e5) 14 g4l:!.fe8 15 <at>d2! (15 i.f2 tLlb4!) 15 ... i.xg4 16 fxg4 'it'e4 17 gxh5 'iVxh 1 18 h6, and White's bishops look good. As a whole, however, this line holds some promise for Black. Let's return to 8 ... O-O (D). 9dS! This is the main challenge to 7 ... tLlh5 8 i.e3 O-O. Lautier-Shirov, Las Palmas 1994 went 9 tLle2!? f5 10 exf5 exd4! 11 'iVxd4 (11 i.xd4 i.xf5 12 g4 c5! 13 i..f2 i.xg4! 14 fxg4 tLlf4 with an attack) l1...tLlc6 12 'iVd2 i.xf5 13 O-O-O 1:tae8 14 i.g5 Wif7 15 g4!? tLle5 with complica- tions. 9 ... fS

INTRODUCTION TO 2 tiJc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 45

w Black can also work up counterplay by at- tacking the front of the pawn-chain with 9 ... c6, a common idea in this pawn-structure. By soft- ening up White's centre and opening up some lines, Black both discourages O-O-O and gains new opportunities; for example, 10 ~d2 (one idea after 10 ttJe2 cxdS 11 cxdS!? is l1...fS 12 exfS .i.xfS 13 g4 e4 14 gxfS exf3 IS 'iVd4 :e8) 1O ... cxdS 11 cxdS (11 'iVxdS ttJc6! 12 O-O-O .Be6! intends 13 'iVxd6? 'iVf6 14 'iVa3 .:1fd8 ex- ploiting White's poor development; better is 13 'iVd2 .:1ac8 14 '>itb1 fS IS exfS .i.xfS+ 16 '>ita1 ttJf6 with chances for both sides) 11 .. .fS!. Black's idea is 12 exfS .i.xfS 13 g4? .i.xg4! 14 fxg4 'iVh4+ IS .i.f2 'iVxg4 and White is hard- pressed to defend. 10 exfS ttJf411 g4 bS! (D) 12 cxbS .i.b7 13 .i.c4 Here the game continued 13 ... ttJd7 (prepar- ing ... ttJb6) 14 ttJe2!? (White might have pre- vented ... ttJg2+ by 14 'iVc2 orby 14 .i.xf4 exf4+ IS 'iVe2) 14 ... ttJg2+ IS 'it>f2 ttJxe3 16 'it>xe3, and now 16 ... ttJb6! would have given Black reasonable compensation for the pawn. The moves ... g6, to open the f-file, ... e4, and ... a6, to open queenside lines, are all in the air. A more accurate move-order for Black may be 13 ... ttJg2+ 14 '>itf2 ttJxe3 IS 'it;>xe3 ttJd7! with the idea ... ttJb6, dodging White's 14th- move options. At any rate, Black seems to have sufficient opportunity for dynamic play. As far as the opening is concerned, I don't see why Black shouldn't be happy with either 7 ... exd4 or 7 ... ttJhS (if only because of 8 .i.e3 exd4), both promising a balanced game. On the other hand, White has a spatial edge and excel- lent long-term prospects if he can control the position. This variation is concrete and tactical enough that variation-specific preparation is strongly recommended. The Ultra-Flexible 2 ... d6: Introduction

1 c4 eS 2 ttJc3 d6 (D)

w This modest move is very popular with expe- rienced players because it is so adaptable. That is, Black doesn't commit a knight and can still opt for systems with fundamentally different pawn-structures. For one thing, he can choose between ... ttJc6 and a move of the c-pawn ( ... c6 or ... cS). Similarly, he can set up with ... fS and ... ttJf6, or ... fS and ... ttJe7, or ... ttJf6 alone, or else ... ttJe7 alone. Those choices can be mixed with ... .i.e7 or a fianchetto ( ... g6 and ... .i.g7),

46 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

and so forth. In general, Black can switch strate- gies in response to White's own piece deploy- ments, rather than embark upon a single-minded course. Thus 2 ... d6 is a typically modem approach to the opening phase of the game. It limits White's ability to impose his choice of set-ups upon the position. On the other hand, 2 ... d6 has the obvious disadvantage of blocking in Black's bishop. Furthermore, since any such noncom- mittal move by Black also increases White's options, White can continuously adapt to his opponent's strategies. To begin with, White's main choices are 3 d4, 3 12Jf3 and 3 g3. I'll concentrate upon particularly distinctive lines arising from the first two moves, since so many continuations after 3 g3 (D) either trans- pose or closely resemble other systems in this book.

For example, 3 ... l2Jc6 4 i.g2 g6 Sl2Jf3 i.g7 is a Closed English (Chapter 6), and 3 ... l2Jf6 4 i.g2 (4 d4 exd4 S ~xd412Jc6 is a version of the main line 3 d4 below) 4 ... g6 S 12Jf3 (or S e4) leads to King's Indian variations that we'll be examining in Chapter 12. The fairly popular 3 ... fS either transposes to another variation or produces a type of ... fS po- sition to which I'm devoting plenty of space elsewhere. But I should mention that 3 ... fS can be met by the challenging 4 d4, when Black has various options; for example, 4 ... e4 (4 ... i.e7!? makes sense, challenging White to enter into the ending after S dxeS dxeS 6 ~xd8+ i.xd8; this is fascinating and hardly explored - proba- bly 7 e4!? is critical) S f3 12Jf6 (sometimes S. .. exf3 is played, followed by ... l2Jf6 and per- haps ... g6; that may be preferable) 6 i.g2 (6 fxe4!?) 6 ... exf3 712Jxf3. In this position, White has broken down Black's centre and probably holds some advantage in spite of his own weak- nesses on the e-file. Many other unique lines are possible after 3 g3; for example, 3 ... i.e6 4 i.g2 (or412Jf3, with the idea 4 ... i.xc4 S ~a4+ or 4 ... c6 S d4!) 4 ... c6 (4 ... l2Jc6 is a line from the Closed English in Chapter 6) S d3 (S b3 allows S ... dS!) S ... l2Jf6 6 12Jf3 i.e7 7 O-O O-O 8 b3, thinking about d4 and/or e4. Not surprisingly, there are many other ways for the players to come to an agreement upon a mutually acceptable position. Active Lines with 3 d4

3 d4 exd4 4 ~xd4 (D)

This is a very ambitious variation, and at the same time a risky one. White's basic idea is al- ways to control dS, thus preventing Black's freeing move ... dS. His command of the d-file should help him in that regard. White also de- velops a piece; that may seem a bit trivial, since Black can attack the queen by ... l2Jc6, but the net effect varies from case to case. In fact, we have already seen several exam- ples of playing d4, and after ... exd4, recaptur- ing by ~xd4. Let's compare some positions arising in the first few moves by using this framework of advantages and disadvantages: a) An example in which White gets the best of both worlds is 1 c4 eS 2 12Jc3 c6 3 d4 exd4 4 ~xd4 (incidentally preventing ... dS). Even then,

INTRODUCTION TO 2 tiJc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 47

the queen may eventually be exposed to attack, but not before it has had time to arrange an opti- mal escape. b) 1 c4 e5 2 d4?! exd4 3 'ilVxd4?! liJc6 was examined in Chapter 2. After White's queen re- treats and Black's next move (normally ... liJf6), Black will already have two minor pieces out, and in addition, ... d5 will be easy to enforce. c) In this chapter, we saw 1 c4 e5 2liJc3 f5 3 d4 exd4 4 'ili'xd4 liJc6. There .. .f5 is a non- developing move which even creates the poten- tial for certain weaknesses (e6, for example), so it looks as though White has the better of the bargain. Indeed, we looked at 5 ~e3+, which is promising, although hardly decisive, for White. At least the move ... f5 controls e4 and adds force to the idea of ... liJf6-e4. Let's return to our main position after 2liJc3 d6 3 d4 exd4 4 'ili'xd4. Here the situation isn't so one-sided. Black gains a tempo with 4 ... liJc6, but the move 2 ... d6 is not entirely positive for him, since it restricts the f8-bishop and effec- tively concedes control of the vital d5-square for the time being. On the other hand ... d6 opens a line for the c8-bishop and directly con- trols a central square (e5). Thus Black gains a modest edge in development, which can quickly grow as White tries to get his pieces out. In the end, White control of territory (in particular his control of d5 along an open file) competes with Black's activity (stemming from his develop- ment), and that's why so many grandmasters have chosen to play this variation from one side or the other. Let's turn to games: Ruban - Miles Belgrade 1988

1 c4 e5 2liJc3 d6 3 d4 exd4 4 ~xd4liJf6 (D)

As opposed to 4 ... liJc6, with the obvious gain oftempo, 4 ... liJf6!? has a more subtle idea: to leave the queen on d4, subject to later attack on the long diagonal following ... g6 and ... i..g7, all the while keeping open the options of ... c6 and ... liJbd7. 5b3

5 e4 is a reasonable option, with the idea

5 ... g6 (5 ... liJc6) 6 f3 i..g7 7 i..e3!? followed by ~d2 with a unique set-up. The best-known al- ternative is 5 g3. Then 5 ... g6?! 6 i..g2 (6 ~e3+ w 'iUe7!?) 6 ... i..g7 7 'ilVe3+ is a bit awkward to meet, as in Kasparov-Short, Barcelona 1989; nevertheless, 5 ... liJc6 6 'iUd2 i..e6 is one of Black's more comfortable versions of the main line, that is, 4 ... liJc6 5 'iUd2liJf6 6 g3 i..e6 be- low. 5  g6 (D) w 6i..b2 After 6liJd5 i..g7 7 i..g5 liJbd7 8 'iUe3+ ~f8 (or the transposition 6 i..g5 i..g7 7liJd5liJbd7 8 'iUe3+ ~f8), Black is left ahead in development and ready to play ... c6, and/or castle by hand with ... h6 followed by ... ~g8-h7. The next moves are natural ones: 6 . i..g7 7 g3 O-O 8 i..g2liJbd7! 9 liJf3liJc5 10 'ilVd2 a5 11 liJd4 l:r.e8 12 O-O c6 13 I!abl ~e714 a3 h5! (D) This complex and dynamic position is very close to a normal King's Indian Defence. In fact, every black piece and pawn are on pre- cisely the same squares that they go to in some main g3 variations of the KID, except that in

48 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w the King's Indian line, White's advance e4 or e3 has usually occurred. Here White's centre is The point is 27 ltJfl ':'xfl + 28 'it'xfl 'iVaI +. Black's active pieces allowed him to sustain an initiative throughout. Naturally a line such as this contains dangers for both sides. Much as in similar King's Indian positions, White faces practical difficulties due to Black's many dynamic ideas, whilst Black risks being stifled and ultimately overrun. K. Jovanovic - Zatulovskaya Women's Zonal, Menorca 1973

1 c4 eS 2ltJc3 d6 3 d4 exd4 4 'iVxd4ltJc6 (D)

better protected and his kingside has fewer holes W than in the King's Indian. With 14 ... hS, Black wants to weaken White's kingside protection by ... h4, and there's little White can do about that. So he tries to achieve some simplification: IS'iVc2 White is fighting for e4, but he's starting to lose time. IS ':'bdl! is a solid move. IS . M 16 b4 axb4 17 axb4ltJce4 18 ltJxe4 ltJxe419ltJf3?! h3! 20 i.hl i.fS 21 'tWb3 (D)

21  ltJxf2! 22 .l:txf2 Best. White loses after 22 i.xg7 ltJxhi 23 ~b2ltJxg3! 24 hxg3 'tWe3+, and there's really no good defence; for example, 2S ':'f2 h2+ 26 ltJxh2 ~xg3+ 27 ':'g2 ~e3+ 28 :tf2 i.xbl. 22  i.xbl 23 i.xg7 <l;xg7 24 'tWxbl ~f6 2S ltJd2 'ilVd4 26 ~d3?? But 26ltJb3 iVxc4 27 ~b2+ lleS clearly fa- vours Black. 26 . .11al + 0-1 This is the obvious and most accepted move. SiVd2 a) White actually loses time after S 'iVe3+ ?!, in part because his c-pawn is a target (a recur- ring theme): S. .. ltJge7 (S ... i.e7 6ltJdS i.e6 has also been played with success) 6 ltJdS ltJeS 7 ~c3 c6!? (or 7 ... ltJxdS) 8 ltJe3 ltJ7g6 9 ltJf3, Uhlmann-Lukin, Leningrad 1984, and now Black stands better after 9 ... i.e7. b) S'ilVdI!? is played sometimes, even though it doesn't support the manoeuvre b3 and i.b2. The idea is S. .. g6 6 ltJf3 i.g7 7 i.gS, when Black often plays 7 ... ltJge7 or 7 .. .f6. But I don't see why 7 ... ltJf6 (D) shouldn't keep the balance more easily. For example, 8 e4 (8 ltJdS?! h6 and here 9 i.h4 gS 10 i.g3 ltJe4 or 9 i.xf6 i.xf6 with the idea 10 ltJxf6+?! ~xf6 and White is on the de- fensive) 8 ... h6 9 i.d2!? (9 i.e3ltJg4; 9 i.h4 gS 10 i.g3 ltJhS!?) 9 ... 'ilVe7 (or 9 ... O-O 10 i.d3 i.g4) 10 i.d3 i.g4 11 i.e3 O-O-O with fine play. S  g6 6 g3 i.g7 7 i.g2ltJf6 8 e4!?

INTRODUCTION TO 2 tiJc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 49

w An unusual position. White's clamp on dS is only possible because Black committed to ... g6 before ... i.e6. Obviously White has acquired a serious internal weakness on d3 as well as losing control over d4, but if he succeeds in playing lbge2 and O-O, then we'll arrive at a favourable kind of Botvinnik c4/e4 system that we shall encounter in the Closed English in Chapter 6. 8 . O-O 9 lbge2 lbeS 10 b3 i.h3! (D) w

11 O-O

Not 11 i.xh3?? lbf3+. 11 ... l::te8 12 f3! i.xg2 13 ~xg2 as! 14 i.b2 a4! Black just keeps pounding away. Nothing is terribly wrong with White's position yet, but it's easy to underestimate the tactics. Islbd4 IS lbxa4?! lbxc4 16 bxc4 l::txa4 leaves White's queenside pawns vulnerable. IS c6! (D) You could do worse than to study such posi- tions in order to broaden your command of pawn-structures. Notice that the absence of light-squared bishops distinguishes this position from some other English Opening variations, as well as from the Maroczy Bind variation of the Sicilian Defence. Superficially, one might think that the trade of bishops would favour White. In formal terms, after all, it is his 'bad' bishop that is exchanged. The question in such positions, however, is whether Black can sum- mon up the piece activity to counter White's significant long-term advantage. This often in- volves attacking light squares that can no lon- ger be guarded by White's bishop. Here those squares include h3, d3, f3 and often, depending upon specifics, b3. For example, a common outcome of the advance ... as-a4 would be the capture of a pawn on b3 ( ... axb3), which might be followed with ... lbfd7-cS, hitting d3 and b3. Finally, the moves ... fS, ... bS and ... dS can be said to attack the most important light squares of all. This all sounds very nice, but if Black isn't able to succeed in creating outposts and/or weaknesses at a fairly early stage, White can slowly drive back Black's pieces, advance his pawns, and stearnroll Black without much ef- fort. The move lS ... c6 fulfils the needs of the position as described. Given even one extra move here, White could probably consolidate. Thus Black concedes a weakness on d6 in re- turn for activity. He can create threats with his queen from as or b6, and simultaneously cause White to worry about ... dS, the ultimate line- opening move. Whether this works is a matter of timing and the skill of the respective players. Incidentally, some people think that the side with more space should avoid exchanges, but

50 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

that is a poor rule at best. Here White would love to trade a few minor pieces and then utilize his space advantage. w 16l:tfe1 16 l:tad1 ~b6 17 'iYc2 axb3 18 axb3 also holds together, since 18 ... ltJfd7 19 ltJa4 keeps Black's knight from settling in on c5. That is probably about equal.

16. .. 'iYa5 17 'it'c2?

White still controls more space after 17ltJc2!; for example, 17 ... axb3 18 axb3 'iVb6 19 f4ltJed7 20 b4. Naturally, the situation would be far from clear. 17 ... a3! 18 i.el d5! (D) This position can arise in our main line after

[diagram]
ltJf6 2 c4 d6 3 ltJc3 e5 4 e4 exd4 5 ~xd4, etc. W 9 i.d3ltJg4!? (D) Suddenly the game is out of White's control. 19 cxd5 cxd5 20 i.d2 .l:tac8 21 f4? ltJxe4! 22 l:txe4 dxe4 23 fxe5 e3! 24 i.e1 i.xe5 Black already has a rook and two pawns for two pieces, and White can hardly defend against the elementary threats. 25ltJde2l:ted8 26.l:tel b5! 27 b4!? ~xb4 The 'long' queen move 27 ... 'iYa8+! wins more easily. 28 l:tb1 'it'c4 29 'iYb3 ~c6+ 30 ~gl ~f3 31 ~c2 i.xc3 32 ltJxc3 1:!.d2! 33 i.xd2 'iYf2+ 34 ~h1 'iYxd2! 35 'iYxd2 exd2 36 ltJe2l:te8! 0-1 Polugaevsky - Nezhmetdinov Russian Federation Ch, Sochi 1958

[diagram]
'iYd2ltJf6 (D) 6e4!? White plays the obvious move, clamping down on d5, but it has become rare. 6 . g6 7 b3 i.g7 8 i.b2 O-O w A solution that is over 50 years old. Black makes a non-developing move away from the centre. It's hard to explain why this works with- out resorting to the catch-all excuse of 'tactical opportunism'. The moves .. .f5 and ... 'it'h4 are now available, for example. The move 9 ... ltJg4 produced two classic masterpieces within less than a decade. 10 ltJge2? White's position looks harmonious, but the knight on e2 neither covers e5 nor prevents a raid on his kingside. An improvement is 10 h3!, when a critical response is 1O ... i.h6!? 11 ~d1 ltJge5 with the idea of .. .f5 and ... ltJb4. Then 12 i.e2! is correct, when 12 ... f5! 13 ltJf3! is dy- namically equal. Another wonderful game in this line, Ala- tortsev-Boleslavsky, USSR Ch, Moscow 1950,

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CDc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 51

saw 10 lbf3. For reasons of space, I'll skip a lot of the tactics, but it's worth noting a few ideas: 10 ... lbge5 11 i.e2 (11 lbxe5 dxe5 gains an out- post on d4; as in the King's Indian Defence, White has no corresponding outpost on d5, be- cause a knight there can be driven away by ... c6; this roughly compensates for White's space advantage) 11 ... lbxf3+ 12 i.xf3 lbd4 13 i.dl?! f5! 14 exf5 i.xf5 15 lbe2?! lbxe2. Here the game would have escaped from White's grasp following the natural 16 i.xg7?, due to 16 ... lbf4! 17 i.xf8 "ilVf6!, when among several ideas is 18 O-O ~g5! (D). w Every player has to know this elementary tac- tical idea, which occurs in countless positions and games. Black threatens both checkmate on g2 and ... lbh3+, winning the queen. Normally the next move is 'resigns', but in this situation White can weasel out with 19 i.g4! i.xg4 20 .Bh6! "ilVxh6. Of course, Black has regained his material and more, with a winning position. The actual game continued brilliantly after 16i.xe2i.xb217"ilVxb2"ilVg5! 18g3~ae8! 19 O-O i.h3 20 f4 (worse still 20 ~fel? l:txf2! 21 ~xf2 ~e3#) 20 ... i.xfl!! 21 fxg5 ~xe2 22 "ilVc3 i.g2 23 "ilVd3? i.f3 24 ~fl ~g2+ 25 ~hl i.c6! 26 ~xf8+ ~xf8 27 "ilVfl + ~f2+ 0-1. Instead of 23 "ilVd3?, a pretty, study-like line follows the obvious try 23 ~el: 23 ... i.h3! 24 ~al! ~g2+ 25 ~hl ~gf2 (after 25 ... ~ff2?, 26 ~e8+ ~f7 27 ~f8+! ~xf8 28 "ilVh8+ probably draws) 26 ~gl d5!! 27 cxd5 J::!.g2+ 28 ~hl1:lff2 29 ~e8+ Rf7 30 ~f8+ ~xf8 31 "ilVh8+ ~e7 32 "ilVxh7+ Rd6! (the difference) 33 "ilVxh311xh2+ 34 ~xh2 ~xh2+ 35 ~xh2 ~xd5 with a winning pawn ending. We now return to the position after 10 lbge2?

(D):

10 .. ~h4!? Nezhmetdinov is appropriately aggressive, but 10 ... lbce5! is even more promising because of 11 i.c2 1Wh4, or 11 h3 i.h6!. White's life looks very difficult in that case. 11 lbg3?! Better is the fearless 11 g3! ~f6 (11 ... lbce5 !? 12 gxM lbf3+ 13 ~dl lbxf2+ 14 'it>c2 lbxd2 15 'it>xd2 lbxhl 16 ~xhl is hard to assess) 12 f4 lbce5! 13 O-O lbxd3 141i'xd3 (D).

Now Black manages to get his vaunted cen- tral break in: 14 ... d5!, although 15 lba4! (pre- venting ... ~b6+, which would be the reply to 15 cxd5 or 15 e5) 15 ... dxe4 16 1i'xe4 ~a6 17 i.xg7 ~xg7 18 lbec3 i.f5 19 1lVd4+ 1i'f6 is only equal. 11 ... lbgeS?! Again, a well-motivated move that has a vari- ety of ideas including ... i.h6 and ... f5. However,

52 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

it shows you just how shaky the move 10 tiJge2? was when you realize that l1...fS! is even harder to meet because of the sequence 12 exfS tiJb4! 13 ~b1 ~xfS 14 tiJxfS (14 ~xfS .1:.ae8+) 14 ... gxfS winning; Black has various ideas such as ... tiJxh2, ... .i.h6 and/or ... ~ae8+. This would have made for a more convincing refutation of 11 tiJg3. 120-0 fS (D) w 13f3? The opening play in this famous game has been extremely inaccurate, and the middle- game proves to be as well! White needs to show some imagination in defence and play 13 exfS tiJxd3 14 'iVxd3 ~xfS IS tiJxfS .l:[xfS 16 lIae1, with the idea 16 ... .i.eS 17 g3 'iVh3 18 'iVdS+! ~h8 19 'iVg2!' 13  ~h6 14 ~dl f4 14 ... ~e3+ IS ~h1 f4 16 tiJge2 ~f2! intend- ing ... ~g3 is another approach. IS tiJge2 gS!? 16 tiJdS g4 17 g3 fxg3 18 hxg3 ~h319 f4 ~e6! (D) w 20~c2 According to lengthy analysis over the years, White's game is now past repair. 20  ~f7 21 'it'f2 ~h2+ 22 'it'e3 ~xdS 23 cxdS There are many options, but from now on I'll just show the flow of the game. 23 . tiJh4 24 ~hl? (D)

24. l:.xf4!! A famous move, which forces White into the open. 2S .l:!.xh2 The game comes to an abrupt end after 2S gxf4 ~xf4+ 26 tiJxf4 tiJxc2+. 2S . ~f3++ 26 'it'd4 (D)

26  ~g7 This slow move has its fascination, even though the less obvious continuation 26 ... cS+! ! 27 dxc6 bS! is faster, and more brilliant. The simple idea is to deny White's king c4 after ... tiJexc6+.

INTRODUCTION TO 2 {Dc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 53

27 a4 cS+ 28 dxc6 bxc6 29 ~d3 tbexd3+ 30

~c4 dS+ 31 exdS cxdS+ 32 ~bS J:.b8+ 33 ~aS tbc6+ 0-1 Andy Soltis lists this as the 2nd greatest game of the 20th century, which I think is rather silly given the poor defence and numer- ous mistakes by both sides, and also taking note of the superb attacking and counterat- tacking battles that appear every year. Never- theless, it is rightfully remembered for the stunning move 24 ... J:.xf4!!. After a while, 6 e4 was largely abandoned, perhaps more due to its risky nature than to its objective soundness (which remains intact). Hubner - Kasparov Match (game 1), Hamburg 1985

1 c4 eS 2 tbc3 d6 3 d4 exd4 4 'iixd4 tbc6 S

'iid2 tbf6 6 g3 The actual move-order was 4 ... tbf6 5 g3 tbc6 6 'iid2. 6 ... ~e6! Attacking the c-pawn and preparing ... d5. Now 7 b3? is a mistake due to 7 ... d5, so White must find other means of parrying the threat. 7tbdS The other critical move is 7 e4. A popular reply is 7 ... a5, when White can fall for a trick that occurs in several similar positions: 8 b3?

8 ... tbxe4! 9 tbxe4 d5. It's amazing how of- ten this has happened. Black gets a winning ad- vantage, with one of several lines going 10 tbc3 (10 cxd5 ~b4 11 tbc3 ~xd5 12 f3 'iif6 and ... O-O-O) 1O ... d4 11 ~b2 ~b4!, or l1...dxc3. White can improve with 8 f3, although then Black has 8 ... a4, holding down b3 for some time, or the conventional 8 ... g6 9 b3 ~g7. 7 ... tbeS! 8 b3 tbe4! As in many lines in this variation, Black uses constant threats to prevent White from consoli- dating. 9'iWe3 After 9 ~d4, Black can stay active with 9 .. .f5!? 10 ~g2 g6; for example, 11 ~b2? (11 ~xe4 fxe4! 12 ~g5!? 'iWxg5 13 tbxc7+ is messy) l1...c5! 12'iWdl ~xd5! 13 'iixd5'iWa5+ 14 ~dl tbd3! (D). w A cute finish from I. Kristiansen-Reinert, Denmark 1985. White is faced with mate on d2, and resigned after 15 ~xd3 tbxf2+. 9 ... tbcS!? (D) This has enjoyed some spectacular success, but it may well be just as good or better to settle for equality by 9 ... c6 10 'iWxe4 cxd5 11 cxd5 'iWa5+ 12 ~d2 i.xd5 13 ~xa5 ~xe414 f3 i.c6, as in Ftacnik-Timman, Wijk aan Zee 1985 et al. w

54 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

10 i.b2?! (D) White should get his kingside out: 10 i.g2! c6 11 ttJf4, and instead of 11...ttJg4?! (Edery- Baerschneider, correspondence game 1990),

11...~f6! leads to the relatively forced se-

quence 12 i.b2 ttJed3+ 13 exd3 ~xb2 14l:td1, when 14 ... 1Wc3+ 15 1Wd2 1Wxd2+ 16 'it>xd2 is only very slightly in White's favour, if that.

10  e6 11 ttJf4!? ttJg4! 12 ~d4? After this White is lost. The position after 13  JWa5+ Or 13 ... ttJgxf2!, in view of 14 ttJxe6 fxe6 15 i.xe6 i.e7! 16 1Wxg7 nf8. I'll leave the rest with no notes.

14 Wfl ttJgxf215 i.xe6 fxe616 ttJxe6 ~d7!

17 ttJh3 ttJxh3 18 ~xe4 ne8 19 ttJe5+ 'ti'xe5 20 1Wg4+ Re7 21 'ti'xh3 i.e7 22 i..xg7 nhfS+! 23 i.xfS l:txf8+ 24 Re1 'iVf2+ 25 Rd1 ~d4+ 26 'lti>e2 "iVe4+ 27 Rd2 i.g5+ 28 '&t>e3 'ti'e5+ 0-1 The tactical nature of such variations means that both players should be specifically pre- pared in advance of the game. lIIescas - Arencibia Salamanca 1998

[diagram]
~d2 ttJf6 6 b3 (D) This modest fianchetto is the main move and probably the best one, at least in practical terms. With careful play, White is likely to get into a positional contest without explosions. the forced sequence 12 ttJxe6 ttJxe3 13 ttJxd8 B ttJc2+ 14 Rd1 ttJxal15 ttJxb7 ttJaxb3! 16 i.g2 Rd7 17 axb3 ttJxb7 18 ttJf3 gives White some compensation for the exchange due to his bishop-pair and better-placed pieces. 12  ttJe4!! (D) The point of Black's play: f2 is attacked and ... iVa5+ is on the cards. w 13 i.h3 13 ttJd3 f5 surrounds White's queen and threatens ... c5. 6 .. g6 The most common reply, but there are alter- natives; for example, 6 ... a5!? is played a fair amount. The idea is to weaken White's queen- side and establish outposts with some help from tactical tricks. A high-level example was 7 i.b2 a4! 8l:td1 (the key idea is 8 ttJxa4?! d5!; e.g., 9 cxd5 ttJe4 10 1Wd3! {l0"iVc1 .l:.xa4!} 1O ... .l:Ixa4 11 a3 ttJc5 12 1Wd1 .l:.e4) 8 ... axb3 9 axb3 g6 10 e4 i.g7 11 i.d3 ttJd4 12 i.c2 ttJxc2+ 13 iVxc2 O-O 14 ttJge2 ttJh5 15 O-O f5! 16 c5! with double-edged play, Lautier-Kram- nik, Match (game 3), Cannes 1993. 7 i.b2 i.g7 8 g3

INTRODUCTION TO 2 tiJc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 55

[diagram]
above. It's odd that in this variation the seemingly 'safe' moves allow so many fireworks. For ex- ample, the pretty game Barcza-Dely, Hungar- ian Ch, Budapest 1969 saw the innocent 8 e3 O-O 9 ttJge2?! routed by 9 ... d5!! 10 ttJxd5 (10 cxd5 ttJxd5) 10 ... ttJxd5 (D). w

11 Ji.xg7 ttJdb4! 12 Ji.xf8 ttJd3+ 13 'it>d1

ttJxf2+ 14 ~c1? (14 'It>e1! ttJd3+ 15 'It>d1 ttJf2+ draws; but Black can try for more by 15 ... ~f6 16 ~c3 ttJce5!) 14 ... ~xf8 15 ttJg3 (Black's combination is based upon 15 .l:tg1?? ~a3+ 16 'iib2 ttJd3+) 15 ... ttJxhl16 ttJxh11li'a3+ 17 'It>d1 i.f5 18 'It>e1 l:td8 19 'i!Vc3 ttJb4 20 ~f2 ttJc2 21 nb1 ttJxe3! 22 ne1 ttJd1+ 0-1. Incredible.

8  O-O (D)

w We have reached a sort of main line. Great players have been willing to take both sides of this position.

9 Ji.g2

In Korchnoi-Spassky, Lugano 1982, White played the immediate 9 ttJh3. This knight heads for f4, to control d5 (the advantage of this move-order over 9 Ji.g2 and 10 ttJh3 will be seen below). For all the indignities that we have seen White suffer in this 3 d4 line above, this kind of bind may be his reward. The knight will come to f4, watching over d5, followed by Ji.g2, and Black's piece-play alone looks insuf- ficient to stir up tactical trouble. Furthermore, if Black plays aimlessly, White will be able to steadily increase his advantage and dominate the play. The game continued 9 ... ne8?! 10 ttJf4 Ji.g4

11 Ji.g2 ttJe5 (according to Korchnoi, 11...g5!

12 h3! gxf4 13 hxg4 fxg3 14 f3 is unclear; nev- ertheless, White owns the two bishops and a kingside attack; he should stand better) 120-0 .l:lb8 13 h3 Ji.d7 14 l:tad1 (D).

Black is seriously cramped, so he tries to break White's grip on the centre: 14 ... a6 15 ttJcd5 ttJxd5 (Black's plan of 15 ... b5 runs into trouble after 16 ttJxf6+ Ji.xf6 17 c5!) 16 ttJxd5 Ji.e6 (16 ... b5? is still a mistake following 17 c5! dxc5 18 f4) 17 ~c2 c6 18 ttJf4. White has won the opening; he has more space and a weak d- pawn to target. Black should look for something else here; for example, 9 ... a6! (in order to chip away at White's control of d5 by means of ... b5) 10 ttJf4 .l:lb8 11 Ji.g2 ttJe5 12 O-O (White might try 12 ::'d1 with the idea 12 ... b5?! 13 c5) 12 ... b5 13 cxb5 axb5, Panzer-Hickl, Lippstadt 1992. By loosening White's grip on d5, Black limits what his opponent can do. 9 . Ji.f5 10 ttJh3 ne8 11 ttJf4 (D)

56 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1l  liJe5 Black almost always gets the worse of ex- changes in these cramped positions, because White's space advantage remains, but Black's active counterplay is gone; e.g., 11.. .liJe4?! 12 liJxe4 Sl.xe4 13 f3 Sl.fS 14 Sl.xg7 <3;xg7 IS ~c3+ f6 16 e4 Sl.e6 17 O-O ~e7 18liJdS Sl.xdS 19 cxdSliJd8 20 l:!.ac1, Seirawan-PfIeger, Lone Pine 1981. An English Opening dream: White has a pawn on d5 restricting the knight, the open c-file, and space, in combination with bishop versus knight. 120-0 c6 13 e4 Sl.g4 14 f3 1!Vb6+ 15 <3;hl Sl.d7 16 l:!.adl Black has not only failed to find counterplay, but his d6-pawn is about to fall. The game ended quickly: 16. g5 17 liJd3 g4?! 18 liJxe5 dxe5 19 f4! l:tad8 20 fxe5 .l:Ixe5 21liJa4 1!Vc7 22 ~f411de8

23 Sl.xe5l::txe5 24 lIxd7liJxd7 251!Vxf7+ <3;h8

26l:!.dll-0 Timman - Cuijpers Dutch Ch, Hilversum 1983

[diagram]
1!Vd2 liJf6 6 b3 g6 7 Sl.b2 Sl.g7 8 g3 O-O 9 Sl.g2 l:!.e810 liJf3 (D) For many years, this move was thought to be harmless because it lets Black sink a piece onto e4. That's not so clear. 10  Sl.f5 Something along the lines of 1O ... Sl.d7 11 O-O a6 with ... bS in mind might be a good op- tion. In this variation in general, pawn-breaks are usually necessary if Black isn't to get pushed back. See the note to 11..:~d7?!.

llliJh4! (D) In earlier games, 11 O-O had been played, when ll...liJe4 12liJxe4 Sl.xe4 is roughly equal.

1l . 1!Vd7?! Black shouldn't give up the bishop-pair when he's done nothing to open lines or create outposts for his knights. Of the alternatives,

11...Sl.d7 120-0 a6, to enforce ... bS, looks par-

ticularly logical with White's knight away from the centre on h4. A sample continuation might be 13 liJdS liJxdS 14 cxdSliJeS ISl:!.ac1l:!.c8 16 <3;hl ~e7 with only a slight disadvantage. 12liJxf5 ~xf513 O-O l:!.e714l:!.adll:!.ae815 h3 ~h5 16 e3 liJe5 17 ~e2 ~xe2 18 liJxe2 lIb8 19 liJf4liJed7 20 Sl.d4 a6 21 l:!.c1l:t.ee8 22 l::tfdlliJe4 Here White could have effortlessly gained a large advantage by 23 Sl.xg7 rJ;;xg7 24 cSt, since 24 ... liJdxcS 2S b4liJd7 26l:!.xc7liJdf6 27 liJdS! is positionally ruinous for Black. In any case, we can see that White's opening was a smashing success. The combination of greater

INTRODUCTION TO 2 {Dc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 57

territorial control and bishop versus knight showed itself to good effect. Ca. Hansen - McNab Copenhagen 1991

[diagram]
'i*'d2 ttJf6 6 b3 g6 7 .tb2 .tg7 8 g3 O-O 9 .tg2 .l:f.e810 ttJh3 d5! (D) w This central blow works because of White's loose knight on h3. As a rule, if ... d5 is viable in these lines, Black gains full equality or more. 11 cxd5?! 11 ttJxd5 .txh3! 12 .txh3 ttJe4 13 'i*'cl? (13 ~c2 ttJd4 14 .txd4 .txd4 15 O-O-O! is unclear) 13 ... ttJd4! 14 e3! c6 15 ttJf4 and now: a) 15 ... ttJd2!? (D) is an incredible try. w 16 .tc3! (16 .txd4? 'iVxd4; 16 ~xd2?? ttJf3+) 16 ... ttJe4! 17 .tb2 'i*'a5+ (17 ... g5 18 ttJd3 ttJxb3 is the ambitious option) 18 ~f1 ttJd2+ 19 ~g2 'i*'e5! 20 .txd4 ~e4+ 21 ~gl ttJf3+ 22 ~f1 .txd4 23 exd4 ttJd2+ 24 ~gl ttJf3+ 25 ~f1 ttJd2+ 1/2_1/2 Sadler-McNab, London 1989. b) 15 ... g5! yields some advantage: 16 ttJh5 (16 ttJd3 ttJxb3 17 axb3 'i*'xd3) 16 ... 'i*'a5+ 17 ~f1 ttJd2+ 18 ~g2 'i*'e5!, and it's hardly possi- ble for White to avoid the lengthy sequence 19 .txd4 ~e4+ 20 ~gl ttJf3+ 21 ~f1 ttJxd422 .l:f.gl ttJf3 23 ttJxg7 ttJxh2+ 24 'it>e2 ~xg7 25 'iVc3+ f6, when Black stands better. 11 ... .txh3 12 .txh3 ttJxd5 13 ttJxd5 .txb2

14.l:f.dl

After 14 'iVxb2 ~xd5 150-0 ttJd4 16 .tg2! ttJxe2+ 17 'it>hl ~b5, Black is still a pawn up.

14. .. ttJd4! (D)

w 15 ttJe3! 15 ~xb2 'iVxd5 160-0 c5! threatens ... .l:!xe2. 15 ... 'iVf6 16 ~f1 l:!.ad8! 17 ttJg4? 17 'iVxb2 improves, but Black has a nice at- tack after 17 ... Ihe3 !. 17 .. Ji'c6 18 .tg2 'iVa6 19 ttJe3 ttJxe2 20 .td5 ttJc3+ 21 'it>g2 J:he3! 22 'iVxe3 ttJxd5 23 'iVf3 'iVf6 24 ~xf6 .txf6 0-1 The Positional Approach

1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 d6 3 ttJf3 (D)

In contrast to 3 d4 exd4 4 ~xd4, which sacri- fices development for the sake of central con- trol, 3 ttJf3 gets a piece out and shares the centre. In our main line, no pawns are ex- changed, so the resulting play tends to be more positional in nature. 3 ... f5 This is one of the better places for Black to advance his f-pawn, because the knight on f3

58 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

allows him to play ... e4 with tempo should his centre be challenged. 3 ... f5 is the move that most uniquely exploits the flexible nature of 2 ... d6. Other logical-looking moves have their own quirks: a) 3 ... lDc6 4 g3 is the Closed English of Chapter 5, but Black has given White the op- portunity for 4 d4!. Assuming that the move 2 ... lDc6 was otherwise acceptable to him, that was a better route to get to the desired posi- tion. b) Likewise, 3 ... g6 4 d4 is a shaky way to arrive at ... g6/ ... iLg7 systems, especially be- cause White gets the advantage after 4 ... iLg7?! (4 ... lDd7) 5 dxe5 dxe5 6 ~xdS+ ~xdS 7 e4!. This cedes the d4-square to Black, but after 7 ... lDc6 S iLg5+ f6 9 O-O-O+ iLd7 10 iLe3, there's no way to take advantage of it, and White has the direct idea of c5 with iLc4 and doubling on the d-file. Of course, other plans are available depending upon Black's response. c) White is supposed to have the advantage after 3 ... lDf6 4 d4 e4 5 lDg5 iLf5 (D). w But that assessment can be disputed; for ex- ample: cl) 6 '(Rc2 h6! 7 lDgxe4lDxe4 SlDxe4 'ili'h4, as in Boleslavsky-Bronstein, Candidates tourna- ment, Budapest 1950, has generally been evalu- ated as better for Black. However, 9 '(Ra4+ (9 lDxd6+ iLxd6 10 'ili'xf5 iLb4+ 11 ~dl 'ili'xd4+

12 Rc2 is hardly clear!) 9 ... iLd7 (9 ... lDc6 10

lDg3) 10 ~c2 iLf5 11 'iVa4+ seems to draw, in view of 11 ... iLd7 12 'iVc2 iLf5, etc. Still, a draw stemming from Black's 6th move isn't much of an achievement for White, and his only alterna- tive, 9lDxd6+, is risky. c2) 6 g4 (D) is the preferred way to win the centre without the weakening f3.

Theory likes White after this move, yet it seems to produce a game with chances for both sides. Now White's goal is to take over the cen- tre; for example, 6 ... lDxg4?! 7lDgxe4 c6?! S h3 lDf6 9 lDxf6+ 'iVxf6 10 e4, Komarov-Rom- anishin, St Vincent 2000. Black should prefer 6 ... iLxg4 7 iLg2 lDc6 S lDgxe4 lDxe4 9 lDxe4 (instead of9 iLxe4 ~d7!? and ... O-O-O) 9 ... iLe7 10 lDg3, and here simply 10 ... O-O looks per- fectly playable, since White's centre is immo- bile. For example, 11 iLe3 iLg5! or 11 ~d3 J::!.eS 12 e4? d5! with the idea 13 cxd5 ~xd5! 14 exd5?? iLb4++. You get the impression that the received wisdom about some of these minor lines isn't fully trustworthy.

4 d4 e4 (D)

We reach a very common position in high- level chess, indicating both players' willingness to mix it up. If Black is satisfied with his play here, and likes the lines following 3 d4 exd4, he will have a repertoire based upon 2 ... d6 that

INTRODUCTION TO 2 lDc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 59

w doesn't sacrifice the opportunity for dynamic play. On the other hand, if White can gain a safe edge in this position, it gives him a way to by- pass the complexities of 3 d4 and 3 g3. By playing 4 ... e4, Black wants to force the white knight to an awkward square and main- tain a space advantage, whereas White hopes that Black is overextended. Typically White will try to undermine the e4 point or advance on the queenside. He has several reasonable moves, and I think it's fair to say that all of them lead to complex play with plenty of life. Let's briefly examine two of these responses to 4 ... e4 before turning to games. a) 5lbd2 (D) is sound, but passive.

There can follow 5 ... lbf6 6 e3, and Black can equalize with the standard plan of 6 ... c6 intend- ing .. .tba6-c7. He can then develop normally by ... J..e7 and ... O-O, or in some cases ... d5 and ... J..d6 might follow. Also played are 6 ... g6 7 J..e2 i.g7 and 6 ... c5!?, to put pressure on the d4-pawn and try to induce it to go to d5. b) A deceptively ambitious move is 5 lbgl !?

White has ideas of imitating a French De- fence with colours reversed by playing e3, and this provides opportunities for both sides; for example: bI) 5 ... c6 6 lbh3 and now 6 ... d5?! 7 cxd5 cxd5 8 'iHb3 (or 8 J..g5) 8 ... lbc6! 9 e3 lbf6 10 J..d2!, intending lbf4, favours White. Naturally,. Black won't be inclined to go along with this, and can play 6 ... J..e7! (versus 7 J..g5) 7 lbf4 lbf6 8 e3 O-O, perhaps with ... lba6-c7 in mind. A variant on this is the immediate 6 ... lba6 7 e3 (7 J..g5!? is interesting) 7 ... lbf6 8 lbf4lbc7 9 d5! J..e7 10 b3!? 0-011 J..b2 J..d7 12 J..e2 g5! with unclear play. Both sides can be confident of getting their share of the action in such posi- tions. b2) Black probably wants to avoid 5 ... lbf6 6 J..g5!, when White's side is easier to play; for example, 6 ... J..e7 7 e3 O-O 8lbh3 c6 9 lbf4 lba6

10 J..e2 (D).

60 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is pretty much the ideal set-up for White in terms of piece coordination and availability of pawn attacks on all parts ofthe board (b4-bS, dS, f3 and even h4-hS). He may not have a forced advantage, but the position is promising. One game went 1O .. .'~Jc7 11 ~3 h6?! (ll...lIb8 120-0 i.e6! 13 f3 exf3 14lIxf3! is slightly in White's favour) 12 i.xf6 i.xf6 13 liJg6 ~e8, Shvedchikov-Iashvili, Moscow 1999, and here

14 O-O makes it difficult for Black to unwind.

For example, l4 ... 'ii;>h7 IS i.hS liJe6 16liJe2! intending f3, and meeting 16 ... liJf8 by 17liJef4. Lautier - Cu. Hansen Biel1992

1 c4 e5 2liJc3 d6 3liJf3 f5 4 d4 e4 5 i.g5!?

By contrast with other lines in which he plays e3, White gets his bishop in front of the pawn-chain first. The drawback is that it helps Black develop quickly: 5 ... i.e7 S. .. liJf6 is also possible, when after 6 liJd2 i.e7 7 e3 O-O the set-up with ... c6 and ... liJa6-c7 has equalized. However, 6liJgl is more attrac- tive - compare SliJgl in the previous game. 6 i.xe7 'Wixe7 (D) w 7liJd2 With 7liJglliJf6 8 e3, White wants to playa sort of French Defence without his bad bishop. Black needn't cooperate by playing an immedi- ate ... dS, since he also has 8 ... O-O 9liJh3 c6 10 i.e2liJa6 11 'iVc2liJc7, Uliashev-Lukin, St Pe- tersburg 1992. Then ... dS or ... i.e6 and .. J:tb8 can follow, with a strong centre. For his part, White can go for queenside action via b4-bS. 7 ... liJf6 8 e3 O-O 9 i.e2 c5!? Black would like to provoke White into play- ing dS, which would give his own knight a fine square on eS and introduce the prospect of at- tack by ... f4. 10 liJb3 i.e6 11 O-O i.f7 This is useful in preventing f3, since the e- pawn will hang after ... exf3. 12lIc1liJa6!? 13 'iVd2 (D)

White prepares lIfd 1 to exert a little pressure down the d-file. He also renews the idea of f3, although it's not always clear whom that fa- vours.

13. .. l:lad8 14liJal!? (D)

A clever idea. White wants to free his b- pawn for defence (by b3) or attack (by b4); and even more so, he would like to play liJc2 and B. The main alternative is 14 BlIde8, and now IS f4! prepares liJdS and could give White the faster attack, especially since the natural plan of ... 'ii;>h8, ... lIg8 and ... gS is slow and hard to implement.

INTRODUCTION TO 2 tiJc3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 61

14. . tiJb4! 15 d5?!

This releases the pressure on Black's centre. IS tiJc2100ks right. B 15  ii.h5! 16 f3!? exf317 gxf3? l::tde818 a3 tiJa6 19 tiJc2 f4! 20 exf4 Or 20 e4? tiJd7; as we've seen many times, when a knight occupies an outpost on eS and can't be challenged, it creates difficulties for the opponent, and here White's bad bishop adds to the problem. 20 .. ii.g6 21 tiJel tiJh5 (D) Two excellent alternatives are 21.. .ii.fS and

21...tiJc7, which both cover e6 and support an

eventual ... bS. w 22f5 If 22 tiJg2?, 22 ... tiJxf4! 23 tiJxf4 'iVgS+ 24 ~h 1 'iWxf4 2S 'iWxf4 l::txf4 results in active black pieces, whereas White has weak pawns and a bad bishop. After the game continuation 22 fS, Black played 22 ... l::txfS?! and stood worse after 23 f4!. But 22 ... ii.xfS! is positionally attractive. White's plan is not clear; e.g., 23 f4 tiJf6 24 ii.d3 ii.h3 2S tiJg2 tiJc7 26 l::tcel 'iWd7, again an- swering 27 fS with 27 ... tiJg4! followed by oc- cupation of eS; notice White's bad bishop on d3. Salov - Romero Madrid 1992

1 c4 e5 2 tiJc3 d6 3 tiJf3 f5 4 d4 e4 5 tiJg5 (D)

5 . ii.e7 Black stays flexible, in the spirit of 2 ... d6 and 3 .. .fS. The alternatives are instructive because of the pawn-structures that arise: a) The elastic move S ... c6 is often played, sometimes transposing. Black may choose to delay the development of his kingside pieces; e.g., 6 tiJh3 tiJa6 7 e3 (7 ii.gS!?) 7 ... tiJf6 8 tiJf4 tiJc7 (one of many variants on this basic piece disposition) 9 d5!? ii.e7 10 b3 O-O 11 ii.b2 ii.d7 with mutual chances, Timman-Yusupov, Am- sterdam 1994. The position became even more unbalanced after 12 ii.e2 gS!. b) For quite some time Black was enam- oured of the space-grab S ... h6 6 tiJh3 g5 (D). w The basic idea is to develop by ... tiJf6 and ... ii.g7. Then ceding the bishop-pair to Black via 7 e3 tiJf6 8 ii.e2 ii.g7 9 ii.hS+ tiJxhS 10 'ilixhS+ ~f8 hasn't given White anything. After 6 ... g5, White's next logical try is 7 f3, when Black usually plays 7 ... exf3 with .. .i i.g7 next. That has proven completely satisfactory. However, S ... h6 6 tiJh3 g5 became less pop- ular as players discovered the strength of 7 tiJgl!, an odd-looking but logical retreat. White's lead in development is gone, but he

62 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

wants to immobilize Black's pawn-structure by 8 h4, after which he will get a freer hand in the centre and on the queenside. Illescas- Hodgson, Spanish Team Ch 1993 continued 7 ... ttJf6 (7 ... iLg7 8 h4 g4 9 e3 ttJd7 10 ttJge2 h5 11 ttJf4 gave White the desired advantage in Portisch-Seirawan, Mar del Plata 1982; of course, the game is only beginning) 8 h4l:tg8?! 9 hxg5 hxg5 10 ttJh3 g4 11 ttJf4 c6 12 e3 ttJa6 13 iLd2 ttJc7 14 'i!kb3 "fIe7 15 O-O-O l:tb8 16 iLe2 iLd7 17 f3!, and Black's king was stuck in the middle. 6 ttJh3 This is the main move, but perhaps more at- tention should be given to 6 h4!? (D).

The idea is to anchor the knight on f4 after ttJh3-f4. 6 h4 is sound because of the pseudo- tactical point that 6 ... h6 7 ttJh3 iLxh4 is risky in view of 8 ttJf4 (or 8 e3) 8 ... iLg5!? 9 ttJg6l:th7 10 c5!? with the idea iLc4. Then Black should steer clear of 1O ... d5? 11 ttJxd5! ~xd5 12 iLxg5. After 6 h4!?, moreover, the thematic 6 ... c6 can be met by the developing move 7 iLf4, while 7 d5!? is also playable. That brings us to 6 ... ttJf6 7 e3, when the complicated position af- ter 7 ... O-O 8 iLe2 c6 9 d5!? (9 ttJh3 ttJg4 10 h5!? is quite unclear) 9 ... ttJa6 has been tested a few times and seems about equal. Maybe White should consider the simple 7 iLf4, when a com- plex battle could result from 7 ... ttJh5 8 e3!? g6; e.g., 9 ttJh3 with the idea 9 ... iLxh4 10 iLh6, or even 9 iLh2 h6!? 10 ttJh3 iLxh4 11 iLe2 fol- lowed by ttJf4. There is certainly plenty to try out here! 6  c67 e3 ttJf6 8 ttJf4 ttJa6 (D) w This position has arisen in many games, and contains the same ideas that we've seen in the notes. White has several possible plans, includ- ing d5 (to grab space and control e6), f3 (to break up the front of the pawn-chain), and b4- b5. Black would like to play moves like ... d5 and ... g5, but can take his time with ... O-O, ... ttJc7 and ... 'it>h8. If White then plays d5, Black will often simply capture on that square and train his forces upon the pawn there, which is effectively isolated. 9h4 Played in the clear majority of games. White assumes that ... g5 will be strong at some point, so he may as well prevent it now.

9  O-O (D)

w 10 iLe2 White can also initiate a queenside advance right away: 10 a3 ttJc7 11 b4 ttJe6 (ll...d5 is al- ready a candidate) 12 ttJh3!? (12 h5) l2 ... d5 (Black takes the centre; d5 is well-protected, so he should have no problems) 13 g3 h6!? 14

INTRODUCTION TO 2 0,c3: BLACK PLAYS FLEXIBLY 63

'iVb3 g5!? (an ambitious move that prepares simply to walk all over White on the kingside; 14 ... a5 is a good alternative) 15 hxg5 hxg5 16 i.d2 <;t>g7! 17 cxd5 cxd5 18 O-O-O .l:.h8 19 i.e2 'iVd6 20 ~b2 i.d7 21 .l:.dgl .l:.h7! with the idea of doubling rooks, Povah-Summerscale, Brit- ish League (4 N CL) 1996/7. B lack has achieved considerable pressure, while White has made no progress versus his opponent's centre.

10. .. ltJc7 11 dS

The timing of this move is critical. White could also consider a more neutral approach such as 11 ~b3. l1 ... cxdS ll...ltJd7 with the idea ... ltJe5 is similar, but Black wants to clarify the central structure. 12 cxdSltJd7! (D) w Black takes advantage of the fact that White's d5 has given him the e5-square and activity along the al-h8 diagonal. Even White's pawn on h4 has become a problem, discouraging him from castling. 13 g3?! Now White's kingside pawns are static and f3 is weak. Also, after 13ltJe6? ltJxe6 14 dxe6 ltJe5 (or 14 ... ltJc5) he soon loses a pawn. Best is 13 h5!, although Black can be quite satisfied af- ter 13 ... ltJe5. 13 ... i.f614 ~f1 14 i.d2 i.e5!? 15 .l:tc1 ltJf6 was the stem game Ruban-Anand, Palma de Mallorca 1989; that makes it difficult for White to defend his d-pawn in the face of attacks on it by ... 'WIe7-f7 in conjunction with ... i.xf4. ... i.eS IS i.d2ltJf6 Here and over the next couple of moves, ... b6 was strong, intending ... 'iVe7-f7 and ... i.xf4 followed by ... i.b7. This is a surprisingly diffi- cult plan to counter. 16 'iVb3 .l:.b8 (D) Now is the optimal time for 16 ... b6!. w

17 a4 'it'h8 18 'it'g2 i.d7 19 :thc1

Perhaps this rook would be better off on dl, watching over the d-pawn. After 19 .i:thc1, Black should probably play 19 ... 'iVe7, intending ... 'WIf7; for example, 20 ltJb5ltJcxd5!, based upon 21ltJxd5!? (21ltJxa7 i.c6!) 2l...ltJxd5 22 ~xd5?? i.e6. It looks as though this fascinating main line is wholly satisfactory for Black, and that White should investigate the rarely-played 6 h4. It's amazing how much active and refreshing chess can be generated from a simple move like 2 ... d6. Because of its flexibility, both players will combine to shape the nature of the contest, which can run the full gamut from highly tacti- cal to subtly positional. 4 2 ... ttJf6 and g3 Systems Introduction to 2 ... lDf6

1 c4 e5 2 liJc3 liJf6 (D)

w Having explored some other moves after 1 c4 e5 2liJc3, we'll tum our eyes to the traditional continuation 2 ... liJf6, which contests the key central squares d5 and e4. By this means Black continues his imitation of White's main Sicil- ian Defence set-up, that is, I e4 c5 2liJf3, and asks his opponent to commit to a formation. In this chapter, I'll examine systems with an early g3 and .ltg2, primarily 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 g3 (D), which has been central to the historical de- velopment of the English Opening.

When White plays 3 g3, he is doing what a clear majority of Sicilian players would do as Black. By this I mean that, when playing against most variations of the Sicilian Defence in which White omits the move d4, Sicilian devotees use ... g6 and ... .ltg7 as their default plan. After 1 e4 c5, for example, we see 2liJc3 liJc6 and now 3 g3 g6 or 3 f4 g6. Versus 2liJf3liJc6 3 .ltb5, the fianchetto by 3 ... g6 is also the most popular move. Thus it makes perfect sense to follow 1 c4 e5 2liJc3liJf6 with 3 g3. Here trade-offs be- tween time and information assume special im- portance, and we can learn a lot about both the English Opening and Sicilian Defence by com- paring and contrasting similar positions. It turns out that both 3 ... .ltb4 and 3 ... c6 take on a char- acter which might not be anticipated if one were only looking at them with the eyes of a Si- cilian Defence player. Much the same applies to White's other fian- chetto line I c4 e5 2 g3. This closely resembles a Hyper-Accelerated Dragon (1 e4 c5 2 liJf3 g6) with reversed colours; and again, Black's knowledge about White's intentions allows him to compensate for being a tempo behind. As usual, we'll get oriented by looking at a few rarely-played third moves for White. As we see in this game, they resemble White's 2nd moves in Chapter 2 and may even transpose. Van Wely - Kasparov Tilburg 1998

[diagram]
With this flexible move, White is aiming for some sort of reversed Sicilian Defence or French Defence position, preferably leading to rela- tively unexplored positions. Although hardly a dire threat to Black, 3 e3 is one of White's more interesting irregular choices; it also has the po- tential to be used as a transpositional tool. Alternatively, White can go for even more modest pawn moves. One of these, 3 d3, isn't 2 . ..tbj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 65 very forceful, since it relinquishes the possibil- ity of d4 for the time being. I discussed and ana- lysed this in Chapter 2 under the move-order 1 B c4 e5 2 d3 ~f6 3 ~c3. Similarly, 3 a3 (D) is flexible, but too modest to give an advantage.

Black has several good answers, among them: a) 3 ... ~c6 4 b4 (4 ~f3 g6 is a pleasant vari- ation of the English Four Knights for Black - see Chapter 5) 4 ... g6 5 ~b2 ~g7 with equal- ity, since trying to disturb Black's development by 6 b5 ~d4 (or 6 ... ~e7 7 ~f3 d6) 7 e3 ~e6 doesn't achieve anything. b) 3 ... g6 is another good idea: 4 ~f3 ~c6, intending 5 b4?! e4! 6 ~g5 ~g7 7 J:1bl O-O! with the idea 8 ~gxe4 ~xe4 9 ~xe4 ~e8; we'll examine this in Chapter 5 under the order 2 ~c3 ~f6 3 ~f3 ~c6 4 a3 g6. c) 3 ... c6 is unexciting but sufficient: 4 ~f3 (4 d4 exd4 5 'iWxd4 ~a6!, and ... ~c5 will soon come with the threat of ... ~b3, illustrating the drawbacks of a3; White should avoid 6 b4?! c5! 7 'iVe5+ ~e7 8 b5 ~c7) 4 ... e4 5 ~d4 d5. This gives us a reverse variant of the Alapin Sicilian (1 e4 c5 2 c3 ~f6 3 e5 ~d5 4 ~f3 ~c6 5 d4), with an extra move a3 for White, which is not necessarily an advantage for him. Play might go 6 cxd5 ~c5!? 7 ~b3 ~b6 and capturing the c-pawn with 8 dxc6?! ~xc6 is very risky, as in the reversed position. Better is 8 d3 exd3 9 'tixd3 O-O! with equality. We now return to 3 e3 (D):

[diagram]
Here are a couple of alternatives for Black, often leading to structures and ideas that we've seen elsewhere: a) 3 ... d5 (somewhat obliging, but not neces- sarily bad) 4 cxd5 ~xd5 5 ~f3 (5 'iWc2 resem- bles the Taimanov Variation of the Sicilian) 5 ... ~c6 (5 ... ~xc3 6 bxc3 ~d6 7 d4 is another well-known reversed Taimanov Sicilian posi- tion in which White has an extra tempo; White wants to utilize his central majority while Black would like to scare something up on the king- side; my guess is that most strong players would prefer to have the white pieces, but it's certainly playable for both sides). After 5 ... ~c6, we've arrived at a position that can also arise by means of the more conventional move-order 2 ~c3 ~f6 3 ~f3 ~c6 4 e3 d5 5 cxd5 ~xd5. At this point, the seldom-played 6 'tic2 is a good alternative to look into, but the approved move is 6 ~b5 (D).

White is held to stand better held, but that isn't at all clear. Black can continue 6 ... ~xc3 (6 ... 'iWd6!? looks slow, but is not so easy to re- fute; White has tried 7 d4 exd4 8 ~xd4!? ~xc3 9 bxc3 ~d7 10 O-O with only a small

66 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

advantage) 7 bxc3 i.d6 (not 7 ... e4?! 8 tZ'le5 ~d5 9 ~a4 i.d7 10 tZ'lxd7 'iitxd7 lli.c4!) 8 e4 (8 d4 e4! with the idea 9 tZ'ld2 'ti'g5!) 8 ... O-O 9 O-O (9 d4?! is a book move, but Black might find 9 ... exd41O cxd4 .l:te8! 11 e5 i.b4+) 9 ... 'iVe7! 10 l:!.bl i.d7 with apparent equality. b) 3 ... i.b4 is a standard move that White plays in the Sicilian. Then 4 tZ'lge2 is a tempo ahead of the variation 1 e4 c5 2 tZ'lf3 tZ'lc6 3 i.b5 e6!? 4 O-O (4 i.xc6 is sometimes played) 4 ... tZ'lge7, often chosen by grandmasters. Once again, the question is whether an extra tempo means enough for White. Interesting play re- sults; for example, 4 ... O-O 5 a3 i.xc3 (5 ... i.e7 6 d4 is also complex) 6 tZ'lxc3 and now 6 ... c6 can be met by 7 d4 exd4 8 ~xd4 d5 9 M, which gives White the bishop-pair for little gain. So 6 ... tZ'lc6 is more natural, when 7 ~c2!? d5 8 cxd5 tZ'lxd5 9 i.d3 g6 10 i.e2!? with the idea d3 produces a unique and intriguing situation. In comparison with a Sicilian Defence, it's not clear whether Black's missing bishop is worth more or less than White's missing knight. We see how reversed positions take on a character of their own, or at the very least have their own dynamic. If White feels comfortable with these lines, and with the options in our main game, he might enjoy playing 3 e3 as a way to enter combat without requiring too much in the way of theoretical preparation. Now we return to 3 ... tZ'lc6 (D): w 4a3 This is an ambitious attempt to expand on the queenside. Instead, 4 tZ'lf3 transposes to the variation 3 tZ'lf3 tZ'lc6 4 e3, examined in Chap- ter 5. In any case, Black's rapid development renders 4 d4?! dubious following 4 ... exd4 5 exd4 i.b4! (e.g., 6 d5 tZ'le5!). 4 ... g6! (D) Black has the lUxury of fianchettoing, since White has no pressure on the centre. In fact, as a rule of thumb, the move ... g6 is a good choice in the English Opening when White is developing slowly. w 5 b4 Black can equalize against 5 d4 by 5 ... exd4 6 exd4 d5, when 7 i.g5 i.e7! 8 tZ'lf3 i.g4 high- lights the poor state of White's kingside devel- opment. 5 ... i.g7 6 i.b2 O-O (D) w 7d3 Even though this looks consistent with a Si- cilian Defence, it will be hard for White to get his kingside pieces out. A Taimanov-style ap- proach would be 7 ~c2!, when the play can go in many directions; for example, 7 ... .l:te8 (try- ing to discourage tZ'lf3 by means of the move

2."tiJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 67

... e4) 8 tbge2, and now Black can play 8 ... dS!? 9 cxdS tbxdS 10 tbxdS ~xdS 11 tbc3 'iid8! (l1...tbd4? loses material to 12 O-O-O!, and 1l...~d7 or 1l...~e6 invites tbe4-cS) 12 tbe4 ~fS 13 f3!? (D).

This is a typically double-edged Sicilian Tai- manov position which looks unclear and would be fun to play. 7  .l:!.e8! 8 ~c2 If White were in a Najdorf set-up with tbd2 instead of tbc3, he could bypass ~c2 and play 8 tbf3, but here that is well met by 8 ... e4! (utiliz- ing Black's quick development; he can also get his pieces out quickly by means of 8 ... dS 9 cxdS tbxdS 10 tbxdS ~xdS with the idea 11 ~e2?! a5!) 9 dxe4 (9 tbxe4?! tbxe4 10 ~xg7 tbxf2! 11 'Oitxf2 'Oitxg7) 9 ... tbxe4 10 ~c2 tbxc3 11 ~xc3 d6 intending ... ~fS or ... ~g4. 8  dS! 9 cxdS tbxdS (D) Now White has a normal Sicilian set-up on the queenside, but he is well behind in develop- ment. 10 tbxdS A classic blunder is 10 tbge2?? tbdxb4!. 10 ~e2 is a fair alternative. But not 10 tbf3?, be- cause of the standard trick 1O ... a5! 11 bS tbd4! 12 exd4 tbxc3 13 dxeS ~xeS 14 'Oitd2! (14 tbxeS .l:!.xeS+ IS 'Oitd2 ~gS+ 16 c;t>xc3 ~cS+) 14 ... tbe4+ IS 'iii>c1 ~xb2+ 16 'iixb2 tbd6 with moves like ... ~g4 and ... c6 to follow. 10. ~xdS 11 tbe2 fS 12 tbc3 'iVf7! A simple move, but easy to overlook. Now ... ~e6-b3 is hard to stop (if only White had the Najdorf knight on d2!), and once it's played, White will have no good place for his pieces. So he tries to get his knight to cS before that happens. 13 tba4 ~e614 tbcs ~dS 15 bS (D)

IS  tbd4! A pretty theme from the Sicilian Defence. At first glance it's an obvious choice, but the con- sequences still have to be correctly calculated and assessed. 16 exd4 exd4+ 17 ~e2 ~xg218 O-O-O ~xbl

19.1:Ixhl

For the moment, the position seems to be holding together for White, but everything comes with tempo: 19  ~dS! This centralizing move threatens ... ~xhl+ and ... .l:Ixe2!. 20l:t.el 20 .l:l:gl? loses to 20 .. Jhe2!. 20  .l:IeS! 21 ~b3?! ~xb3 22 tbxb3 l:Iae8! 23 'it>dl This is a depressing move to make, but the tactics all hold together: after 23 tbxd4 .l:!.Se7 24 'it>d2 .'Ctd7 Black wins a piece.

68 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

23  .l:i.xbS 24 .Bf3 .l:!.xel + 2S ~xel c6 26 .idl as! 27 .Bxd4 a4 28 .Bxg7 ~xg7 29 tbd2 .l:!.eS+ 30 .Be2 bS Black has two pawns and a rook versus two pieces (the former are generally superior in an endgame), whereas White has four isolated pawns and his pieces are restricted. Unsurpris- ingly, Black went on to win. But 3 e3 is a little move that can teach you a lot. Black's 3rd-Move Options Now we'll return to 3 g3 (D), the main subject of this chapter, which is described above in general terms.

I have given most of my attention to 3 ... .Bb4 and 3 ... c6. Nevertheless, following the philoso- phy of working from fundamentals, I'll take an abbreviated look at some of Black's other third moves, beginning with these: a) 3 ... g6 will normally lead into another sys- tem, very often related to the King's Indian De- fence. Along those lines, Black has a couple of ways to avoid the standard variations that arise later in this book. A nice game that shows some basic ideas is Chiburdanidze-Uhlmann, Aruba 1992: 4 .Bg2 .Bg7 S d3 (I've adjusted the game's move-order to make the point that S tbf3 is the normal way to shoot for advantage by playing d4; in fact, Black either opts for a slow King's Indian Defence after S ... d6 6 d4, or he assumes a theoretically slightly inferior line following S ... tbc6 6 O-O O-O 7 d4 exd4 8 tbxd4; it's worth noting, however, that some strong players use this latter variation) S ... O-O 6 tbf3 l'!e8 (by means of his move-order, Black has gone without ... d6 and can now try for ... dS di- rectly) 7 O-O c6!? 8 tbd2?! (a slow move; White should probably react with more urgency; for example, he can discourage ... dS by 8 .igS, planning 8. .. h6 9 .Bxf6 "iWxf6 10 e3 with the idea of d4, although that gives up the bishop- pair) 8 ... tba6 9 l'!bl dS 10 b4 dxc4?! (simply 1O ... tbc7 assures Black of an ideal, well-pro- tected centre and the better game) 11 tbxc4 tbdS!? 12 tbxdS?! (White can avoid strengthen- ing Black's centre by ignoring the b-pawn; Ribli recommends 12 tbe4! with the idea 12 ... tbaxb4 13 tbcd6l:te7 14 .igS!, ending in advantage) 12 ... cxdS 13 tbe3 .Be6 14 ~a4 tbc7 IS bS 'iVd7 (Black has the big centre, and threatens ... a6) 16 ~3 d4! 17 tbc4 tbdS 18 .Bd2 tbb6! 19 a4 tbxc4 20 dxc4 )lac8 (it's not only that Black is attacking the backward c-pawn; more impor- tantly, his own centre pawns are ready to ad- vance) 21l:tfc1 .Bf8!? 22 as .ifS 23 l'!b2 e4 24 b6 axb6 2S axb6 (2S "iWxb6 runs into 2S ... .Ba3) 2S ... .icS 26 .Bf4l:1c6! 27 .Bc7 l'!ee6 (D). A picture of centralization! The game con- cluded 28 'iVa4 ~g7 29 ~aS "VJIie7 30 "iWbS hS 31 l:tal h4 32 gxh4 .Bg4 33 lId2 d3 34 .in? .Bxf2+ 3S ..t>hl 'iVf60-1. b) 3 ... .icS (this is a legitimate move, just as it is after 3 tbf3 tbc6 4 g3 .icS) 4 .Bg2 and now: bl) A very interesting option is 4 ... c6 S e3 (or S tbf3 e4 6 tbgS dS 7 d4 .Be7 and Black's centre holds together), and now: b11) S ... dS 6 cxdS cxdS 7 d4! exd4 8 exd4 .Bb6!? (D). These symmetrical positions tend to favour the side whose king's knight can go to e2/e7

2. .. tDj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 69

w rather than f3/f6, because from there it can at- tack the opposing d-pawn. Whether such an ad- vantage is enough to convert into a win is an open question, but here White stands better af- ter 9 lbge2 lbc6 10 .Bg5 .Be6 11 O-O O-O 12 lbf4. b12) Black can also play 5 ... O-O, when nor- mal play would be 6lbge2 d5 7 d4 exd4 8 exd4 i.b6 9 cxd5lbxd5 10 lbxd5 cxd5 I1lbc3 lbc6 12 .Be3 .Be6 with a level game. Thus 4 ... c6 may not be ideal for creating dynamic play, but it gives Black chances to equalize. b2) Black's most obvious move is 4 ... O-O. Then: b21) Then a typical position can arise from

5 e3 d6 (5 ... c6 transposes to line 'bI2') 6lbge2.

If Black plays ... lbc6 soon, we'll end up in Closed English territory (Chapter 6). But if Black plays without ... lbc6, unique positions arise; for example, 6 ... a6 (6 ... c6!? is the other way of preserving the bishop; for example, 7 O-O .Bb6 8 b3 .Bf5 9 d4 l:te8 10 h3 h6, Maus- Dankert, Hamburg 1993, and now White might try ll.Ba3 'iVd7 12 g4 .Bg613 d5 .Bc7 14lbg3) 70-0 l:te8 8 d4 .Ba7 9 'iVc2! and White stands slightly better. b22) 5 lbf3 is an obvious reply to 4 ... O-O. The game can turn wild following 5 ... e4 6lbg5 (Marin suggests 6lbh4!? with the idea that af- ter 6 ... l:te8 7 O-O, 7 ... d5 8 cxd5 .Bd4!? {8 ... g5? 9 d4} 9 d3 gives White with the better game; but 7 ... d6 8 d3 exd3 9 'iVxd3 lbc6 is not so clear) 6 ... .Bxf2+! 7 ~xf2lbg4+ 8 ~gl 'iVxg59lbxe4

9 ... "fIie7 (9 ... 'iVg6!?) 10 d4! (10 h3lbe5 and then 11 d3 d6 12 ~h2 led to approximate equality in Brestian-Eisterer, Austrian Team

Ch 1990, but 11 b3! may improve) 1O ... h6 11 .Bf3 d6 12 'it>g2, Kramarik-Tihlarik, Brati- slava 1991. White's bishops and centre are be- coming threatening. After 12 ... f5, 13 lbc3! lbf6 14 ~e1 preserves the advantage. Vassallo - Ferron Garcia Alicante 2001

[diagram]
This usually transposes to a Reversed Dragon (Chapter 5), but there are legitimate alterna- tives. 4 cxd5 lbxd5 5 .Bg2 (D) If he wants to, White can bypass some side- lines by 5lbf3, when 5 ... lbc6 6 .Bg2 transposes to the popular Reversed Dragon lines in Chap- ter 5. Black can also continue 5 ... lbxc3 6 bxc3 .Bd6 (6 ... e4? 7 "fIia4+) and achieve a fairly nor- mal position.

5  lbxc3 As always, Black has alternatives:

70 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) 5 ... liJb6 6liJf3liJc6 transposes to the Re- ll.l:!.bl!? (D) versed Dragon lines of Chapter 5. b) 5 ... .i.e6 6 liJf3 and now 6 ... liJc6 trans- poses to Chapter 5 again, and against any other black move that protects the e-pawn, d4 will B follow. c) 5 ... c6 has been played a remarkable num- ber of times, but simply 6liJf3 followed by O-O and d4 guarantees a straightforward advantage. d) 5 ... liJe7 6liJf3liJbc6 used to be a popular line. Black's idea is to control d4, and he will probably set up a reversed Closed Sicilian by ... g6 and ... .i.g7. However, White can use his extra tempo in various ways. The course of the game Larsen-Lehmann, Palma de Mallorca 1967 demonstrates a Sicilian-like queenside minority attack: 7 b4! a6 S O-O g6 9 a4! (D).

9 ... .i.g7 (9 ... liJxM 10 liJxe5 .i.g7? llliJxf7!) 10 .i.a3 O-O 11 b5 liJd4 12 liJg5!? (better is 12 e3! liJe6 13 lWb3) 12 ... axb5 13 axb5 .i.d7?! (13 ... h6! 14liJge4 f5 15 liJc5 Iha3! 16.l:i.xa3 lWd6 17 liJ3a4 b6 would have been an effective counter) 14 .i.xb7 .l:!.bS 15 .i.g2liJxb5 16liJxb5 .i.xb5 17 I:tbl h6 lSliJe4 .l:t.eS 19 d3, and White has active bishops, as well as strong squares for his pieces in front of Black's isolated c- pawn. These are advantages sufficient to win the game. 6 bxc3 .i.d6 7 liJf3 O-O 8 O-O White's central majority gives him the edge in slow lines as well; for example, S d3 c6 9 O-O liJd7 10 liJd2!? (10 .l:!.bl) 10 ... liJb6 11 a4 i.e6 12 a5liJd5 13 .i.b2 and c4. 8 . liJd7 9 d4 .l:!.e8 10 ~c2 ~e7 The combination of ... .l:!.eS and ... "VJIie7 is meant to prevent the advance e4. In return for open lines and piece activity, White allows Black to cripple his pawn-struc- ture. 1l  exd4 12 liJxd4 liJb6 13 a4 as 14 liJbS! lla6 ISliJxd6 'iVxd6 16 I::.dl 'iVe7 17 I::.d4! c6

18 c4 .i.e6 19 .i.e3liJc8 20 cS I::.a7 21 i.f4

White's active rooks and bishop-pair domi- nate the play, and he went on to win. The Modern Variation: 3 ... ~b4

[diagram]
One of the most serious theoretical shifts in the English Opening came with the discovery that 3 ... i.b4 is not only playable, but gives Black as many chances for advantage as White. For decades, a majority of players had concen- trated upon 3 ... c6, the Keres Variation, which will be discussed later in this chapter. Regard- less of the precise theoretical state of 3 ... c6, the move became associated with lines in which Black had to play very accurately to escape seri- ous trouble. Moreover, Black suffered a number of well-publicized defeats with 3 ... c6. Black's shyness about playing the Reversed Dragon with 3 ... d5 4 cxd5 liJxd5 was influenced by similar experiences, although that has changed today. At any rate, the move 3 ... .i.b4 has done more to discourage 3 g3 than any other factor, and accounts for the fact that 3 liJf3 is now White's most popular move among masters. It is also responsible for the increased interest in 1

2.JLJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 71

c4 eS 2 g3, which obviously renders ... iLb4 ir- relevant for the time being. Of course, some of this is fashion, and a number of masters use 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 3 g3 as their main weapon. Moreover, if a few top-level play- ers reconsider 3 g3 iLb4 and come up with new ideas for White, 3 g3 will soon become the trendy choice. Even as theory stands today, many theoretically 'equal' positions that result from it are interesting and full of content. w Larsen - Petrosian Milan 1975

1 c4 ttJf6 2 ttJc3 eS 3 g3 iLb4 (D)

4 ttJf3 4 iLg2 is by far the favourite move here, but there are some logical points behind this un- common choice. For one thing, White tries to make Black commit to the defence or advance of his e-pawn before he can play ... O-O and ... l:te8, moves that often follow 4 iLg2. A cou- ple of lesser ideas for White are worth mention- ing: a) 4 ttJdS is in general not an effective idea if 4 ... ttJxdS S cxdS doesn't attack a knight on c6. Compare 4 iLg2 O-O S ttJdS below (specifically, the note to White's Sth move in the game Kor- chnoi-Tseitlin). b) The tempo-winning 4 iVb3 ttJc6 S ttJdS looks more to the point. However, after s ... iLcs White's queen is poorly placed on b3. The best-known example is 6 e3 0-07 iLg2 ttJxdSl 8 cxdS ttJe7 9 ttJe2 d6 10 O-O c6 (1O ... iLg41 11 f3 iLd7 is the simplest equalizer) 11 d4 exd4 12 exd4 iLb6 13 iLgS iLd7 followed by ... h6, and Black had satisfactory play in Korchnoi-Kar- pov, World Ch (game 2S), Baguio City 1978. 4. e4 (D) Black takes up the challenge; 4 ... ttJc6 would enter the Four Knights Variation of the next chapter. w S ttJd4 S ttJgS has the disadvantage that after S. .. iLxc3 6 dxc3 O-O 7 iLg2 .l:e8 8 "i;c2 iVe7 9 O-O d6 10 ttJh3 iLfS 11 ttJf4 c6, White's knight has made four moves to get to f4, a square that he usually uses as a springboard to dS. Since dS is unavailable, White even has to be wary of the move ... gS followed by ... h6, when the knight will become stuck and vulnerable on h3. S. ttJc6 Black directly challenges the knight on d4. This is the standard idea, as we shall see in many games. Nevertheless, he has other ap- proaches to this kind of position. A logical al- ternative is S ... O-O 6 iLg2 l::!.e8 (or 6 ... iLxc3 first), with two-sided play following 7 iVc21? iLxc3 8 dxc3 h6 9 iLf4 d6 10 O-O-O ttJbd7. 6 ttJc2 (D) It's important to know that 6 ttJxc6?! dxc6 opens too many lines for Black; after the move ... iLfS, White's d-pawn won't be able to ad- vance safely. There are very few lines in which ttJxc6 is White's best course. 6 . iLxc3 7 dxc3 We already discussed the differences be- tween recaptures in our analysis of 1 c4 eS 2 ttJc3 iLb4, and we'll keep running into them. Here 7 bxc3 isn't as challenging. It can be an- swered conventionally by 7 ... O-O or 7 ... iVe7, but 7 ... dS! 8 cxdS iVxdS is a more active idea,

72 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

intending 9 i.g2 ~S. White often ends up with a backward d-pawn that can't be advanced without creating weaknesses. 7 ... h6 7 ... 0-08 i.gS is somewhat better for White because Black's knight is already on c6 and the manoeuvre tLle3-dS gains effect. Another way to justify the text-move is that White's bishop has no better square than gS. 8i.e3 This gives the game a unique character, whereas 8 i.g2 O-O 9 O-O is seen in Chapter S. 8 ... 'iVe7!? 8 ... O-O and 8 ... b6 9 i.g2 i.b7 intending ... tLleS are also possible. 9 i.g2 d6 10 tLlb4! tLlxb4 11 cxb4 O-O 12 'iVd4 .l::!.e813 h3!? (D)

White prevents ... tLlg4 and plans to expand on the kingside. The position is balanced. Gen- erally speaking, if Black maintains a cramping pawn on e4 or creates weaknesses in White's camp, that compensates for the bishop-pair. 13 b6 14 O-O-O!? Obviously risky. White wants to go all-out by g4-gS, which means that he has to castle on the other wing. w 14 i.b7 15 <;t>bl tLld7 16 g4 tLle5! 17 c5!? Not 17 i.xe4?? cS. 17 dxc5 Or 17 ... bxcS 18 bxcS dS! with equality. 18 bxc5 :ad8 19 'it'c3 i.d5 (D) 20 i.d4 f6 21 i.e3 b5!? 22 b3 tLlc6 23 h4! i.f7 24 g5 fxg5 25 hxg5 :xdl+ 26 :xdl h5! The position is still dynamically equal. 4 tLlf3 is under-explored and interesting . Digression on the Rossolimo Sicilian After 1 c4 eS 2 tLlc3 tLlf6 3 g3 i.b4, White nor- mally plays the natural 4 i.g2 and Black replies

4 ... O-O (D).

2.JtJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 73

Now White has to consider how to make progress. It's informative to look at this as a re- versed-colour variation of a line of the Rosso- limo Sicilian, which goes 1 e4 c5 2liJf3 liJc6 3 .tb5 g64 O-O i..g7 (D). w In our English Opening version, Black has a tempo less; so couldn't White claim some ad- vantage by playing typical Sicilian moves at this point? Unfortunately, as we have learned, knowing what your opponent is doing can par- tially compensate for being a tempo behind. Thus anything that White does commits him to a structure and/or piece placement, and Black can adjust his strategy accordingly. Let's exam- ine some continuations to see whether that's sufficient for Black to equalize. We'll start with the Rossolimo Sicilian posi- tion. How does White try to make progress after 40-0 .tg7? I'll show some standard ideas with a selection of theoretical details, and then com- pare them with our English Opening 3 ... i..b4 variation. A side benefit is that I shall provide belated coverage of the Rossolimo Sicilian it- self! a) In the Sicilian, 5 c3 is usually answered by 5 ... liJf6, since liJc3 is no longer available to White. Let's be clear about that. In our English Opening variation, after 3 g3 i..b4 4 i..g2 O-O 5 liJf3 l:!e8 6 O-O e4 7 liJd4, Black has the ideal move 7 ... liJc6!, after which 8liJxc6?! dxc6 gives Black open lines and freer play (see the game Cuellar-Uhlmann below). In the Sicilian posi- tion, White's 'extra' move is 5 c3, so if he meets 5 ... liJf6 with 6 e5 liJd5, he can't then play the desirable liJc3. There might follow 7 d4 cxd4 8 cxd4. After 8 ... d6 9liJc3, 9 ... liJxc3 10 bxc3 O-O is theoretically equal, while 9 ... i..e6!? is in- triguing. Instead of 6 e5, White can develop slowly, but to gain any advantage he has to play ambitiously at some point; for example, 6l:!el (a move rec- ommended more often than not) 6 ... O-O (D). w Now White has two main approaches: al) 7 d4 d5! (this is more ambitious and probably better than 7 ... cxd4 8 cxd4 d5 9 e5 liJe4, a well-known position in which, how- ever, Black stands satisfactorily) 8 e5 (8 exd5 ~xd5 9 c4 ~d6) 8 ... liJe4. Remarkably, we've reached a position that is probably slightly more difficult to play from White's side of the board! a2) 7 e5liJd5 8 d4 (D).

Now 8 ... d6!? is a challenging move that might attract some players, but the most solid variation is 8 ... cxd4 9 cxd4 d6. After 10 liJc3, one line is 1O ... dxe5 11 i..xc6 bxc6 12 liJxe5, when 12 ... 'ifb6 should be good enough (13 ~a4

74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

i.xe5 14 dxe5 lLlxc3 15 bxc3 i.e6). But, as above, 1O ... i.e6!? is even more interesting. Then 11 lLlg5? is very strongly met by 11 ... dxe5 12lLlxe6 fxe6 13 i.xc6 bxc6 14 dxe5 't!fb6, and after the natural 11 i.g5, ll...dxe5 12 i.xc6 bxc6 13 lLlxe5 1:tc8 holds on to the bishop-pair and contemplates moves like ... f6 and ... c5. In conclusion, White's move 5 c3 in the Si- cilian Defence tips his hand, and Black can choose the appropriate defensive system. Com- pare variations of the English Opening below in which Black can play ... c6 successfully, only because White isn't able to respond by lLlf3! b) Returning to the Rossolimo position after 40-0 i.g7, 5 I:tel (D) fights for an edge without committing to the move c3.

Now 5 ... lLlf6 might be met by 6 e5 with the idea 6 ... lLld5 7 lLlc3!, again utilizing the avail- ability of White's c3-square. In fact, 6lLlc3 in- tending e5 is also good. Nevertheless, tipping his hand by 5 .:i.el once again limits what White can achieve. It's more logical for Black to play the typical defence 5 ... e5, since the rook on el is not very useful in that case (in a couple of situations, it might even be better placed on f1, supporting the ad- vance f4). Then there are various continuations, but with Black intending 6 ... lLlge7 to reinforce c6, the most common one is 6 i.xc6 dxc6 7 d3 WIIe7!? 8lLlbd2 (8 b3; 8 a3!?, with ideas ofb4, when 8 ... a5 !? is interesting) 8 ... lLlf6 9 lLlc4lLld7 . I think White may have a very small edge in this line, but it hasn't translated into much in prac- tice. In the reversed English Opening position, af- ter 4 i.g2 O-O, Black can hold off with the move ... 1:te8. As we just saw, the best position for that rook isn't known yet. c) Returning to the Rossolimo Sicilian, 5 lLlc3 (D) is another instructive attempt.

But this is also a committal move, and per- mits Black to play 5 ... lLld4. Remember that ... lLld4 is more effective when White has a knight on c3, so that an exchange on d4 forces White to lose a tempo after ... cxd4. Probably 6 l:1el would follow, permitting the exchange on b5 to uncertain effect. Compare the reversed English Opening po- sition, after 3 g3 i.b4 4 i.g2 O-O. Black hasn't played ... lLlc6, so 5lLld5 is harmless (the knight can be exchanged without loss of time); see the note to move 5 in Korchnoi-Tseitlin below. Furthermore, 5 ... e5 is a perfectly adequate reply to 5 lLlc3, especially since a knight or bishop on d5 can be exchanged off (after 6lLld5 lLlge7, for example). In that case, Black's pre- ferred set-up would be ... lLlge7, ... O-O, ... d6, ... i.e6 and ... d5. d) Finally, in part because he hasn't made much progress with the 5th moves above, White has turned to the slightly cooperative 5 i.xc6. We already looked at this and the reversed posi- tion by transposition in Chapter 3 in the game Illescas-Sisniega, Novi Sad Olympiad 1990 (see the note to the main move 8 ... lLle7). Spe- cifically, we saw the position after 5 i.xc6 dxc6

6 d3 e5 7 lLlbd2 'fiIe7 8 b3 lLlf6 9 i.b2 lLld7 10

a4, which is equal with either colour (although full of content). Naturally, there's much more to be said about these lines, but I wanted to give a general im- pression of how 1 e4 c5 2lLlf3 lLlc6 3 i.b5 g6 4

2.JDj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 75

O-O i.g7 plays out. Now let's once again return to 'our' position from the English Opening: I c4 e5 2lLlc3lLlf6 3 g3 i.b4 4 i.g2 O-O (D), and B show some games. w Korchnoi - Ma. Tseitlin Leningrad 1973

[diagram]
'iVb3!? This looks logical enough, attacking the Or 9 lLle2lLle5!, when in most lines ... lLlf3+ will follow. 9 ... l:i:e810 d3 Some of the most entertaining attacks in chess are conducted by pieces with little or no pawn support. An example is 10 i.g2 lLld4 11 'iVdl d5! 12 cxd5 (Black's position is wonder- fully harmonious after 12 i.xd5 i.f5 13 d3 J:tad8) 12 ... 'iVa6! (D). bishop and avoiding doubled pawns if Black W captures on c3. The problem is that White's queen is misplaced, and Black will exploit this by tactical means. The sortie 5 lLld5 is not dangerous after 5 ... lLlxd5 6 cxd5. White even came out worse in Simagin-Polugaevsky, Moscow 1964 after 6 ... c67 a3 i.e7 8 d3? (8 d4 is a better choice) 8 ... cxd5 9 e3 (9 i.xd5?? 'iVa5+) 9 ... d6 10 lLle2 i.e6 with a temporary extra pawn and advan- tage. After 11 lLlc3 lLlc6 12 i.xd5 i.xd5 13 lLlxd5 'iVa5+ 14 lLlc3 d5, Black controls the centre and White's light squares have been compromised. 5 ... lLlc6 6 lLld5 i.c5 7 e3 (D) It's hard to believe, but White has some trou- bles already; for example, 7 d3lLld4 8 ~dl c6 9 lLlxf6+ Wt'xf6 10 lLlf3 lLlxf3+ 11 i.xf3 d5!. 7  e4!! Out of nowhere comes this energetic and creative advance. Black sacrifices a pawn, try- ing to exploit White's weakened light squares. A more restrained method of development is 7 ... d6 8lLle2lLlxd5 9 cxd5lLle7 10 O-O i.b6. 8lLlxf6+ Wt'xf6 9 i.xe4 It's extremely hard for White to develop in view of 13 lLle2? i.g4, 13 i.n 'iUg6 14 d3 i.g4!, 13lLlf3 i.g4 14 h3 ~d3! or 13 i.n ~g6

14 d3 i.g4 15 i.e2 i.b4+, with the idea 16

i.d2? (16 'it>n lLlxe2 17 lLlxe2 i.f3 18 .l:1g1 ~f5!) 16 ... i.xe2 17lLlxe2lLlf3+.It's not inevi- table that light-square weaknesses completely cripple White when he plays g3 and e3, but in this case he is also massively behind in devel- opment.

10. .. d6 11 i.d2

Korchnoi doesn't like this move, but his 11 lLle2 can be answered by the exchange sacrifice

76 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Il..Jhe4! 12 dxe4 'iVf3 13.l:!.1 tbe5 14 'iVc2 'ii'g2 15 tbf4 'ii'xh2 with ideas of ... g5, ... ..tg4, etc. 1l. .. ..tf5 12 ..tc3 "ii'g6!? An excellent alternative was 12 ... tbe5! 13 ..txe5 dxe5; for example, 14 'fixb7 .l:!.ab8 15 'i!t'c6 ..tb4+ 16 ..t.;>1 .l:!.e6! 17 'i!t'xc7 ..td6 18 ~xa7 ..txe4 19 dxe4 .l:!.xb2 20 f3 ..tf8! and White's three extra pawns are useless in the face of .. .l::td6-d2. 13 ..txf5 'fixf5 14 :r.dl? 14 'iVxb7 should have been tried. After the text-move Black's pieces come flooding out.

[diagram]
Or 14 ... ..txe3 15 fxe3 .l:!.xe3+ 16 'iitd2 .l:!.xd3+

17..t.;>c1 tbd4 (D).

w Then a cute line is 18 ~a4 b5! 19 cxb5 'iVg5+ 20 'iitbl "iVxb5! and Black wins (21 ~xb5l:f.xdl#). 15 'fixb7 15 cxd5 ..txe3! is an express version of the last note. 15 ..txe3! 16 fxe3 .l:!.xe3+ 17 ~d2 J::txd3+ 18 ~c1 .l:!.b8! 19 .l:!.el 19 ~xc6 .l:!.xc3+ 20 bxc3 .l:lbl + 21 'it>d2 l:tb2+. 19 h6 Protecting against the back-rank mate and winning the queen. Black won shortly. Brasket - Timman Lone Pine 1978

[diagram]
This is obviously sound; the problem is that it tips White's hand. 5 . c6! (D) When your opponent decides not to occupy the centre, consider doing so yourself! Notice that in the Rossolimo Variation above, Black didn't play the passive ... d6 at such an early stage of the game, whereas White has done the equivalent with his extra move. I should men- tion that 5 ... .l:!.e8 with the idea 6 tbf3 e4 is an- other fully legitimate way to exploit the slow pace set by 5 d3. w

6..td2?!

This looks safe and sound because of the idea iVb3, yet it gives Black the chance to take over the centre with a pawn sacrifice. Strangely, even safe-looking alternatives don't promise White a worry-free life: a) 6 e4?! d5 (or 6 ... ..txc3+ 7 bxc3 d5) 7 cxd5 cxd5 8 exd5 tbxd5 9 tbge2 tbc6 with a nicely centralized position. White will have to liquidate his weak d-pawn just to maintain equality. b) 6 ~3 is a respectable alternative that can lead to some dynamic play after 6 ... tba6! 7 tbf3 (7 e4? tbc5! 8 'fic2 d5; after 7 a3 ..ta5!? 8 'fic2 d5 9 b4 ..tb6 10 tbf3 "fie7 11 O-O, it's an open question who stands better: Black has central control, and White has harmonious develop- ment) 7 ... e4!? (Black loses time in order to se- cure a strong outpost on c5) 8 dxe4 (not 8 tbd4? exd3 9 exd3 tbc5! 10 'fic2 .l:!.e8+) 8. .. tbxe4 9 O-O..txc3 10 bxc3 :e8 11 ..tf4 tbac5 12 "fic2 and the two bishops and play on the d-file may favour White by a smidgen. c) 6 tbf3 d5 7 cxd5 (7 tbxe5?? loses a piece to 7 ... d4) 7 ... cxd5 8 a3 ..txc3+ (8 ... ..te7!?) 9 bxc3 'iVc7 10 O-O h611 ..te3 tbc6, Hort-Kuzmin, 2 ... 0,f6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 77 West Germany 1981. As so often, two bishops Cuellar - Uhlmann versus space yields approximate equality. Leningrad Interzonal 1973 6  dS! 7 ~b3 tba6! 8 cxdS cxdS (D)

1 c4 eS 2 tbc3 tbf6 3 g3 .ltb4 4 .ltg2 O-O S

tbf3 (D) This is a more logical choice than S 'iib3 or S W d3, because it develops, forces the play and 9a3 It turns out that White's planned capture on dS gives Black an effective attack following 9 tbxdS .ltxd2+ 10 ~xd2 tbxdS 11 ~xdS (11 .ixdS ~a5+ 12 ~dl.ltd7 13 a4 tbb4) 1l..."iVb6!. 9 ... .ltaS 9 ... .ltxc3 10 .ltxc3 tbcs is also possible. 10~c1? Slow. A better move is 10 tbf3, although 1O ... d4 11 tbe4 tbxe4 12 dxe4 .ltxd2+ 13 tbxd2 .lte6! wins time (14 ~xb7 tbcs IS 'iibS 'ilic7 16 b4? tbb3! 17 tbxb3 ~c3+). 10 .lte6 11 ~dl d4 (D) w 12 tbbl Here, instead of 12 ... .ltxd2+?!, Black could have maintained the advantage by 12 ... tbdS or 12 ... .ltb6! with the idea ... tbcS. The opening was a great success for him. comes closer to castling.

S. . l:.e8 6 O-O e4 Remember that this move tends to be better when tbd4 can be answered by ... tbc6. Interest- ing positions can arise after 6 ... c6 (risky) 7 d4!? (7 'ilib3 .ltxc3 8 bxc3 is flexible and unclear, with the idea 8 ... dS 9 .lta3; 8 ... d6! intending . .. tba6 is a sound option) 7 ... e4 (D). w 8 tbgS! (White doesn't get much from 8 tbel dS 9 'iib3!? .ltxc3 10 bxc3 dxc4 11 ~xc4 tbbd7, when Black's coming control of the queenside light squares compensates for White's bishops) 8 ... dS 9 ~b3 .ltf8? (too passive; 9 ... .ltxc3! 10 bxc3 h6 11 tbh3 tbbd7 is roughly equal) 10

78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

cxd5 cxd5 11 f3 h6? (11...~c6 12 e3 retains White's edge) 12 ~xf7! ~xf7 13 fxe4 ~g8 14 e5 ~h7, Pi'ibyl-Lutikov, Bucharest 1975, and here White is completely winning after 15 ~xd5! with the idea 15 ... i.e6 1611Vxb7 ~a6 17 ~f4 or 15 ... 'it>h8 16 ~f4. 7~e1 We discussed the comparison with the Ros- solimo Variation above. Ljubojevic-I.Sokolov, PCA Qualifier, Groningen 1993 illustrated it well: 7 ~d4 ~c6! 8 ~c2 i.xc3 9 bxc3 (White retains the central majority and bishop-pair; re- capturing with the b-pawn may not be worse than with the d-pawn, but it's more difficult to play - after 9 dxc3, 9 ... ~e5 10 b3 d6 11 i.g5 ~ed7 12 'iVd4 h6 13 i.xf6 ~xf6 equalized in F.Olafsson-Smyslov, Candidates tournament, Bled/Zagreb/Belgrade 1959) 9 ... d5 10 cxd5 'iVxd5 (D). w This kind of position arises in several varia- tions. In return for the advantages mentioned for White, Black has space, free development and light-square pressure. 11 d4 'iVh5 12 f3! and now: a) The game continued 12 ... i.h3? (exchang- ing bishops is thematic, but it runs into tactical problems) 13 g4! 1IVh4 14 ~e3 g6? (14 ... exf3 15 exf3 i.xg2 16 ~xg2 iYh3 is the best of evils). Now simply 15 i.xh3 iYxh3 16 g5! would have been killing; for example, 16 ... ~h5 17 ~g4 threatens ~f2 followed by fxe4, and 17 ... exf3?! is met by 18 ~h6+ followed by Itxf3, targeting f7. b) Sokolov proposes a solution based upon light-square play: 12 ... exf3 13 exf3 and now 13 ... ~d5!?, with the idea 14 i.d2 ~a5 15 ~a3 ~b6, controlling c4 and d5, while e3 and d3 are shaky squares in White's camp. However, White can play the tricky 14 c4! ~c3 (threaten- ing the queen and ... ~e2+) 15 l:tel!, followed by ~d2 after the bishop moves. 13 ... 'iVaS is a decent option here. It's fair to say that this whole line is in dynamic balance. 7 . i.xc3 8 dxc3 (D)

Capturing with the d-pawn is the most popu- lar response in most of these positions, since White can exert influence down the d-file and develop his c1-bishop quickly. 8 . d6 9 ~c2 ~bd7 When we get to the Four Knights Variation in Chapter 5, we'll see that Black has benefited here by not having ... ~c6 in, since d7 is a more flexible square for this piece.

10 b3 (D)

White will undoubtedly play this move at some point. It defends against a tempo-winning attack on his c4-pawn, but also plays a part in

2.Jfjf6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 79

one of White's standard plans that you'll see in the next note.

10. .. h6 W

Black feels that he needs to prevent .igS at some point, so this is a useful move. ll.Be3?! Not an utterly weak move, but it introduces the wrong plan. White's standard idea is 11 ll'le3! (D), to cover fS (versus ... .ifS), but even more so to come to dS. We'll see this in the next chapter.

One fantasy line that partially explains 10 b3 A blunder, but after 24 .l:.el ll'lg4 2S 'tlkdl ~xdl (or 2S ... ll'leS) 26 ltdxdlll'lxe3 27 .l:.xe3 l:he3 28 fxe3 gxh4 Black will eventually win. 24 . Jhe3 25 fxe3 ~xg3+ 26 ~hl g40-1 Stein - Smyslov Moscow 1971

[diagram]
(D)

is l1...b6 12ll'ldS ll'lxdS 13 cxdS .Bb7?! 14 c4 B fS IS .Bb2 with a very nice long diagonal to work with. To be clear: I'm showing a number of wins by Black in this chapter, but with perfectly ac- curate play the assessment of these variations moves back and forth between complete equal- ity for Black and a very limited edge for White. 1l. . b6 12 ~d2 .Bb7 13 l:tadlll'les! White's moves have been logical, but sud- denly the potential threat of ... ll'lf3+ is hanging over White's position. The rest of the game is a model of sustained initiative through tactics, and I'll let you watch it without many notes: 14 ~cl ~c8! Light squares! 15 h3? ll'lf3+! (D) 16~hl Suddenly Black is getting a serious attack. 16 exf3 exf3 17 .ihl ~xh3 18l:td4ll'le4! comes out well for him.

16. .. lte5! 17ll'lel nhs 18 h4 ~g4! 19 exf3

exf3 20 ll'lxf3 .Bxf3 21 .Bxf3 ~xf3+ 22 ~gl g5! 23 nd4 ne8 24 ~dl?? This is one of our first looks at the so-called 'Botvinnik System', in which White gains a firm grip on dS while conceding an outpost on d4. The combination of c4, ll'lc3, e4, g3 and .Bg2 constitutes a Botvinnik formation, and it usually includes ll'lge2, d3 and O-O. Then White has the broad choice of playing in the centre by .Be3, attacking on the kingside with f4 or g4, and advancing on the queenside with

M.

White's set-up was originally considered the best way to meet 3 ... .Bb4; as it turns out, Black

80 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

can play very dynamically against it and secure equal chances. 5  lDc6 Surely this is Black's most natural move, controlling d4 and bringing a piece out; and yet 5 ... .i.xc3 is more popular, and we shall see why by comparing this game and the next. 6 lDge2 .i.c5 7 O-O d6 (D) w What could be more logical? White has cre- ated a gaping hole on d4, so Black hurries to control it. But this illustrates a great strength of the Botvinnik System: it creates only one weak- ness, and White's play on the rest of the board is multi-faceted, as we'll see. 8d3

8 h3 is another continuation for White, with

the idea of 'it'h2 followed by launching the f- pawn forward: a) 8 ... lDd4 9 d3 c6 10 'it>hl lDe8?! allows White to demonstrate another basic idea in the Botvinnik: lllDxd4 .i.xd4 12lDe2 .i.b6 l3 d4 WIIe7 14 .i.e3lDf6 15 ~d3l:[e8 16lDc3 (D).

This is Portisch-Ree, Wijk aan Zee 1969. The weakness on d4 has disappeared and White commands the centre. b) A typical opposition of kingside and queenside attack took place in Lalic-Komarov, Benasque 1994: 8 ... a6 9 d3 .i.d7 10 ~h2 (these are all the usual preliminary moves for f4) lo ... lDd4 (whereas Black clears the way for ... b5) 11 f4 h6 12 a4!? (to discourage ... b5) 12 ... .l:.b8 l3 a5 b5! 14 axb6 1:1xb6 15 lDxd4 .i.xd4 16 1:1a2 "iKe7 17lDe2 .i.c5 18 f5! (White prepares the pawn-roller that is the bread and butter of the Botvinnik System) 18 ... c6 (now Black makes no attempt to hold it up, say, by ... lDh7; but his central and queenside play is also thematic) 19 g4 d5 with equality, and 19 ... 1:1fb8! was also good. The general lesson of the opening is that versus the direct f4 plan, Black can play for a speedy ... b5 and hold his own. 8  h6 9 a3 as 10 1:1bl .i.d7 11 h3 lDh7 12 'it>h2 f5 13 .i.e3! Finally White contests d4. The idea is .i.xc5 followed by f4, when he wins key squares in the centre. 13. .1l.xe3 14 fxe3 fxe4 15 lDxe4 1:1xn 16 WIIxfl 'VIIe7 17 lD2c3 1:1f8 18 "iKe2 .i.e6 19 b4 axb4 20 axb4 (D)

We have a picture of White's desired set-up in a great many Reversed Sicilian variations: pseudo-outposts on e4 and d5 in conjunction with a queenside b-pawn attack and unob- structed bishop on g2. The a-file can also prove useful. Black's counter-strategy is also stan- dard: via ... c6 and ... d5 he wishes to deny White those juicy squares. However, White's pieces 2 .. .ti'Jj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 81 are ideally coordinated to render that less than effective. 20 . .liJd8 21 bS c6 22 bxc6 bxc6 23 'i!Va2 W liJgS 24 'iVa3! liJxe4 2SliJxe4liJf7 26 l:!.b6l:!.c8 27 'iVb4! i.fS 28 cS! i.xe4 29 'iVxe4 dxcS (D) White can work around Black's centre after 29 ... d5 30 'iVf5 'iVc7 31 e4! d4 32 i.f3!, intend- ing .idl-b3. w 30 l:!.xc6?! 30 'iVc4! 'i!Vd6 31l:!.b7! puts a great deal of pressure on the enemy position. 30  l:!.xc6 31 'iVxc6 'iVd6 32 'iVe8+ 'iVrs 33 'i!Ve6 'iVd6 34 'iVa2?! 34 'iVc4! 'iitf8 35 i.d5 still favours White and should have been tried. 34.. 'iVxd3 3S .idS 'iVn 36 h4 g6 112_112 J. Pribyl - Hecht w.Germany-Czechoslovakia match, Bamberg 1972 1 c4liJf6 2liJc3 eS 3 g3 i.b4 4 i.g2 O-O S e4 i.xc3! Rather than exploit his outpost on d4, Black does his opponent the favour of eliminating it! On the other hand, he acts before 6 liJge2 con- solidates White's game, and we've seen that the structures resulting from ... i.xc3 hold consid- erable promise for Black. As usual, White has a serious decision between recaptures. 6bxc3 6 dxc3 is Korchnoi-Mecking below. 6 ... c6! (D) I'll concentrate upon this main move. Black has in mind the direct ... d5. 7liJe2?! Surprisingly, this natural move has proven to be very awkward and risky for White, even if it's playable. The knight development is natu- rally even worse in the Sicilian position 1 e4 c5 2liJf3 liJc6 3 i.b5 g6 4 O-O i.g7 if White plays 5l:!.el e5 6 i.xc6 bxc6?! 7 c3! liJe7?!. Here are a few alternatives: a) Strange to say, there have been many games with the innocuous 7 d4, when Black can play 7 ... exd4 8 'i!Vxd4!? (8 cxd4 liJxe4! 9 i.xe4 hIe8) 8 .. J:te8 9 liJe2 d5!? (9 ... d6) 10 cxd5 cxd5 11 exd5 i.f5, a complex gambit idea from Vallejo Pons-Aronian, FIDE World Cup, Khanty-Mansiisk 2005. But 7 ... d6 is the most instructive idea, with Nimzo-lndian-Iike themes. 8liJe2 (D).

White has ideas of playing c5, which Black can prevent with ... c5. This has the drawback that if White replies dS, Black hasn't the op- tion of ... cxd5, followed by putting pressure on the backward c3-pawn down an open file and enjoying outposts on c5 and c4. Black can

82 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

even lose time to provoke the advance of the d-pawn by S ... Ji.e6!? 9 dS Ji.d7! followed by ... cxdS and ... ltJa6-cS. For his part, White needs to prevent that plan before initiating an attack on the other wing. He can do so by 10 Ji.a3!, when 10 ... cxdS!? 11 Ji.xd6 dxe4! 12 Ji.xfS 'tWxfS gives Black compensation for the ex- change following ... Ji.e6. At any rate, Soro- kin-Motylev, Calcutta 2002 proceeded S. .. cS 9 dS (here 9 O-O! ltJc6 10 'tWd3 keeps everything flexible) 9 ... ltJeS (9 ... ltJbd7! 10 O-O?! 'tWaS 11 f4 iVa6) 10 h3 g6?! 11 Ji.h6ltJg7, when 120-0 fS 13 f4! would have taken advantage of Black's vulnerable dark squares. b) 7 Ji.a3! is probably as good as anything: 7 .. J:teS S iVb3 (D).

S. .. b6!? (S ... d6, planning ... a6 and ... bS, is Kosten's idea, and S. .. ltJa6 9 d3 d5!? is a curious gambit, intending 10 cxdS cxdS 11 exdS Ji.fS 12l:tdl e4) 9 d3! (9 ltJe2 Ji.b7 10 Ji.d6?! l:te6 contains the trick 11 'tWa3? cS! 12 Ji.xbS Ji.xe4!

13 Ji.xe4ltJxe4 14 f3ltJf6 IS Ji.xa7 'tWcS 160-0

~b7 17 'tWb2 l:txa7 with the better knight and pawn-structure, Grigoriants-Sadvakasov, Subo- tica 2000) 9 ... Ji.b7 10 ltJf3! dS l1ltJd2! ltJa6 12 O-O ltJc7?! 13l:tfe1 ~d7 14 liad1l:tadS IS exdS cxdS 16ltJf3! and with his active pieces, White stood better in Hubner-Christiansen, Munich 1992. 7 ... dS 8 cxdS cxdS 9 exdSltJxdSl0 O-O ltJc6

(D)

White has two bishops and potentially active piece-play, but his central pawns can only ad- vance at the cost of creating weaknesses. Black will target light squares such as d3, c4, a2 and a4. w 11 l:tblltJb6!? 12 d4 This is best; otherwise .. :it'd3 or ... Ji.fS re- strains and targets the centre. ... Ji.e6 Aiming at the a-pawn, but even more so at the outpost square c4. 13 a4?! White might want to bailout and simplify by 13 dxeS! Ji.xa2 14 l:tb2; for example, 14 ... Ji.dS IS Ji.xd5! ~xdS 16 'ii'xdS ltJxdS 17 f4ltJb6! (back to the light-square blockade) IS ltJd4! ltJaS! 19ltJfSltJbc4 20 l:ta2l:tfdS 21ltJd4l:tdS 22 'it>g2 l:tcS with equality. ... Ji.c4 14l:tel ~d7 IS Ji.a3l:tfd8 16 Ji.cs ltJdS17 'ikd2 b618 Ji.a3 (D)

18. ltJf6!? With ideas of capturing on e2 and then d4. Black remains better, but that would be more evident after IS ... l:tacS!. 19 'tWgS?! White should hunker down with 19 l:tbd1 (meeting 19 ... Ji.b3?! with 20 dxeS!).

2. . .cDj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 83

19 ... h6 20 'iVh4 i.d5! 21 dxe5 ttJxe5 22 ttJf4? i.xg2 23 l:txe5 i.b7 24 'iih3 ..wc6 25 ttJg2 At this point, 2S ... ttJe4! would win immedi- ately in view of the threats of ... ttJd2 and ... ttJgS: 26l:txe4 'iixe4 27l:tfl 'iVf3! and White can't do a thing about 28 ... gS followed by ... g4! - an aesthetically appealing position. Schindler - Nebel E-mail (IECe) 2003

[diagram]
i.xc3 6 bxc3 c6 7 'iVb3 (D) Overall, this move has proven harmless ver- sus good defence, and White can easily get into trouble with a small misstep.

7 ... ttJa6 Black has the ideas ... ttJcS and/or ... dS. 8 i.a3 d6!? An ingenious move because of the defensive conception behind it. 8 ... l:te8 is a popular alter- native. 9 ttJe2 ttJd7! The point. White succeeded in opening the position after 9 ... i.e6?! 10 d4! exd4 (lO ... bS 11 dS!) 11 ttJxd4 ttJcS 12 i.xcs dxcS 13 ttJxe6 fxe6 140-0 'iVc7 IS eS! ttJg4 16 i.h3 ttJxeS 17 f4 ttJf7 18 i.xe6l:tae8 19l:tael with space and a small advantage in Hort-Smyslov, Reggio Emilia 198617. 10 d4!? Black's trick is 10 i.xd6? ttJdcS 11 i.xcS ttJxcS 12 'iVc2 ttJd3+ (or 12 ... 'iVd3) 13 ~fl i.e6! with an almost winning advantage. 10 ... c5 11 O-O ttJb6 12 f4 After 12 i.el ! i.d7 13 a4 cxd4 14 cxd4 exd4 IS ttJxd4 ttJcS Black wins a pawn, but his weak d-pawn and White's strong bishop-pair pro- duce a complex imbalance. 12. i.g4 13 l:tael "i!Bc7 (D) w 14 fxe5? White loses the thread and immobilizes his own kingside pawns. He should play 14 dS, sacrifice the pawn on c4, and play fS in order to get his pawns rolling on the kingside. That would be very complex, whereas in the game he gives up that chance and lets a knight into c4.

14.  dxe5 15 ttJc1 i.d7 16 ttJd3 i.a4 17

..wbl ttJxc4 18 i.xc5 l:tfd8 19 'iic1 b6 20 i.a3 Now instead of 20 ... exd4 21 eS, with some complications, 20 ... .l:tac8! would prepare cap- ture of d4 and leave White's bishop looking rather pitiful on a3. Korchnoi - Mecking Candidates match (game I), Augusta 1974

[diagram]
i.xc3 6 dxc3 d6 (D) 7 "i!Be2 The reasoning here is that White's knight isn't well-placed on e2, from where it has no place to go and serves little purpose. So White defends his e-pawn and will bring his knight via f3 to either d2 or h4. In the Sicilian Defence, Black has used the same plan a tempo down; the result is equality in both cases. An example of the knight's awkward role on e2 with respect to both the queenside and centre is 7 ttJe2 a6! 8 a4 (otherwise ... bS followed by ... i.b7 and ... ttJd7- cS keeps White on the defensive) 8 ... i.e6 9 b3

84 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w ttJbd7 10 a5 b6 11 f3 ~8!? 12 i.e3 b5! 13 cxb5 'ifxb5 14 c4 'iVb4+ 15 i.d2 ~7 160-0 .:tab8 17 .:ta3 c6! 18 'ifeI .:tfe8 19 g4 d5 with an obvious advantage for Black, A.Popov-Vein- ger, correspondence game 1994. 7 ... ttJbd7 S ttJf3 (D)

... ttJcS After 8 ... a6, a cautious approach for White is 9 ttJd2!? (9 a4? ttJc5 attacks b3, and 10 ttJd2 a5 doesn't help much) 9 ... b5 10 a4! bxc4 11 ttJxc4 with chances for both sides, Relange-H.Olafs- son, Internet 1998. 9 ttJh4 a6! In most lines after 7 ~e2, ... b5 is Black's main goal. Sometimes you see ... a5-a4, to win space and tie down White's queenside; for ex- ample, 9 ... a5 100-0 a4 11 i.d2i.e6 12 l:!.adl ~d7 13 i.e3 .:ta5 with equality.

10 b3 bS! (D)

11 i.a3 An equal game results from 11 O-O i.b7 (l1...bxc4!?) 12 f3 i.c6. w 11 . ttJfd7 12 O-O i.b7 13 f3 White can also flee the fl-a6 diagonal by 13 :tfdl with the idea 13 ... bxc4 (13 ... i.c6) 14 ~xc4 a5 15 ~e2. ... i.c6 14 ttJfS bxc4 IS bxc4 White has doubled and isolated c-pawns that are blockaded, but they control important squares and are not easily attacked. lS ... ttJa4 16 1Wd2 ttJdcS 17 ttJe3 .:teS IS :tad1 .:tbS 19 ttJdS i.d7 20 i.b4 i.e6 21 .:tfe1 c6!? 22 ttJe3 ~b6! 231Wc2 23 ~xd6?! is worse due to 23 ... .:tbd8 24 ~xe5 ttJd3. 23 . .:tbdS Neither side has a great deal to do, and after much manoeuvring the game was ultimately drawn. In this section, we have seen that while White has many interesting ways to continue after 3 g3 i.b4, his positive prospects are lim- ited by the lack of forcefulness in his position. That is, the c4/ttJc3/g3 set-up is excellent as a reactive system when Black defending the Si- cilian (via 1 e4 c5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 i.b5 g6, for ex- ample), but it isn't as effective for White when his goal is to claim the initiative. Keres Defence

1 c4 eS 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 3 g3 c6 (D)

This move, introducing what is called the 'Keres Defence', has much in common with 2 g3 c6 and 2 g3 ttJf6 3 i.g2 c6 below (see the section 'White Plays 2 g3 '). Black is essentially entering into a type of Alapin Sicilian (1 e4 c5 2 2 ... ttJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 85 w ltJf3ltJc63 c3) with a tempo less, but as so of- ten, that extra move g3 has disadvantages that accompany its more obvious good points. Hodgson - lIIescas Wijk aan Zee 1993

[diagram]
White permits Black to build up a large cen- tre, although at first that looks risky for Black. 4 ... d5 5 cxd5 cxd5 (D) w 6 "iib3 The consistent move, forcing Black to sur- render a pawn. It would be disappointing to have to grant Black space and the ideal centre so early in the game; for example, 6 d3 d4 (or 6 ... ltJc6) 7ltJe4 ltJxe4 8 dxe4 (8 il.xe4 has several answers, in- cluding the calm 8. .. il.d6, when White must avoid 9 ltJf3?? fS, so 9 il.g2 O-O 10 ltJf3 ltJc6 could follow) 8 ... ltJc6 9ltJf3 il.e7 10 O-O O-O 11 ltJel il.e6 12ltJd3 nc8 13 f4 f6. White has a bad bishop and has done nothing about Black's d4- pawn. 6 .. ltJc6! The entire Keres Defence rests upon a gam- bit! Fortunately for Black, it's a good one. 7 ltJxd5 ltJd4! 8 ltJxf6+ Instead, after 8 "iVc4 ltJxdS! 9 il.xdS bS! 10 il.xf7+ Re7 Black wins material, because 11 ~dS ltJc2+ 12 ~dl ltJxal 13 "iixa8 "iic7! 14 ~e4 Rxf7 IS ~bl il.b4! 16 ~xal?! il.fS 17 d3 llc8 18 "iVbl e4! is too strong.

8. .. gxf6 (D)

Over the years, 8 ... 'iVxf6 has won more than its share of games, but it's not as clear after 9 ~d3. w 9 'iVdl This time 9 ~d3 "iic7! forces White's king to move, with this typical consequence: 10 ~dl (10 ~f1 il.e6 threatens ... ltJc2 and ... il.xa2, when 11 ~c3 "iVb6 intends ... nc8 with a killing attack) 10 ... il.fS 11 il.e4 il.xe4 12 ~xe4 fS 13 ~d3 .l::r.c8 (now 14 ... e4! is threatened) 14 e3 'iVc6 IS f3 ltJc2 16 llbl il.g7. White can't get his pieces out and if nothing else, Black can bring his king's rook into the fray and over- whelm his opponent. 9 ... 'iVc7 10 Rf1ltJc2 11l1bl il.e6 12 b3 All these moves have been forced for White. ... nc8 13 il.b2 il.a3! (D) 14 il.c3?! But nothing fits the bill. For example, 14 il.h3 il.xh3+ IS ltJxh3 il.xb2 16 nxb2 "iWc6 17 f3 O-O and .. JHd8 is corning (and incidentally threat- ening ... ltJe3+), Saines-Y.Kovacevic, correspon- dence game 1977. Another try is 14 il.e4 il.xb2 IS nxb2ltJa3 16 d3 fS 17 il.f3, Spesny-Raetsky,

86 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Mlada Boleslav 1992, when Raetsky points out that Black wins after 17 ... e4! 18 dxe4 fxe4 19 i.g2 (19 i.xe4 'tWe5) 19 ... 'tWc120 :d2 tZ'lbl! 21 :d4~2!. 14  tZ'lb4 15 i.xb4 i.xb4 Black has more than enough compensation for the pawn. 16 tZ'lf3 O-O Or 16 ... 1lVc2 with a nice advantage. 17 tZ'lel llfd8 18 tZ'ld3 i.a3 19 h3 .i:.d4 20 tZ'le1 'ilVa5 21 d3 :d7! 22 'itJlgl l:.dc7 23 b4 After 23 ~h2 :c1 Black wins the queen. 23 i.xb4 24 'it>h2 i.xa2 The rest was easy for Black. We see the value of open lines and sustained initiative. Obviously grabbing the pawn via 6 ~b3 is too greedy, which in turn means that 4 i.g2 is al- ready dubious! Bevia - IIIescas Alicante 1989

[diagram]
In the early days of the Keres this was quite popular. White attacks e5 and practically forces the following concession in the centre. 4 . exd45 'tWxd4 d5 (D) White's queen is aggressively placed, and he will try to train his pieces on d5; the moves i.g2 and i.g5 serve that purpose. But first he has to make some fundamental decisions over this and the next few moves, primarily when to ex- change pawns, taking into account that Black might play ... c5 or ... dxc4 at the right moment, and that if White exchanges pawns on d5, he opens the way for Black's knight to come to c6 with tempo. This means that move-order is w critical. Let's look into the theory in the context of this game. 6cxd5 White wants to fix the pawns right away, but as mentioned, this permits Black to develop by ... tZ'lc6 and encourages the advance ... d4 with further gain of time. If White can wait before exchanging on d5, Black may have to play the suboptimal ... i.e7 or ... i.e6 at an early stage. One of several issues is whether ... dxc4 will be an easy equalizer in that case. This all plays out in the following examples: a) 6 i.g2 i.e6 (6 ... dxc4 7 ~xc4 i.e6 8 ~a4 tZ'lbd7 is considered equal, but White's pieces seem to coordinate slightly better; for example, 9 tZ'lf3 tZ'lc5!? 10 'iVc2 'iia5 !?, and now not 11 i.d2 tZ'lb3!, but 11 i.e3! O-O-O 120-0) 7 cxd5 cxd5 (D). w Now 8 tZ'lf3 tZ'lc6 9 'iVa4 i.c5 10 O-O O-O 11 .tg5 is one of the most important variations stemming from 2 g3; refer to the next section below. Instead, 8 i.g5 is often given as slightly 2 . ..tfJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 87 better for White, based on lines continuing 8 ... i.e7. That is unconvincing after 8 ... tbc6 9 'ilia4 (after 9 i.xf6?, both 9 ... tbxd4 10 i.xd8 tbc2+ and the safer 9 ... gxf6 followed by ... d4 favour Black) 9 ... 'ilib6! 10 i.xf6 gxf6, which seems to be equal; for example, 11 O-O-O! O-O-O! 12 i.xdS (12 e3 d4) 12 ... i.xdS 13 tbxdS1\VcS+ 14 tbc3 i:txdl+ IS "iVxdl "iVxf2 with chances for both sides. b) 6 i.gS i.e7! (6 ... dxc4 7 ~xd8+ 'it>xd8 8 O-O-O+! 'it>e8 9 e4 i.e6 10 f4 bS should be in- vestigated) 7 cxdS cxdS 8 tbf3 tbc6 9 'iVa4 i.e6 10 i.g2 h6 11 i.xf6 i.xf6 120-0 'ilib6! is unbal- anced and very likely better for Black. Compare 6 tbf3 below; in fact, 12 ... O-O would transpose directly to that line. c) Still another try is 6 tbf3 (directed against ... d4) 6 ... i.e7 (6 ... dxc4!? is also reasonable), when White again has to deal with Black's po- tential expansion: cl) 7 i.g2 cS! 81\Vd3 d4 9 tbe4 tbc6 with a position that is level or slightly favouring Black, Pfleger-Keres, Bamburg 1968. c2) 7 cxdS cxdS 8 i.g2 tbc6 9 'iVa4 O-O 10 O-O (D) is a standard position characteristic of the isolated queen's pawn.

This time both sides have their conventional advantages, and it's too early for 10 ... d4 (due to 11 i:tdl!). Play can continue 1O ... i.e6 (or 1O ... "iVb6 11 iVbS d4 12 "iVxb6 axb6 13 tbbS i:td8 14 i:tdl i.cs IS i.gS, Gulko-I.Gurevich, Saint Martin 1993, when IS ... i.e6 is equal: 16 b4 i.xb4 17 tbfxd4 i:txa2, etc.) 11 i.e3!? (11 i.gS h6 12 i.xf6 i.xf6 13 i:tadl 'iVe7 14 e3 i.xc3 IS bxc3 i:tfc8 exerts pressure on White's c-pawn and equalizes, Damljanovic-Onishchuk, Skopje 2002) 11... tbg4! 12 i.d2 "iVb6 13 tbxdS i.xdS 14 ~xg4 ~xb2 IS lhbl 'iVxa2 and the position is dynamically balanced. 6 ...cxd5 7 i.g2?! This works out poorly, but White already has real problems: a) 7 tbf3? tbc6 8 ~a4 d4 (this advance is what originally made the Keres so popular: White will lose valuable time as Black devel- ops) 9 tbbS (D).

Now 9 ... i.b4+ has been the normal move, with an excellent position following 10 i.d2 i.xd2+ 11 tbxd2 O-O. Still better, Tony Kosten suggests the killer move 9 ... tbe4!, intending ... tbcs; for example, 10 i.g2 (but 10 i.d2 a6 11 tba3 tbcs 12 'iVdl ~e7 - threatening mate in I! - 13 i.el d3 14 i.g2 i.g4 IS h3 i.fS is horren- dous for White) 1O ... tbcS! 11 'iVa3 (11 'iVdl 'iVaS+) 11...i.fS 12 b4 tbd3+ and Black wins material with a continuing attack. b) 7 i.gS? is almost as bad: 7 ... tbc6 8 ~a4 d4 (Black also has a resource that we haven't seen in this variation yet, namely, 8 ... i.b4 9 tbf3 h6, when White has to choose between the evils of 10 i.xf6? ~xf6, 10 i.e3 O-O 11 i.g2 tbg4 and 10 i.d2 O-O 11 i.g2 l:te8!) 9 O-O-O?!, Lamaan-Keres, correspondence game

1935. Now Black's most dynamic continua-

tion is 9 ... 'iWb6! 10 i.xf6 gxf6 11 tbe4 i.e6! with the idea 12 tbxf6+? Re7 13 tbe4 tbb4 14 a3 tba2+ IS 'it>bl i.g7! and he is winning; ideas like ... i.b3, ... fS, ... d3 and ... l:tac8 are in the air. 7  tbc68 'iVa4?! 8 ~dl improves, but is still pretty bad: 8 ... d4 9 tbe4 i.b4+ 10 i.d2 O-O 11 tbxf6+ 'iVxf6 12

88 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

i.xb4 lbxb4. Black is threatening ... d3, but 13 a3 lbc6 14 lbf3 i.fS leaves him with the same threat and a space advantage. 8 .. d4! (D) w 9lbe4! White needs to exchange pieces ifhe's going to cope with Black's advanced pawn. 9 lbbS i.b4+ 10 Wfl O-O can lead to the pretty line 11 i.gS h6 12 i.xf6 'iixf6 13 lbc7 d3! 14 lbxa8 'iixb2 IS .l:tdl dxe2+ 16lbxe2 i.g4 17 f3 lIe8 and Black wins. Another nice variation is 11 i.xc6 bxc6 12 'iixb4 cxbS 13 'ilHxbS!? :tb8! 14 ~d3 (14 "iWxb8 i.h3+ Islbxh3 'ilHxb8) 14 ... i.b7 ISlbf3!? i.e4 16 'ilHdl "iWdS 17 Rg2 lIfd8 and Black is on the verge of winning, since ... d3 will follow. The game might end with slaughter on the light squares: 18 b3 d3! 19 i.f4 (19 exd3 'ilHxd3) 19 ... .l:tbc8 20 exd3 'iHxd3 21 lIel 'iVbS! 22 'ilHe2 lId3 23 i.e3lbdS and ... lbc3 next. 9 . lbxe410 i.xe4 i.b4+ (D) w llwn Obviously Black has disturbed White's de- velopment, but it's not clear that castling by hand won't work for White. 1l. . i.e712 Rg2 O-O 13lbf3 i.f614 i.f4? This turns out to be a huge mistake. True, Black's extra space shows in lines such as 14 .l:ldl i.d7 IS 'ii'a3 .l:te8 16 i.d3 i.e6 with the idea ... i.dS. But White could limit his disad- vantage by 14 h4 .l:te8 IS 'ii'c2. 14.. .l:te81S i.d3? (D)

IS ... gS! 16 i.d2 g4 17 lbgl lbeS 18 i.e4 i.d7! 19 'ii'b3 i.e6 Once again, the light squares triumph: 20 "iWxb7 .l:tb8 21 'ii'xa7 i.dS 22 f3 lbc6 23 ~a6 .l:txe4 24 fxe4 i.xe4+ 2slbf3 d3 0-1 After 26 'ii'a4, 26 ... 'ilHdS would be a sadistic finish. You can see why the move 4 d4 has declined in popularity. On the other hand, the same idea after 1 c4 eS 2 g3 is more promising, because 2 ... lbf6 3 i.g2 c6 4 d4 exd4 S 'ilHxd4 doesn't leave a knight on c3 subject to attack by ... d4. We'll examine 2 g3 below. Next, let's look into the move that poses the most difficulty for Black, 4lbf3. Jezek - Sapundzhiev Correspondence game 1973

[diagram]
dS The move S. .. 'ii'b6 is perhaps slightly weaker. Ullrich-L.Carlson, correspondence game 1990 went 6lbb3 (6 e3 is also played) 6 ... a5 7 d3 a4 8 i.e3! "iWb4 9 lbd4 (D). 2 ...tlJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 89

9 ... exd3 (9 .. :~xb2 10 lIc1 .Bb4 11 .Bd2! leads to an edge for White) 10 'iVxd3 d5 11 cxd5 lLlxd5 12 .Bd2! lLlxc3 13 .Bxc3 ~d6 14 .Bg2.Be7 15 lIdl O-O (l5 ... lLla6 16 lLlxc6 'iixd3 17 lIxd3) 16 lLlxc6! lLlxc6 17 'iixd6 .Bxd6 18 lIxd6 .Be6 19 a3 with an extra pawn and the better game. 6 cxd5 'ii'b6 Traditionally the main move, although the natural 6 ... cxd5!? has never been refuted. Still, White seems to get some advantage in the main line following 7 d3 .Bc5 8 lLlb3 .Bb4 9 dxe4 lLlxe4 10 .Bd2 (D).

1O .. :~b6 (this is probably the most testing continuation, pretty much forcing the next few moves; after 1O ... .Bxc3 11 .Bxc3 lLlxc3 12 bxc3, Black's weakness on d5 is more impor- tant than White's on c3 because the former can be blockaded so nicely by a powerful knight and White's bishop is better than Black's) 11 lLlxe4 dxe4 12 i.xb4 'iVxb4+ 13 ~d2 lLlc6 14 .Bg2 f5 (trying to shut out the bishop on g2) 15 ~xb4 lLlxb4 16 O-O .Be6 17 lLld4 ~e7 (after 17 ... .Bd7 18 f3 exf3 19 Itxf3! White threatens not only the f5-pawn, but also 20 :tb3!) 18 f3! (now the better bishop has its say) 18 ... e3 19 f4 lIhd8 20 lIadl Itd6 21 a3 lLlc6 22 lLlxc6+ bxc6 23 lIxd6 ~xd6 24 11f3 and White has come out ahead, P.Gutman-Glasberger, e-mail 2003. 7 lLlb3 cxdS 8 .Bg2 (D)

8 ... .ifS 8 ... a5 is just a tad slow: 9 d3! (9 d4 a4 10 lLlc5! is also good) 9 ... a4 10 .Be3 ~b4 11 lLld4! a3 (1l...~xb2 12 lLldb5) 12 lLlc2! 'iVxb2 13 .Bd4 .Bb4 14 lLlxb4 ~xb4 15 .Bxf6 gxf6 16 O-O! and White had the advantage in Botvin- nik-Tal, World Ch match (game 9), Moscow 1961.

9 d3 .Bb4 100-0 .Bxc3 11 bxc3 O-O 12 .Be3

(D)

This position has been contested countless times. It pits Black's strong centre against White's superior development and activity.

90 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

12  'ii'c7 12 .. :~a6!? 13liJc5 'ii'c6 14 c4! dxc4 15.l:!.c1! frees White's bishop-pair to his advantage, as has been shown in several games. 13 .l:!.c1 liJc6 (D) w 14c4 A classic attack on Black's centre. But it doesn't crack easily. 14  l:tad8! Evidently worse would be 14 .. .l::tNd8 15liJd4 liJxd4 16 ~xd4 'ii'e7 17 ~xf6! gxf6 18 cxd5 .l:!.xd5 19 'ii'a4 due to 19 ... b6 20 ~c6!; compare the main game. 15liJd4! liJxd416 ~xd4 "V/Iie7 (D) The stem game Reshevsky-Keres, Los An- geles 1963 went 16 ... exd3 17 cxd5 "VJIid7 18 ~xf6 dxe2 19 "V/Iixe2 gxf6 20 ~b2!? (still better is 20 ~c4! .l:!.c8 21 llf4, an idea of Prieditis) 20 .. .'it>g7 21 "V/Iid4 ~h3 22 ~fd1 ~xg2 23 ~xg2 a6 24 d6 with a considerable advantage. w 17 cxd5 This is an interesting juncture. White can play 17 ~xf6!? gxf6! (17 ... 'iVxf6 18 cxd5.l:!.xd5 19 'ii'b3.l:!.d4 20 dxe4 ~xe4 21 ~xe4.l:!.xe4 22 e3!, and White quickly takes over the central files) 18 cxd5 .l:!.xd5 19 'iVa4, but 19 ... b6! 20 ~xe4.l:!.a5 gives adequate counterplay. 17. .l:!.xd5181!Va4 b6! 19 ~xf6!? Here 19 a3 with the simple idea 19 ... .l:!.a5 20 'ii'b4 is definitely worth trying. 19  gxf6 20 ~xe4 Now 20 dxe4.l:!.a5 21 'iVc2 (21 'iVd4!? .l:!.d8 22 "VJIib2 ~e6) 21...~e6 gives Black enough play for the pawn. ... ~a5 21 'ii'c2 ~xe4 22 dxe4 .l:!.e8 23 .!:tfd1 ~xe4 112_112 A cute sequence (not forced) is 24 .l:!.d8! l':tc5! 25 ~xe4 .l:!.xc 1+ 26 ~g2.l:!.xd8 with a very likely draw. You can see that Black's game in the Keres Defence depends upon some very delicate play, so the popularity of 3 ... ~b4 (after 1 c4 e5 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 g3) is understandable. White Plays 2 g3

1 c4 e5 2 g3 (D)

2liJc3 is still the dominant move in the Eng- lish Opening by a large margin. Nevertheless, over the last decade, White has increasingly played the fianchetto 2 g3 in order to avoid cer- tain bothersome variations that can arise after 2 liJc3. This can greatly simplify his task; for one thing, playing 2liJc3 means that in several varia- tions White has to deal with the move ... ~b4, 2 ... l:iJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 91 and 2 g3 sidesteps them (I'll discuss that pres- ently). On the other hand, 2 g3 commits White to a fianchetto and thus eliminates numerous varia- tions which involve some combination of moves such as lbc3, lbf3, e3, d4, etc. Therefore, before plunging into lines stemming from 2 g3, it's worthwhile to discuss the ramifications of this choice. First, we want to see which sequences of moves after 2 g3 can lead to independent lines, and which will transpose into other English Opening variations (or even to other openings entirely). Then, what are the concrete advan- tages and difficulties that accompany it? Right off, someone who plays 2 g3 should consider what he wants to do after 1 c4lbf6 (D) (instead of l...e5). Then 2 lbc3 e5 already commits White to learning 1 c4 e5 2lbc3lbf6 variations, which is one thing he is trying to steer clear of by play- ing 2 g3! In that case White would have to deal with theory that is unique to both 1 c4 e5 2 g3 and 1 c4 e5 2 lbc3 lbf6. That's a lot to ask. White can choose 2 lbf3, of course, but that may have nothing to do with the kinds of posi- tions that he is aiming for. So one question would be how 1 c4lbf6 2 g3 fits in with White's plans. Unfortunately, this opens a new can of worms. For example, how does White want to cope with 1 c4lbf6 2 g3 e6? Presumably 3 i.g2 d5 or 3 lbf3 d5 follows, when White can play 4 d4 with a Catalan, or leave his d-pawn alone and enter into some kind of Reti with b3 and i.b2. In addition, White has to consider 1 c4 lbf6 2 g3 c6 and 3 ... d5. Or, against a King's Indian Defence (which would proceed by 1 c4lbf6 2 g3 g6 3 i.g2 i.g7), does he want to be committed to the fianchetto variations? And so forth. The bottom line is that when White plays 1 c4 with the inten- tion of 1...e5 2 g3, he has to consider whether to accept the transposition 1 c4 lbf6 2 lbc3 e5, enter into 1 c4 lbf6 2 lbf3, or be prepared for variations outside the traditional scope of the English Opening. Having said all that, here are some concrete considerations that might go into a decision about whether to play 2 g3 after 1 c4 e5.

1 c4 e5 2 g3: Favouring White:

a) In some cases, the difference is easily seen. For example, 2 lbc3 i.b4 enjoys a good reputation, whereas 2 g3 i.b4? has nothing to recommend it! b) Similarly, with 2 g3 lbf6 3 i.g2, White sidesteps 2lbc3lbf6 3 g3 i.b4, analysed above. c) 2 g3 lbf6 3 i.g2 d5 4 cxd5 lbxd5 is a re- versed Accelerated FianchettolDragon. White has a few options apart from 5 lbc3 (which transposes to the main line). For example, he can play 5 lbf3!? lbc6 6 O-O. If Black then con- tinues 6 ... lbb6 (not forced), White can bring his queen's knight to d2 instead of c3 by means of, for example, 7 d3 i.e7 8 a3 O-O 9 lbbd2. Ulti- mately, this may not bring give White an advan- tage, but it's a different and legitimate way of playing. We'll see it below. d) In some lines, there is no knight on c3 that can be attacked by ... d4. This occurs prom- inently in the variation 1 c4 e5 2 g3 lbf6 3 i.g2 c6 4 d4 exd4 5 ~xd4 d5 6 cxd5 cxd5 7 lbf3 lbc6 8 ~a4, as opposed to 1 c4 e5 2lbc3lbf6 3 g3 c6 4 d4 exd4 5 ~xd4 d5 6 cxd5 cxd5 7 lbf3 lbc6 8 ~a4 d4 (attacking the knight on c3).

1 c4 e5 2 g3: Favouring Black:

a) As we've seen in Chapter 3, the sequence 2lbc3 f5 allows 3 d4!. But after 2 g3, 2 ... f5 has fewer drawbacks for Black, and 2 g3 d6 3 i.g2 f5 eliminates most lines in which White plays an early lbf3 and d4. Whether this should worry White is open to debate. b) The move-order 2 g3 c6 can present unique problems for White. In particular, 3 d4 i.b4+ is increasingly popular, and the similar 2 g3 lbf6 3 i.g2 c6 4 d4 i.b4+ usually trans- poses. Obviously this strategy isn't available to Black after 2lbc3.

92 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

c) Furthennore, following 2 g3 c6 3 tbf3 e4 4 tbd4 dS S cxdS, Black can recapture with his queen (S ... 'iVxdS), as he can in the line 2 g3 tbf6 3 i.g2 c6 4 tbf3 e4 S tbd4 dS 6 cxdS 'iVxdS (D). w Again, 2 tbc3 eliminates this possibility. See below for details. d) Another difference between 2 g3 and 2 tbc3 is that 2 g3 tbc6 3 i.g2 g6 followed by ... i.g7 almost always gives Black a Closed English variation (reversed Closed Sicilian) of Chapter 6, which is very popular among 1.. .eS players. In that case it's difficult for White to avoid 4 tbc3 i.g7, which is then the main line. But if White uses the move-order 1 c4 eS 2 tbc3 tbc6, he has the extra possibility of 3 tbf3, when 3 ... tbf6 is a main-line Four Knights Vari- ation (see below), whereas 3 ... g6 and 3 .. .fS can be answered by 4 d4 (or 4 e3), in both cases cir- cumventing the Closed English. There are a few more issues, and it may take some independent investigation to be sure that you're comfortable with 2 g3. Gulko - Korchnoi Hastings 1988/9 lc4eS2g3fS A simple attempt to grab space and control e4. Unfortunately, there's no space to cover all of the alternatives with their transpositions, most notably 2 ... d6 and 2 ... tbc6. A few starternotes: a) 2 ... d6 is ultra-flexible, and keeps open options of ... fS, ... c6 and ... g6; for example, 3 i.g2 fS (or 3 ... tbc6) 4 d4, and now even the elastic move 4 ... i.e7 is possible, when the ex- change of queens is harmless. b) 2 ... tbc6, as mentioned above, virtually en- sures a Closed Sicilian or other respectable line; for example, 3 i.g2 g64 tbc3 i.g7. Here 3 .. .fS!? 4 tbc3 tbf6 is a tempo-down Sicilian Grand Prix Attack, when S e3 discourages both S ... i.cs be- cause of 6 tbge2 and S ... i.b4 due to 6 tbdS. 3i.g2 In the previously-examined case of 2 tbc3 fS 3 d4, Black was pretty much limited to 3 ... e4 and 3 ... exd4, both playable, but arguably leav- ing White with some advantage. But after 2 g3 fS 3 d4!? (D), there are new possibilities.

One is 3 ... d6; this is better than in the 2 tbc3 fS 3 d4 d6 case, if only because 4 dxeS dxe5 5 ~xd8+ isn't as effective when White has spent a move on g3. Furthennore, 3 ... e4 4 tbc3 tbf6 has led to various set-ups for both sides; as al- ways, White should consider the manoeuvre tbh3-f4. This brings up the simplest answer to 3 d4, namely 3 ... i.M+. Then4i.d2 (4 tbc3 exd4!? S ~xd4 tbf6 is possible too) 4 ... i.xd2+ 5 ~xd2 d6 6 i.g2 tbf6 7 tbc3 O-O transposes to the game. That's hardly the whole story, of course, and it will help to compare other ... fS lines. 3 ... tbf6 4 d4 (D) At this point 4 tbc3 arrives at a position that could have come from 2 tbc3, and both sides should be aware that 4 ... i.b4! is a fully legiti- mate choice, especially since S tbdS tbxd5 6 cxdS doesn't attack a knight on c6. 4,..i.h4+ Black develops quickly and clears the way for ... O-O. 4 ... e4 may not be so bad; for example, S tbc3 i.b4 6 i.gS 0-07 tbh3 h6 8 i.xf6 iYxf6 9 tbf4 c6 10 h4 tba6!? with the idea ... tbc7. 2 . ..tlJj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 93

5 iLd2 iLxd2+ 6 ~xd2 d6 7 ltJc3 White can also exchange queens by 7 dxeS dxeS 8 ~xd8+ 'it>xd8 (D). w This type of ending, which appears in vari- ous forms over many opening lines, will vary in assessment from position to position. Here Black has an excellent pawn-structure, so the issue is whether White can upset the balance, usually with rapid development and a pawn- break. Under normal circumstances, the two tempi spent on g3 and iLg2 aren't ideal for ac- complishing this, so Black shouldn't have too many problems. A sample line is 9ltJc3 '3;e7 10 O-O-O c6 11 ltJf3?! (better is 11 h3 iLe6 12 b3 ltJbd7 with equality) ll...ltJg4! 12.l:tdfl e4 13 ltJd4.l:td8 14ltJc2 iLe6 IS h3ltJeS 16 b3ltJbd7 with the more comfortable position for Black. 7  0-08 e3 c6 9 f3?! White wants to support his centre and dis- courage ... e4, but this is awfully slow. Play would be level after 9 .l:tdl ~e7 10 dxeS dxeS 11 ~d6 'iVxd6 12 .l:txd6ltJbd7. 9 . iLe6 10 d5 cxd5 11 cxd5 iLd7! 12ltJge2 a5 13 O-O ltJa6 14 f4 At this point, apart from 14 ... e4, either 14 ... llVe7 or even 14 ... l1e8 IS fxeSl:.xeS! would leave Black in excellent shape. It's difficult for White to demonstrate an ad- vantage following 2 g3 fS. On the other hand, there arise plenty of interesting positions which will test the two players' skills. w Markowski - Krasenkow Polish Team Ch, Zakopane 2000

1 c4 e5 2 g3 c6 (D)

I'm going to emphasize this move because it leads to basic types of positions, including those with the isolated queen's pawn and with an ad- vanced centre. To begin with, Black threatens simply 3 ... dS. Again, we have the odd case in which Black is playing a tempo down compared with 1 e4 cS 2 c3, and one would think that White could take advantage of this. But the g3 move can be a mixed blessing for White, as seen in this and the next games. We'll leave some questions of move-order until later, specifically of the choice between 2 ... c6 and 2 ... ltJf6 3 iLg2 c6, which very often transpose. 3d4 Following 3 iLg2 dS 4 cxdS cxdS S d4, both S ... e4 and S. .. exd4 6ltJf3 iLb4+ 7 iLd2 iLcs are satisfactory answers if one knows the theory. This might not fit Black's designs, however, so he sometimes chooses 3 ... ltJf6, when 4ltJc3 dS! returns to the Keres Defence section and 4 d4 iLb4+ is discussed in later games.

94 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

3 ... exd4 It's always hard to know when Black can play the cramping advance ... e4. If White has B played both g3 and i.g2, Black can often pro- tect e4 and make the bishop on g2 look ineffec- tive. Here White has made only one of those moves, so he has a good shot at gaining the ad- vantage after 3 ... e4 44Jc3: a) Suba-Timman, Thessaloniki Olympiad 1984 went 4 ... fS!? S h4!? (D).

This flexible flank advance supports i.gS and anticipates that after a knight gets to f4, it will be difficult to drive it away by ... gS. Black continued S ... 4Jf6 (perhaps S. .. 4Ja6 64Jh34Jc7 should be tried) 6 i.gS h6 7 i.xf6 'iixf6 8 e3 (now White has got rid of his bad bishop and tries to establish a favourable French Defence) 8 ... g6 9 4Jge2 d6 10 4Jf4 4Ja6 (White has the better minor pieces, but he needs a plan) 11 g4! (a marvellous positional blow; Black can't hold the kingside together) 1l...~g8 (ll...4Jc7 12 hS gS 13 4Jg6 ~g8 14 'fib3! prevents Black from developing normally) 12 'iib3 4Jc7 13 gxfS!? (both 13 dS cS 140-O-O and 13 hS gS 144Jg6 are very good; Black's opening has been a disaster) 13 ... gxfS 14 i.e2 ~b8 IS 'iia4 a6 160-O-O i.d7 17 cS! dS, and easiest now was 18 i.hS+ 'it>d8 19 'iiaS and ~hgl, with a winning game. b) 4 ... dS is a critical move. At first it looks weak because of S cxdS cxdS 6 'iWb3 (D). Then 6 ... 4Jf6? allows 7 i.gS and 6 ... 4Je7 7 i.f4 a6 comes up short after 8 f3 exf3 9 4Jxf3 4Jbc6 10 e4! i.e6, Korchnoi-Bacrot, Match (game 4), Albert 1997, when I think 11 4JgS! is strong; for example, 11...4Jxd4 12 'iWxb74Jc2+ 13 'it>f2 4Jxal 14 4JbS!. But that's not the end of the story, because Black has 6 ... 4Jc6!, when the most critical line is 7 'iWxdS!? 'iixdS 8 4JxdS 4Jxd4 9 4Jc7 + (9 i.gS is equally complex but apparently all right for Black when the dust clears) 9 ... ..t>d8 10 4Jxa84Jc2+ 11 'it>dl4Jxal; here several games have been played without success for White, the simplest continuation being 12 b3 b6 13 i.b2 i.b7 14 i.xal (144Jxb64Jxb3) 14 ... iLxa8 with equality. So perhaps 4 ... dS is a satisfactory move after all. Another promising sign is that the obvious S4Jh3 is relatively harmless after the surprising S. .. dxc4! 64Jxe4 i.b4+. Lines in which White plays e3 should be compared with the Advance French. There the 'extra' move g3 is not always useful. 4 'iixd4 (D)

4 ... d5 4 ... 4Jf6 S i.g2 4Ja6!? is another reasonable course for Black, combining the ideas of ... 4Jb4 with quick development by ... i.cS. For example, 2 ...tbj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 95 6 4:Jf3 iLcs 7 'liVeS+ 'liVe7 8 'liVxe7+ ~xe7. White can try to claim a slight edge because of his potential grip on d5 and Black's knight on a6, but it's hard to believe that's worth much; for example, 9 4:Jc3 dS 10 cxdS liJb4 11 O-O liJbxdS. Of course, there's much more to be said about S ... liJa6, and White needn't despair of finding interesting ways to try for advantage. 5 iLg2 Without descending too far into the morass of move-order issues, White often plays S liJf3 here, although that permits S ... dxc4 with fair chances for equality. 5  iLe6 Black could play S ... dxc4, but decides to go in another direction and force White's hand. 6 exd5 exd5 7 liJf3liJe6 S 'liVa4 iLe5! There are other ways for Black to set up, of course. The text-move is the most forceful, and it covers d4. 90-0 liJf6 (D) w This position is similar to one that occurs in the Keres Defence (2 liJc3 liJf6 3 g3 c6), but counterbalanced White's pressure against the weak black pawns) 13 iLxf6!? gxf6 (D). w White has ceded the bishop-pair, and to some extent the dark squares, to create doubled, isolated pawns in his opponent's camp. The difficulty is that those pawns aren't yet subject to effective attack, and they cover some nice squares; Black will probably follow up with .. J:tab8 and ... .l:tfc8. In the meantime, White manoeuvres to occupy cS and/or play e4. This is unclear. UliJc3 O-O 12liJd3! In positions with an isolated d-pawn, a knight on d3 is often well-placed. 12  iLd4!? (D) Putting the bishop on this square is unusual in such a position. The alternative 12 ... iLe7, while a bit passive, is also playable. Then 13 .l:!.dl d4 14liJf4 iLd7 gives White nothing spe- cial. there White's knight is already committed to w c3. 10 liJe5!? You can argue the liJeS-d3 is the same as the common idea liJel-d3, but with extra threats. 10 iLgS is the most commonly played move, when 1O ... h6 11 iLxf6 'liVxf6 is seen in the next game. 10  nes 1O ... O-O! is critical; for example, 11 liJxc6 1Bd7! 12 iLgS bxc6 (instead, Markowski-Gel- fand, Polanica Zdroj 2000 went 12 ... 'liVxc6 13 'liVxc6 bxc6 14 iLxf6 gxf6, and the bishops 13 iLg5 iLxe3!? 14 bxe3 h615 iLe3!

96 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

15 ~xf6 ~xf6 16 l:.ac1 l:.fd8 is solid and equal. So White blockades d4. 15. ~g4!? 15 ... l:.e8 and 15 ... b6 are safer, in the latter case intending ... ~e7 and .. JUd8. 16liJf4!? (D) The stodgy 16 ~fel would retain mutual chances; White might even claim some edge based upon the two bishops.

16. . g5! 17 liJxd5liJxd5 18 ~xg4!

The alternative 18 ~xd5 ~xe2 19 ~xc6 .l:.xc6 should lead to equality, although White has to be careful about the light squares around his king. ... liJxe3 19 fxe3 'WIe7 At first, White's position looks a wreck, but he can maintain the balance because of Black's weakened kingside. 20 ~d5! 'WIxe3+ 21 'it>hlliJe5 22 'WIf5 (D) At this point, Black played 22 .. .'ixc3?!, when 23 ~f6! would have been annoying for him, because 23 .. .l:tc5 24 ~adl threatens 25 'ifxh6. But 22 ... .l:.xc3 is satisfactory; for exam- ple, 23 ~e4 (23 'iff6 l:Ic5! with the idea 24 ~adl?? ~xd5 25 ~xd5 'ife4+) 23 ... liJg6 24 ~d5 liJe5 25 ~e4, etc. Seirawan - I. Sokolov Wijk aan Zee 1995

[diagram]
'WIxd4 d5 6 cxd5 cxd5 7 liJf3 liJc6 8 'ifa4 Sometimes 8 ~dl is played, but that is un- derstandably harmless, because White's rooks can't quickly come to the d-file. 8 .. ~c5 The most active square for Black's bishop. 8 ... ~e7 9 O-O O-O allows 10 ~e3, controlling the dark squares d4 and c5 while preventing ... 'ifb6. This has been relatively successful. Neverthe- less, 1O ... liJg4 11 ~d4liJxd4! 12liJxd4 ~c5! with the ideas of ... 'WIb6 and ... 'iff6 establishes a dynamic equality. 90-00-0 Notice that in this move-order Black has managed to do without ... ~e6. 10 ~g5 (D)

... h6 After 1O ... ~e8 11 e3?!, the pretty game Lar- sen-Chandler, London 1986 illustrates some major themes in isolated queen's pawn posi- tions. Strange to say, White's restraining move e3 is often ineffective, because it weakens not only the kingside light squares, but also the key interior square d3. The game continued 11...h6 12 ~xf6 ~xf6 13liJc3 ~e6 14l:.adl Itad8 15 .l:i.d2 ~b6 16l::tfdl (D).

2. . .ei:Jj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 97

White's moves are as logical as can be and his position looks preferable. For one thing, it's hard to defend the d-pawn. But remember those light squares? Black has just enough time for the pawn sacrifice 16 ... d4! 17lbxd4?! (17 exd4 .ltg4! 18 ~d3 introduces a position in which White lacks useful moves but Black also has difficulty making progress; a beautiful line is 18 ... lbxd4 19 ~xd4 .ltxd4 20 lbd5! 'iVxf3!! 21 .ltxf3 .ltxf3 22 'iVxd4! ~xd5 23 ~xd5 .ltxd5 24 ~xd5 with a drawn ending) 17 ... .ltxd4 18 exd4 .ltg4 19 lbe4 ~g6 20 f3 nxe4 21 fxe4?! (21 fxg4! ~xg4 22 .ltxc6! seems better, although after 22 ... bxc6 23 'ilixa7 h5 Black has a strong attack for the pawn) 2l....ltxdl 22 ~xdllbxd4

See how the picture has transformed: White has a weak isolated pawn, a bad bishop, and a vulnerable kingside, whereas Black has a knight ensconced on the forward outpost d4. Now 23 llxd4? loses to 23 ... 'iVb6. For all that, White does have a useful pin on the d-file to work with. The game continued 23 'it>hl 'iVf6 24 e5! (White solves two of his problems in one shot! But his kingside is still airy) 24 ... 'iVxe5 25 .ltxb7 nd6 26 .ltg2 h5! 27 b4 h4 28 gxh4 'ilYf4 (threat- ening 29 ... lbf3!, hitting d2 and h2) 29 .l::!.d3 ~xh4, and Black stood better. Going all the way back to 1O ... .l:Ie8, White should probably reject 11 e3 and take a chance with the natural 11 lbc3!. Then the rook on e8 isn't ideally placed (in comparison with the main lines) unless Black can make something tactical like ll...d4 12 .l::!.adl .ltd7 work. But since 13 ~c4! followed by .ltxf6 apparently keeps the advantage, the line as a whole seems to favour White. Let's return to 1O ... h6. 1l.ltxf6 'iVxf612lbc3 .lte613lbel! (D) This retreat is White's most ambitious move: he frees his g2-bishop and heads for the excel- lent d3-square, whose virtues were described in the last game. The innocuous 13 e4 dxe4 14 lbxe4 'iVe7 15 lbxc5 'ilYxc5 was Pirc-Keres, Moscow 1956 . 13 .. .u.ad8 Black has the 'which rook?' problem. In fact, 13 ... .i:.fd8! looks more accurate, because the a8-rook helps defend the queenside. Black's method of counterplay is instructive; for exam- ple, 14lbd3 .ltb6!? (or 14 ... .itd4 15l:.ac1 a6 16 lbf4 ~e5) 15 lbf4 d4 16 lbcd5 .ltxd5 17 lbxd5 'iVe5 18 ~b5 d3! (without this kind of dynamic move, White's better pieces and pawn-structure give him a pull) 19 'iVxd3 lbb4! 20 'iVc3 .ti.xd5 21 'iVxb4 l:!.b5 22 'iVe4 'ilYxe4 23 .ltxe4 llxb2 with a draw, the more so because of 24 .ltxb7 .itxf2+!.

98 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

14lLld3 .td4151lac1llfe8 16lLlf4 'iVe517 e3 17 .l::tfdl keeps White's positional advantages W alive, modest as they may be. In the 13 ... l::.fd8 line above, this would be met by 17 ... b5!. 17  .txc318 bxc3 White tries to set up a d4 blockade, on the grounds that Black's weakness on d5 outweighs his on c3. This is a standard idea when you have two bishops. Note that 18 .l::txc3 d4! again acti- vates every black piece.

18. . ,lIe7 19 ~fdllled7 20 'iVb5 a6 21 'iVc5

'iVd6 22 'iVxd61lxd6 23 c4!? There's no way to make progress, so White liquidates to a draw. 23 ... dxc4 24 l:txd6 ~xd6 25 lLlxe6 fxe6 26 ':xc4 l:.dl + 27 .to <3;f7 28 'ii;>g2 .l:.d2 29 a4 Rf6 1h-1f2 Matamoros - Belkhodja Calvia Olympiad 2004

[diagram]
The move-order 2 ... c6 3 d4 .tb4+ 4 .td2 .txd2+ 5 'iVxd2 d6 6 i.g2 or 6lLlc3 will trans- pose after 6 ... lLlf6. 3 i.g2 c6 4 d4 i.b4+ (D) This check has been a deterrent to the use of

2 g3 in conjunction with d4.

5 i.d2 5lLlc3!? might be answered aggressively by 5 .. :iVa5!? 6 dxe5 i.xc3+ 7 bxc3 'iVxc3+ 8 i.d2 'iVxe5 9lLlf3 'iVe7 10 i.f4 d5 and, while White's pieces are well-placed, Black remains a pawn up. 5 ... i.xd2+ 6 'ixd2 d6 (D) Let's reflect for a moment upon what Black has accomplished. Simply put, he has got rid of his f8-bishop and then placed his central pawns on dark squares, leaving the 'good' c8-bishop on the board. The pawn on e5 secures a foot- hold in the centre, and Black retains the option of playing ... exd4, ... d5, or ... e4. In return, White has his own healthy share of the centre. His bishop on g2 is also 'good', as- suming that he plays e3. Or, if White chooses e4 instead, he gains the traditional space advan- tage conferred by pawns on e4 and d4 versus e5 and d6 (aided by the pawn on c4). Finally, Black has the only weak central point, that is, d6. 7lLlc3 White can try to anticipate the coming at- tack on his c-pawn by playing 7 e3 first. Then 7 ... i.e6 8 b3 exd4 9 exd4 d5 10 c5!? O-O 11 lLlc3 is Rotshtein-Rabiega, Graz 2004. Here Black can play l1...b6! in view of12 cxb6 axb6 with open lines and easy play.

7 ... O-O (D)

w 2 .. .tbj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 99 8e3

8 e4 brings the game into channels resem-

bling the King's Indian Defence; for example, W 8 ... liJbd7 9liJge2 (M.Gurevich gives 9liJf3 a5

10 O-O a4! l1.J:!.abl 'iVa5 12 .J:!.fdl.J:!.e8 with dou-

ble-edged play), and now 9 ... a6 10 O-O b5! is Black's standard plan, with equality. 8 ... .Be6 (D)

9b3

9 d5 is a natural-looking move, but it cuts off

White's own bishop after 9 ... cxd5 10 cxd5. The game Granda-Rohl, Calvia Olympiad 2004 is a good example: 10 ... .Bd7 (or 1O ... .Bf5 11 e4 i.d7, Minasian-Sargissian, Armenian Ch, Ere- van 2003) 11 b4!? (White's point is to avoid 11 liJge2 a5! 12 O-O liJa6 with the idea ... b5) ll...liJa6 12 .J:!.bl .J:!.c8 13liJge2. The only prob- lem is that now White has a new weakness which Black occupies immediately: 13 ... .l:Ic4!. These are all familiar ideas from the King's In- dian Defence. The whole idea of d5 turns out to be risky for White in this situation, since he re- stricts his own bishop on g2 and is unprepared for Black's queenside expansion. 9 ... exd4 10 'iVxd4 After 10 exd4 d5 Black achieves immediate equality. ... d5 11 cxd5liJxd5 Probably 11 ... .Bxd5 also suffices to equal- ize. But after 1l...cxd5?! 12 liJge2 liJc6 13 'iVd2! 'iVb6 (13 ... 'iVa5!?) 140-0 .J:!.fd8 15 .J:!.fdl .J:!.ac8 16 'iVb2!, Black has failed to break down White's blockade. 12liJge2 Or 12liJxd5 iLxd5 13 .Bxd5 (or 13 e4 .Be6 14liJf3 'iVa5+ 15 'iVd2 iVa6!) 13 ... cxd5 (D). This standard position has occurred repeat- edly in practice. White's greater control over d4 is balanced by his weak kingside light squares; for example, 14liJf3liJc6 15 ~c3 ~e7 160-0 lIac8 (or 16 ... iHe4). ... Wia5 13 ~a4 ~xa4 14 liJxa4liJa6 14 ... liJd7 also looks satisfactory. Generally speaking, the variation with 4 ... .Bb4+ yields equality. Lehtinen - McShane Rilton Cup, Stockholm 200213

[diagram]
~xd2 d6 6 .Bg2 'ilie7 7 liJc3 liJf6 8 e3

8 e4 gives Black the choice of playing nor-

mally by 8 ... O-O and 9 ... liJbd7, or essaying upon the gambit 8 ... d5!? 9 cxd5 (9 dxe5liJxe4 10 liJxe4 dxe4 11 ~d6liJd7 is equal) 9 ... exd4!? 10 ~xd4 cxdS l1liJxdSliJxd5 12 ~xdS O-O (D).

You will see quite a few positions like this in

1 c4 and 1 d4 openings. White isn't that badly

100 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

developed, but he hasn't brought his king to safety and is subject to various time-winning moves because of his exposed queen. This gives Black some compensation for a pawn, but not necessarily enough. Davies-Khenkin, Tel Aviv 1992 continued 13 lbe2 lId8 14 ~3 i.e6 IS ~e3?! (it's tough to pick a square; probably IS 'iYc3! is best, preventing ... "iUb4+; then Black could seek compensation by IS .. JIc816 'iia3!? 'iixa3, with near equality, but White's kingside majority gains in influence, and in general dou- bled a-pawns are not a major factor until a posi- tion becomes greatly simplified) IS ... 'iib4+ 16 ~c3lbc6 17 O-O .l:!.d2! 18 'iVxb4lbxb4 19lbc3 I;:txb2, recovering his material. w S. lbbd7 9lbge2 O-O 100-0 .l:teS (D) This is one of Black's basic set-ups. 11 h3 A useful move: White denies Black the use of the g4-square, which is particularly impor- tant if White chooses to advance by f4. 11  lbfS A strategy of provocation. The move 11.. .h6 suggests itself for two reasons: a) If Black plays ... e4 soon, White's move g4 is a natural response, both preparing lbg3 and trying to drive the knight on f6 away with gS. In that case, ... h6 will have given Black an extra move to shore up his centre. b) As will become clear, ... h6 gives Black's knight an important retreat-square on h7. 12 e4!? White captures the centre and grabs space, incidentally preventing ... e4. These are real accomplishments. Note, however, that the ad- vance e4 is not without drawbacks: White has no dark-squared bishop, and this exposes points such as d4 which that bishop might have de- fended. Instead, 12 dS is natural, denying Black's knight its way back to cS via e6. Then 12 ... c5

13 e4 (D) leads to a normal-looking King's In-

dian/Old Indian position.

White probably has some advantage; he can attempt to expand on either wing following, say, lbc1-d3. For his part, Black has the stan- dard Old Indian idea of playing ... hS-h4 in con- junction with a knight on g6; if in tum White plays h4, he will only achieve a later f4 at the cost of weakening g4 and h4. On the queenside, ... a6, ... J::tb8 and ... i.d7 can at least aim for ... bS. In general, however, his most practical goal will be to paralyse activity on both wings. 12 . a6 The minute White's g2-bishop is cut off from c6, attack on the centre by ... bS becomes a plan. 13 a4!? Not a bad move, although it ends up haunt- ing White. 13 f4 immediately would discour- age 13 ... bS?! (13 ... hS!? or 13 ... lbg6 is better) due to 14 cS!; for example, 14 ... exd4! Islbxd4 dxcS 16lbxc6 'iic7 17 e5 i.b7 18 ~d6!' 13 ... a514 f4 This is eventually necessary to make prog- ress, but it might have been preceded by bring- ing a rook to the centre and getting the king off gl. 14 dS is still playable, when Black has the clever move 14 ... lb8d7! IS dxc6?! bxc6 16 .l:.fdllbcS!, with the idea 17 "iVxd6 i.a6. Then 18 ~xc6 i.xc4 19 lbd5 "iVf8! 20 lbxf6+ gxf6 makes matters worse because of the threat of

21...J::ta6 22 ~c7 1;:i.c8, trapping the queen.

[diagram]
18 g4 h6 with ideas such as ... i.d7, ... .l:i.ad8 and

... ~b6-M. Then 19 g5! hxg5 20 fxg5lZlfd7! 21 lZlf5 lZle5 (D) gives Black valuable outposts on c5 and e5 in return for his pawn. w For example, 22lZlxd6 (22 ~xd6? ~xd6 23 lZlxd6l:td8 24lZlf5 i.e6!) 22 ... l:Ie6 23lZlf5 can be answered by 23 ... i.d7!? or 23 ... l:te8 24lZld6 l:Ie6, etc. 16 ~h2 exd417lZlxd4lZlc5 18 .l:i.fel 'Wic7 The game is dynamically balanced, which can fairly be said about the opening as a whole. It demonstrates that even after the 'boring' 3 ... i.b4+ (or 2 ... lZlf6 3 i.g2 c6 4 d4 i.b4+), fascinating battles can arise, in this case with multitudinous positional and tactical themes. White Plays tLlf3 Larsen - Korchnoi Leningrad Interzonal 1973 lc4e52g3c6 A move-order note: if Black wants to make sure that White is committed to i.g2 (thus re- ducing control of d3), he might play 2 ... lZlf6 3 i.g2 c6. Then 4 d4 i.M+ 5 i.d2 i.xd2+ 6 ~xd2 d6 transposes to the previous section, and 4 lZlf3 e4 5 lZld4 d5 6 cxd5 ~xd5 intro- duces a position differing somewhat from our main line; for example, 7lZlc2 ~h5 8 h3 ~g6 9 lZlc3 (D). Then Black has two attractive moves: a) 9 ... i.c5 with the elementary idea 10 O-O? (10 d4 exd3 11 'iYxd3 WIIxd3 12 exd3 i.e6; 10 M! i.b6 11 a4looks best) 1O ... i.xh3 11 i.xh3?? WIIxg3+ 12 i.g2lZlg4. b) 9 ... lZla6! 10 d3 exd3 11 WIIxd3 WIIxd3 12 exd3lZlb4 13lZlxM i.xM and White's d-pawn has to be defended. The only issue Black runs into using this move-order is that 2 ... lZlf6 3lZlc3 c6 4lZlf3 is the Keres System, which might not be to Black's taste. In that case, he could also learn to play 3 ... i.M. 3lZlf3 The idea is to lure Black's e-pawn forward and then attack his centre. 3  e4 4 lZld4 d5 5 cxd5 WIIxd5 (D) This recapture is a problem for White, who is presumably happy to meet 5 ... cxd5 with a standard plan consisting of d3, lZlc3 and i.g2, with an attack on Black's centre. w Now Black's queen has prospects of active play on the kingside via ... Wllh5, or of central

102 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

influence by ... 'ilVeS. Nevertheless, White has certain advantages, in that Black's queen can be kicked around with tempo, perhaps twice (fIrst by lbc3 and then by one or more of the advances d4, f4, or even g4). And the pawn on e4 is rela- tively vulnerable in comparison with S. .. cxdS. All things told, Black seems to have his fair share of the play, but the ... 'iWxdSlines aren't in- vestigated as much as one would expect. 6lbb3 a) A lesser-played alternative is 6 lbc2 lbf6 (6 ... e3 7 f3) 7 i.g2 'iVhS!? (7 ... 'iWeS is also sound) 8 h3! (8 lbe3 i.h3! 9 i.xh3 'iVxh3 10 'iVb3 'iWd7 and with ... lba6 and ... O-O-O coming, Black keeps White's centre in check) 8 ... 'iVg6 9 lbe3 (to clear the way for 'ilVc2) 9 ... lba6! 10 lbc3 i.e6!? (the other idea is 1O ... i.cS, to cap- ture on e3) 11 'iWc2. Now a double-edged con- tinuation is 11...O-O-01? 12 i.xe4 (12 lbxe4? lbb4 13 'iVbli.xa2) 12 ... lbxe4 13 'iVxe4 i.e7!? 14 'iWxg6?! (14 d3!) 14 ... hxg6, when Black has his bishops and can target White's h-pawn. b) 6 e3 is more common. After 6 ... lbf6 7 lbc3 'iVeS (D) Black has space and light squares to work with, but White can target his vulnera- ble e-pawn. w bl) One try is 8 f4, when 8 ... exf3 9 lbxf3 isn't terrible for Black, but cedes a 2:0 central majority to his opponent. 8 ... 'iVe7! is more at- tractive, with the idea 9 'iVc2?! (White does poorly after 9 i.g2 cS!, but he should consider 9 b4!?) 9 ... cS! 10 lbb3lbc6 11 a3 hS! 12 Ji.g2 i.fS. Black has space, with control of key squares. b2) 8 i.g2 allows Black two promising ap- proaches: b21) Not 8 ... i.g4?! (Silva-Santos, Portu- guese Ch 1994), which should be answered by 9 'iVb3! i.c8 10 f4!. b22) 8 ... lba6 9 O-O i.g4 10 f3 exf3 11 i.xf3 i.xf3 (l1...'iWhS?! 12 lbe4; l1...hS? 12 lbxc6) 12 lbxf3 'iVhS 13 d4 i.b4 (to control e4) 14 'iWc20-0 IS a3 i.xc3 16 bxc3 .l:tfe8 17 ':b1 b6! with approximate equality. Now White should steer clear of 18 'iWa4?! lbc7 19 'iVxc6 .l:tac8 20 ~a4lbcdS. b23) 8 ... i.cS 9 lbb3 (or 9 O-O!? O-O 10 d3 exd3 11 'iVxd3lba6 12 a3 i.b6 13lba4lbcS 14 lbxcs i.xcs IS i.d2 'iWhS) 9 ... i.b6 10 O-O O-O II f3, Brekke-Benko, Gausda11984, and Black would do well to play 11....l:td8! 12 'iVe2 exf3 13 i.xf3 i.h3 14 .l:te1 lba6 IS d4 'iVe6 with the ideas ... lbb4 and in some cases ... lbg4. w Let's return to the main game: 6  lbf6 Black could also try 6 ... i.fS 7lbc3 'iVd7. 7 i.g2 ~h5 (D) 8h3! As in similar positions, 8 lbc3 Ji.h3! favours Black. 8  'iWg69lbc3lbbd7?! Black's e-pawn is threatened by 'iVc2, which seems to force concessions, yet 9 ... lba6! (the key move in this variation) would come to the rescue. Now 10 'iVc2?! can be answered by 1O ... lbb4 11 'iVb1 (D). 11 ... e3! (a major theme for Black, threatening ... lbc2+; even 1l...i.e6!? 12lbxe4 O-O-O yields some attack) 12 'iVxg6 hxg6! 13 O-O (13 <;folfl exf2 14 <;folxf2 i.e6! threatens ... lbxa2, and there is no good reply) 13 ... exd2 14 i.xd2 i.xh3 wins a pawn; it's hard for White to improve here. 2 . .,tl:Jj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 103

Therefore, White's best move is 10 O-O, when 1O ... .te7 11 d3 exd3 12 exd3 O-O 13 1:tel lIe8 14 .tf4 .te6! IS tbd4 tbcs 16 tbxe6 tbxe6 17 .te3 keeps the position about level, because the bishop-pair offers White compensation for his weak d-pawn. 10 'iiVc2 e3 Forced, to save the e-pawn; but this time there's no knight on b4. 11 ~xg6 exf2+ 12 ~xf2 hxg6 (D) w Black has maintained material equality, but White has the two unopposed centre pawns. That gives him the advantage in spite of his weakness on g3. 13 d4!? White keeps an edge after the patient 13 d3!; for example, 13 ... .td6! 14 .td2 (or 14 g4 tbcs IS tbaS!, threatening tbxc6 and intending tbc4) 14 ... tbhS IS tbe4 .tc7 16 g4 tbf4 17 .tf3! tbxh3+? 18 ~g2 tbf4+ 19 .txf4 lIxhl 20 .txc7! with two pieces for a rook and a large positional advantage. 13 .. tbb6 14 e4!? .te6 15 .tf4 .tb4 16 tbc5 O-O-017 tbxe6 fxe6 IS a3?! Both players have had alternatives during this sequence, but here Kasparov shows that 18 tbe2! was definitely stronger. IS.  .te7 19 lIadll1hfS Black stands fine now, threatening ... gS. The rest is worth a look, but not relevant to the open- ing: 20 'it>e2? tbc4! 21 h4 tbh5 22 .th3l:txf4! 23 .txe6+? 'it>c7 24 .txc4 tbxg3+ 25 'it>e3 lIdfS 26l:thgl .txh4 27 'it>d311f2 2Sl:td2 .tg5! 29 ':xf2 l:txf2 30 tbe2 l:!.f3+ 31 'it>c2 tbxe4 32 .td3.J:i.e3 Black went on to convert his extra pawns into victory. This opening variation is double- edged and relatively unexplored . Reversed Dragon without tbc3 Pecorelli Garcia - Franco Campos Havana 2001

[diagram]
(D)

w This is a type of Reversed Dragon (or so it is called; for the moment it is a Reversed Hyper- Accelerated Fianchetto!). 5 tbf3 White develops in a way that turns this into a variation unique to 2 g3. A normal Reversed Dragon would arise after S tbc3 tbb6 6 tbf3. 5  tbc6 A recurring blunder which applies to many openings is S ... e4? 6 '!lVa4+ and 7 'iYxe4. 60-0 tbb6

104 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Because of White's move-order, Black can try to keep his knight in the centre for a long time by playing 6 ... iLe7 (D). w One interesting consequence is that if White continues with the set-up we are considering (d3 and tDbd2), Black's knight remains on its best square; for example, 7 d3 O-O 8 a3 as 9 b3 (9 tDbd2 iLe6) 9 ... iLe6 10 iLb2 f6 11 tDbd2 'ilVd7 was very comfortable for Black in Carl- sen-Gelfand, Moscow (blitz) 2007. Thus, if White doesn't want to revert to the conventional Dragon set-up by 7 tDc3, he should play 7 d4, when the main line is 7 ... e4 8 tDeS fS 9 tDxc6 bxc6 (D). At this point there's quite a bit of theory, so I'll simply list some abbreviated lines: a) 10 'ilVa4 is played more often than other moves. The conventional solution is 1O ... 'ilVd7, with the idea of ... cS. Topalov-Timman, Wijk aan Zee 1999 went 11 .l:i.d1 cS! 12 'ilVxd7+ iLxd7 13 dxcS iLe6! and the game was level. b) Carlsen-Gelfand, Moscow (blitz) 2007 went 10 tDc3 O-O 11 f3!? exf3 12 exf3?! (12 l:lxf3 followed by e4 is equal) 12 ... iLf6 13 .l:!.el .nb8. This is quite awkward for White. c) 10 tDd2 is a good try, although several an- swers are reasonable. Black can play conven- tionally by 10 ... O-O 11 tDb3 iLa6 12 .l:!.e1 .l:!.b8. Alternatively, 1O ... iLe6 11 tDb3 O-O 12 iLd2 'iWb8!? with the idea ... ~bS is a clever option. Lastly, for the fanatic, there's 1O ... hS!? 11 tDb3 (11 h4!? O-O) ll...h4, with ... h3 and ... iLa6 in re- serve. All of this should be subjected to scrutiny. d) 10 f3 exf3 11 iLxf3 O-O 12 tDc3 iLe6 and now 13 ~a4 tDb6 14 ~xc6 iLd7 with a repeti- tion of position was Gulko-Harikrishna, Wijk aan Zee 2001. Instead, Sher-Smirin, Moscow 1990 went 13 e4 fxe4 14 tDxe4, and 14 ... ~d7 would have been the obvious move, with the idea IS .l:!.f2 .l:!.ae8.

[diagram]
7 ... iLd6 is a safe development. There are al- ternatives on every move, of course. 8 tDbd2 (D)

This is the point: the knight goes to d2, as it does in many Najdorf and Scheveningen varia- tions with colours reversed.

[diagram]
By far the most common move. In the Sicil- ian Defence, a knight on d7 goes particularly well with ... bS, so 10 b4 should be prevented.

10 b3 iLe6

10 .. .fS 11 iLb2 iLf6 is also perfectly play- able, and the conservative 1O ... .l:!.e8 11 iLb2 iLf8 maintains a balance. The nice thing is that both of these set-ups promise a middlegame full of content for both sides. 2 .. .tbj6 AND g3 SYSTEMS 105 11 i.b2 f6 (D) w 12 'if'c2 12 ~c1 ~f71? with the idea ... i.f8 and .. .lId7 is another moderately popular sequence. 12. 'if'd7 Again 12 ... ~f7 13 ~fd1 i.f8 with the idea ... ~d7 has its adherents and has done reason- ably well. I think that 14 tiJc4 is the most flexi- ble and promising reply. 13 ~fdl This safe move is probably best, and the simi- lar 13 ~ac1 is played too. Nevertheless, the am- bitious 13 e31? has been employed more often. White aims for d4, but it's hard for him to im- prove upon the following lengthy, almost forced, book sequence: 13 ... ~fd8 14 d4 exd4 IS tiJxd4 tiJxd4 16 i.xd4 cSl 17 i.xcS (17 i.c3 a4!) 17 ... Nc8 18 b4 tiJdS! 19 tiJb3?! (but 19 ':'fd1 axb4 20 i.xdS! ~xcS 21 i.xe6+ 'iWxe6 22 'iYb2 bxa3 23 'if'xa3 ~cdS is not attractive for White) 19 ... b6 20 e4 tiJxb4! 21 axb4 axb4 22 l:lfd1 'iWc7 23 tiJd4 ~xd4 24 ~xd4, Bourquin-Vnukov, e-mail (IECG) 2000, and now it looks as though 24 ... b3! is a refutation: 2S 'iWe2 (2S 'if'b 1 bxcS 26 .l:.da4 'iYeS!) 2S ... bxcS 26 lIc4 .l:!.b8 with what must be a winning game. 13  JUd814 tiJc4! (D)

14 .. tiJxc4 Other ideas for Black include 14 ... lWe8, plan- ning ... 'iYf7 (or ... lWhS if White plays e3). 15 bxc4 White won't get much from IS dxc4!? ~e8 16 tiJh4 i.cS 17 i.e4 g6. 15 . a4?! Finally allowing White's cherished break! Black should stop d4 by, for example, lS ... i.fS. Or he can play lS ... i.cS!? intending 16 e3 i.fS!, when the ultimate equality of this whole line might express itself in 17 'iWc 1 e4 18 dxe4 ~xd1+ 19 ~xd1 lIxd1+ 20 Ihd1 i.xe4. 16 d4! exd4 17 tiJxd4 tiJxd4 18 ~xd4 ~c8 19 lIxd8+ i.xd8 20 i.e4 Here White's pieces coordinate beautifully, and he went on to win.

5 Four Knights Variation

1 c4 e5 2 lLlc3 lLlf6 3 lLlf3 (D)

3 .. lLlc6 Now that we've seen the theory of 3 g3, the motivations behind 3 lLlf3 should be easier to understand. First, it's more forcing and there- fore restricts the opponent's options. Black's usual response is to protect his e-pawn by 3 ... lLlc6, when he has forfeited the possibility of ... c6, a move that plagued White in our pre- vious chapter in the variations stemming from both 2 g3 and 2lLlc3lLlf6 3 g3. Furthermore, in lines with ... lLlc6 and ... .i.b4, White's lLld5 will tend to be more effective, not only be- cause a counter with ... c6 isn't on the cards, but because ... lLlxd5 tends to lose a tempo after the recapture cxd5. As always, such advantages come with dis- advantages. By playing 3 lLlf3, White encour- ages ... e4 with tempo, and indeed that move is key to Black's play in many of the most impor- tant variations. Furthermore, White foregoes the development by lLlge2 (or lLlh3), reducing the likelihood that he will attack Black's centre byf4. Why 3 ... lLlc6? Simply because the e-pawn needs protection and the only other serious moves are 3 ... e4 and 3 ... d6. After some experi- ence with the gambit 3 ... e4?! 4lLlg5 b5!? (else the e-pawn falls for nothing), it turns out that declining the pawn sacrifice by 5 d3! secures a pleasant advantage based upon White's central control and development. The relevant analysis can be found in various books. Defence of the e-pawn by 3 ... d6 is primarily a transpositional device; for example, after 4 d4 lLlbd7, 5 e4 will transpose to either an Old In- dian Defence, if Black plays 5 ... .i.e7, or to a King's Indian Defence if Black plays 5 ... g6. The game stays within English Opening terri- tory after 4 d4 e4 5 lLlg5 .i.f5, which was ana- lysed in Chapter 3 under the move-order 1 c4 e5 2lLlc3 d6 3 lLlf3 lLlf6 4 d4 e4 5lLlg5 .i.f5. In any case, 3 ... d6 forfeits the chance to play ... .i.b4 or ... d5 (at least in one step); those moves are two of Black's main weapons versus 3 g3. The position after 3 ... lLlc6 (D) is called the 'English Four Knights Variation', and is a tradi- tional main line. w The first question is whether White can prof- itably play the thematic pawn-break 4 d4 (see beloW). That move has undergone a modest re- vival; although the conventional wisdom is that Black achieves equality, the debate goes on. Then we have a series of less dramatic choices for White on his 4th move such as 4 d3, 4 e3 and 4 g3. Black has many possible responses to all of these, but an intriguing question is whether he can afford to enter a reversed Open Sicilian

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 107

(1 e4 cS 2 lLlf3 lLlc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 lLlxd4) by play- ing 4 ... dS S cxdS lLlxdS. Two issues arise: a) Which of White's fourth moves will be useful versus ... dS and productive in its own right? b) Is Black's position in the normal Open Sicilian so compelling that when White plays it with an extra tempo, it will propel him to the advantage? That is, if White simply plays a use- ful 'Sicilian' move such as 4 a3, 4 d3 or 4 g3, will 4 ... dS S cxdS lLlxdS allows him a lasting edge? Or, if Black plays safely, are White's prospects strictly limited? We've asked this question before about analogous positions in Chapters 2, 3 and 4. In general, 3 lLlf3 is more popular than 3 g3 because Black has a much harder time proving equality, and can easily end up with the small disadvantage that we associate with moving second. After 3 ... lLlc6, let's look at games with a va- riety of fourth moves, beginning with some less conventional ones. Slower White Approaches 4a3 Korchnoi - Salov St Petersburg 1997 White reasons that ... a6 is a handy move in al- most every Sicilian Defence, so it makes sense to try it for White. a) 4 b3 can't be too bad, but isn't very force- ful. Perhaps the easiest response is 4 ... g6 fol- lowed by ... iLg7 and ... O-O. In fact, the obvious 4 ... dS S cxdS lLlxdS 6 iLb2 lLlxc3 7 iLxc3 iLd6

8 d3 O-O also equalizes.

b) 4 d3 (D) is a common choice, but too slow to pose a real challenge to Black because it forfeits the chance to play d4 in one move. bl) As against other quiet moves, the all- purpose 4 ... g6 is satisfactory, leading to the King's Indian/Closed hybrid of Chapter 12 if play continues S g3 iLg7 6 iLg2 O-O 7 O-O d6. b2) Black also frequently chooses 4 ... iLM with the idea of an early ... e4 and/or ... dS. S iLd2 O-O and now: b21) 6 g3 may not inspire, but gives chances for a slight edge after 6 .. J:te8 7 iLg2 iLxc3 8

iLxc3 dS 9 cxdS lLlxdS and now 10 O-O!, in re- sponse to which 1O .. J:tb8!? intending ... lLlxc3 and ... b6 has been played. Kotronias solves the problem of the bishop-pair after 10 iLd2 with 1O ... lLld4! 110-0 iLg4!. Notice also that the ag- gressive 6 ... lLld4!? with the idea ... lLlxf3+ and ... c6 has held its own in practice. b22) One high-level example is 6 e3 ne8 7 ~c2!? iLxc3 8 iLxc3 dS 9 cxdS lLlxdS 10 iLe2 iLfS! 11 l:tdl (Black's tactical point is 11 e4 lLlf4! 12 exfS lLld4!) ll...aS 12 O-O file7 with equality, Ehlvest-Kasparov, Reykjavik 1988. b3) If Black doesn't want to go in those di- rections, he can also answer 4 d3 more ambi- tiously by playing a reversed Open Sicilian with 4 ... dS S cxdS lLlxdS. This is an extremely instructive position to investigate by substitut- ing various normal Sicilian moves for White at this juncture. For example, 6 e4!? (D) is like a Sveshnikov Sicilian in reverse.

White's problem again has to do with his ex- tra move, in this case d3. In the reversed lines,

108 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black has the aggressive move ... i.b4 if White's d4-knight retreats. Here, because of White's extra move d3, the development i.bS is not available. A typical line goes 6 ... ttJb6 (6 ... ttJf6 is also perfectly satisfactory; for example, 7 i.e2 i.g4 8 O-O i.xf3!? 9 i.xf3 ttJd4, Moroze- vich-Grishchuk, World Ch, Mexico City 2007; and even 6 ... ttJxc3 7 bxc3 i.cs isn't bad) 7 i.e2 i.e7 80-00-09 a4 i.e6! 10 i.e3 (10 as ttJd7) 1O ... ttJd7 (anyway!) 11 d4 exd412 ttJxd4 ttJxd4 13 ~xd4 c6 14 as ttJcS IS ~eS ttJb3 16 l:l.a4 i.d6 17llVhs g6 18 ~6 i.eS with full equality, Carlsen-Topalov, MorelialLinares 2008. Of course, White has options apart from 6 e4 in the position after 4 d3 dS S cxdS ttJxdS. 6 g3 is a Reversed Dragon, which we'll see below; and 6 e3 is a reversed Scheveningen. But in general, when playing with this d3/e3 pawn- structure, White has more chance of gaining the advantage if he can place his queen' s knight on d2; you might compare the N ajdorf Variation of the Sicilian with its extraordinarily effective knight on d7. In our line, with White's knight on c3, Black should be able to equalize, but you might want to confirm this for yourself. Let's return to the main game with 4 a3 (D).

4 . g6 Broadly speaking, if ... i.b4 isn't possible, then ... g6 will be a good alternative. It makes sense against any slow move like 4 a3. Other moves: a) Black can also treat White's whole idea with disdain and play 4 ... dS S cxdS ttJxdS (D) anyway. Confronted with the 'extra' move a3, Black may not want to attack as White does in an w Open Sicilian position, preferring to look for simplifying ideas that yield equality. White, on the other hand, already has the central majority. Let's look at a few continuations: al) 6 e3 has several good answers. First, 6 ... i.e7 7 i.bs1Wd6!? is effectively a tempo up for Black on a line we've seen via the move- order 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 3 e3 in Chapter 4, because 4 a3 has proven irrelevant. A more provocative course for Black in this variation is to try the gambit that White plays with reversed colours, that is, 7 ... O-O!? 8 i.xc6 bxc6 9 ttJxeS i.d6! with the idea 10 ttJxc6 1Wgs. It's unlikely that White's pawn being on a3 helps him much. Finally, Black can playa Four Knights Sicilian in reverse by 6 ... ttJxc3 7 bxc3 e4 8 ttJd4 ttJeS, when the pawn on a3 even prevents the stan- dard idea i.a3. In each case, you'd have to compare the reversed positions concretely to be sure of what the differences are. a2) 6 e4 is a Sveshnikov without the possi- bility of 6 ... ttJdb4, but as above, White's posi- tion after the unexciting 6 ... ttJb6 is probably not helped by the weakening move a3. Further- more, Black can play the forcing 6 ... ttJf4 7 d4 exd4 8 i.xf4 dxc3 9 bxc3 1Wf6 (9 ... ~xdl + 10 Itxdl i.xa3 is also possible due to the pawn on a3) 10 1Wd2 i.g4 11 eS 'iVe6. Black actually gets a better position than White does in the re- versed lines, because his queen has access to b3 and ... i.xa3 is possible in some situations. a3) Beim-Rublevsky, Frankfurt 2000 con- tinued with the more flexible 6 ~c2! i.e7 (6 ... ttJxc3!?) 7 e3 O-O 8 i.bS!? (8 i.d3 is strate- gically interesting; for example, 8 ... g6 9 ttJxdS ~xdS 10 h4 i.g4 11 i.e41We6 12 b4) 8 ... i.g4! 9 i.xc6 i.xf3 10 gxf3 bxc6. Black's pressure

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 109

against vulnerable points down the d- and b- files compensates for his weak pawns on the open c-file. b) 4 ... d6 can lead to a calm position follow- ing S e3 g6 6 d3 (6 d4 Ji..g7 is solid) 6 ... Ji..g7. Black's move-order has the advantage that S d4 can be answered by S. .. e4 6 liJgS Ji..f5. Com- pare the 2 ... d6Iines in Chapter 3; here White's move a3 is not useful. We now return to 4 ... g6 (D): w 5 d4 Usually the best answer to the move ... g6 is to counter directly like this (or to play e3 and d4). Here the effectiveness of S d4 is somewhat reduced because a3 has become irrelevant. I mentioned the dubious move S b4? in Chapter 4 (via 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 a3, etc.). Black responds S. .. e4! 6 liJgS Ji..g7 with the idea of ... h6 and after liJh3, ... gS, hemming in the knight on the rim. Then 7 .i:!.bl O-O! 8liJgxe4liJxe4 9liJxe4 .i:!.e8 gives Black more than enough compensa- tion. The problem is that Black is developing too quickly for White to coordinate. For exam- ple, 10 liJc3 (10 d3 dS! 11 cxdS 'iVxdS 12 e3 fS 13 liJd2 as! gives us the familiar sacrificial idea 14 bSliJd4!) 1O ... d6 11 e3 Ji..xc3 12 dxc3 'iVh4! intending ... Ji..g4 or ... Ji..fS (not 13 g3?? li'e4). 5  exd4 6liJxd4 Ji..g7 7 Ji..g5!? White tries for maximum central control. 7 liJxc6 bxc6 8 g3 O-O 9 Ji..g2 J::te8 puts Black ef- fectively a tempo ahead of the Three Knights Variation of Chapter 6, since a3 is at best inef- fectual. Nor does 7 g3 go very well with a3; for example, 7 ... O-O 8 Ji..g2 .i:!.e8 is comfortable for Black. Note that getting queens off via 9liJxc6 dxc6! 10 'iVxd8 .l:i.xd8 11 Ji..f4 Ji..e6 doesn't help White's cause. 7 ... h6 8 iLh4 O-O 9 e3l:te810 iLe2 (D)

... liJxd4!? Korchnoi proposes 1O ... dS. This is a dynamic tactical device that you should look for in simi- lar positions (whether from the King's Indian or Modem Defence, for example), especially if ... gS is possible for Black. The primary points are that 11 liJxd5 is inferior due to 11...gS 12 liJxf6+ (12 Ji..g3liJxd5 13liJxc6 bxc6 14 cxdS iLxb2) 12 ... iLxf6 13liJxc6 bxc6, and 11 cxd5 is also ineffective after 11...liJxd4 12 exd4 gS with the idea 13 Ji..g3 liJxdS 14 O-O c5!? (or 14 ... c6). This sequence works because White hasn't castled and every move by Black has been directly aggressive. Of course, White isn't that badly off, and can play 11 liJxc6 bxc6 12 cxdS cxdS, with chances for both sides. 11 exd4 g5 Again, 11.. .dS! was a good move. 12 iLg3liJe4 13 O-O d6 14 iLd3! Here Black played 14 ... f5 and got the worse of it after 15 Ji..xe4 fxe4 16 .i:!.el. Things might have become more exciting after 14 ... liJxg3 IS fxg3! iLxd4+ 16 <it>h 1 iLg7 17 'iVf3 Ji..e6 18 'iVe4 with an unclear attack. Ehlvest - Harikrishna FIDE World Cup, Hyderabad 2002

1 c4 e5 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 liJf3 liJc6 4 e4 (D)

A fascinating move which looks ridiculous because it creates a big hole on d4. But the weakness is compensated for by the control that White has over dS and the consequent

110 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

difficulty that Black faces in freeing his game. In practice, White can slowly work around the centre, usually by playing g3, i.g2 and O-O, and then aiming to achieve f4. Black's task is to exploit the d4 outpost or otherwise chal- lenge White's centre.

4. .. i.h4

The other established variation goes 4 ... i.c5 5ltJxe5! (else after 5 ... d6, White's pawn-struc- ture looks rather silly) 5 ... ltJxe5 6 d4 i.b4 7 dxe5ltJxe4 8 'iVd4ltJxc3 9 bxc3 (D).

Now 9 ... i.e7 is supposed to be about equal after 10 'iVg4 Rf8 11 'iVg3 d6, but White has some interesting and untried options such as 10 i.d3 0-0110-0 d6 12 i.f4. Black's alternative is 9 ... i.a5 10 i.a3 d6 11 exd6 O-O 12 O-O-O cxd6 13 'iVxd6!? (13 i.xd6l:te8 14 i.d3) 13 ... 'iVxd6 14 i.xd6 J:le8 15 Rb2 i.d7 16 i.d3 i.c6 17 f3, an ending that has arisen in some top-level games. Black should be able to work his way to a draw with extremely accurate play, but the average mortal will probably be unsatisfied with this.

[diagram]
6 a3 simply pushes Black to where he wants

to go after 6 ... i.c5 7 b4 i.b6. 6 i.e2 is playable but non-threatening. 6 ... h6 Probably not the optimal solution to the po- sition, but it does prevent a piece from going to g5. Black has other ideas such as 6 ... O-O and 6 ... i.c5, leading to complex positional strug- gles. For example, 6 ... i.c5 7 i.g2ltJd4 8ltJxd4 i.xd4, as in Gulko-Karpov, Reykjavik 1991, leaves White a choice of plans: ltJe2 followed by d4 (assuming the bishop retreats from d4), or implementing the pawn-break f4. Theory considers this line to be equal. The logical 6 ... i.g4 is consistent with the theme of controlling White's weak square d4. An excellent illustration of both sides' ideas was Bu Xiangzhi-Bacrot, Turin Olympiad 2006:

7 h3 i.xf3 8 'iVxf3 ltJd4 9 'iVdl c6 10 i.g2 O-O

11 O-O i.c5! (retreating the bishop to c5 is typi-

cal, and why not? Once Black has sidestepped 4 ... i.c5 5 ltJxe5, the bishop can return to its ideal post) 12 ~h2 (D) (12ltJa4 'iVe7 13ltJxc5?! dxc5 leaves White's d-pawn as a target down the open file).

A representative position from this variation. The combination of ... i.g4xf3 and ... i.c5 has cemented control over d4, whereas White has opportunities based upon kingside expansion: 12 ... a5 13 f4 b5!? 14 f5 b4 15 ltJa4ltJd7!? (or 15 ... i.a7) 16ltJxc5 dxc5 (16 ... ltJxc5 17 f6!) 17 g4 f6 18 h4 h6 19 i.d2 ~f7!. The king escapes to the centre and frustrates attacking plans by White. The game was logically drawn. 7 i.g2 i.xc3+?!

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 111

This exchange is rather cooperative, giving White the bishops and eliminating d4 as an outpost. While this pawn-structure may be ac- ceptable for Black, he has trouble finding counterplay. One alternative is 7 ... i.g4, again retaining the option of ... i.cS. 8 bxe3 i.e6 9 lbd2! White has two ideas: he can continue lbfl- e3 and lbdS or lbfS, a manoeuvre not possible after O-O; and by keeping his king in the centre he can neutralize Black's potential attack by ... 'iVd7, ... hS-h4 and/or ... lbh7-gS. Still, castling and combining ideas of lbh4-fS and f4 is also a reasonable strategy. 9 ... hS 10 l:i.bl b6 11 h4lbd7 12lbn lbe7 13 lbe3 f614 d4! (D)

If you compare this position with a Nimzo- Indian Defence, you will see that White's pawn on c4 is well-defended and that the move f4 is coming under better circumstances than in most lines of that opening. White has the advantage. 14  lbf8 IS l:i.b2! This rook will be useful on the second rank, whether on d2, e2 or f2. IS. .. 'iVe816 f4lbd717 'ifa4 e618 l:i.d2 "fie7 19 i.a3 White hits the weak point at d6. The rest of the game illustrates how difficult Black's de- fence is: 19 ... bS 20 'ifdl!? bxe4 21 O-O exf4?! 22 gxf4 fS 23 dS! exdS 24 exfS i.f7 2S lbxdS i.xdS 26 .i::.xdS! This effectively finishes the game, because 26 ... lbxdS 27 ~xd5 O-O-O 28 'iVa8+ is killing. Now Black blunders, but he's being crushed in any case.

26. . O-O? 27 i.xd6 "Wib6+ 28 ~hllbxfS 29

l:i.xfSl:IxfS 30 i.xa8 ~d8 31 i.e4 ~xh4+ 32 ~g2 .l:tbS 33 ~e2 1-0 Central Assault with 4 d4

1 e4 eS 2lbe3lbf6 3lbf3lbe6 4 d4 (D)

White's motivation is obvious: to break down Black's centre and gain a space advantage in the process. 4 ... exd4 4 ... e4 isn't popular, but has a long history of healthy results. I'll look at two replies for White: a) Exciting play results from 5 lbd2 i.b4! (5 ... lbxd4 6 lbdxe4lbxe4 7lbxe4 i.b4+ 8 i.d2 i.xd2+ 9 "Wixd2 gives White enough advantage to dissuade most players from trying S. .. lbxd4)

6 e3 i.xc3 7 bxc3 O-O 8 i.e2 ne8 9 O-O d6 10

f3 !? (D) (the thematic move, to remove the cramping pawn from e4).

112 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1O ... exf3 (or 1O ... ~fS, when 11 f4! ~d7! is unclear; instead, 11 fxe4 ttJxe4! 12 ttJxe4 ~xe4 13 ~d3 ~d7! is quite comfortable for Black - the c1-bishop is blocked) 11 ~xf3 l:txe3 12 ttJb3. This is Botvinnik-Ragozin, Leningrad 1940, which continued 12 ... .l:.e8 13 ~gS! with a strong attack. But in Adamski-Knaak, Poland- East Germany 1973, Black grabbed material and dared White to prove his case: 12 ... .l:.xc3! 13 ~gS ttJe7! 14 ~d2! l:txc4 IS ~xf6 gxf6 16 ~e2l:tc6 17 dS!? (17 .l:Ixf6 ttJdS) 17 .. J1b6 18 l::txf6 ttJxdS 19 l:lxf7!? Rxf7 20 il'xdS+ ~e6 21 ~hS+ ~e7 2211el ~g8, holding up the at- tack in view of 23 ttJd4?? (23 ~c4 is correct) 23 ... .l:.bl!. As you might guess, there are poten- tial improvements all over the place! b) S ttJgS and now: bl) Line 'b2' has so long been considered an equalizer that there hasn't been much atten- tion given to another good approach: S ... ~b4 6 dS ttJeS and now 7 ~b3 ~xc3+ 8 ~xc3 d6 leads to double-edged play. White shouldn't get too greedy by 7 ~d4 d6 8 ttJxe4 tDxe4 9 'ilVxe4 O-O, because with a large lead in development, Black has at least enough compensation for the pawn; for example, 10 e3l:te8 11 ~e2 ~f6 12 O-O ~fS 13 ~d4 ~g6 with ideas of ... ~h3 and ... ~d3. b2) S. .. h6!? 6 ttJgxe4 ttJxe4 7 ttJxe4 'ilVh4

w Here is Black's point: if the knight moves he will regain the pawn on d4. So White plays 8 ~d3 dS!? (upon 8 ... ~b4+9Wdl fS lOttJg3 O-O

11 a3 ~e7 12 f4!, Black comes up short of com-

pensation for the pawn) 9 cxdS ttJb4 10 'iVbl ~fS 11 ttJd6+ (only move) 1l...cxd6?! (I'm not sure why 11...~xd6! isn't played; even though White is temporarily two pawns up after 12 ~xfS, 12 ... O-O is dangerous for him, and 12 ... g6 13 ~I il'xd4 also deserves a test) 12 ~xfS g6 13 il'f4! (a sacrifice based upon positional grounds; the old analysis went 13 ~1 l:tc8 with ... ttJc2+ to come) 13 ... ttJc2+ 14~d1 il'xf4 IS ~xf4 ttJxal 16 e3!, Smirin-L.1ohannessen, Istanbul Olympiad 2000. Remarkably, White stands somewhat better here, because the knight on al can't be salvaged and White's bishop- pair will exert tremendous influence. Black should check out II.. .~xd6. 5 ttJxd4 ~b4 6 ~g5 h6 Timing is critical here: 6 ... ~xc3+ 7 bxc3 ttJeS?! 8 f4! ttJg6 (8 ... ttJxc4? 9 e4 ttJe3 10 il'e2! is like the note to 9 ... ttJg6 in G.Shahade-Ako- pian below) 9 g3! h6 10 ~xf6 ~xf6 II ~g2 O-O 120-0 d6 13l:tbl (D).

The type of position that White is aiming for. His pieces have wonderful range and Black's knight is restricted by the f4-pawn, whereas the pawns on c3 and c4 are safe from attack. Fur- thermore Black is forced to create a weakness in order to get developed: 13 ... c6 14 ~d2l:te8 IS e4 ttJf8 16l:Hel ttJd7? 17 ttJfS dS 18 cxdS cxdS, Kottnauer-Euwe, Groningen 1946, and now 19 ~xdS ttJb6 20 ~d4 leaves White a pawn ahead for nothing. 7 ~h4~xc3+ The most frequently played move, introduc- ing a heavyweight struggle between bishops and knights. Black can also play very flexibly by 7 ... O-O, when I'll offer a brief analysis of how the game might proceed: 8 l:lc I (8 e3 l:te8 9 ~e2l:[e4!? is double-edged) 8 ... dS!? 9 cxdS

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 113

(9 tZ:lxc6 bxc6 10 cxd5 cxd5 11 e3 g5 12 i.g3 c5!) 9 .. :~xd5 10 i.xf6 gxf6 11 tZ:lxc6 ~xdl+ 12l:txdl bxc6 13 e3 i.e6. In spite of his six iso- lated pawns (four of them doubled!), Black's two bishops and open lines give him plenty of play. Rather strangely, theory is as yet undevel- oped on most lines which are unique to 7 ... O-O (rather than 7 ... i.xc3+). 8 bxc3 tZ:le5 (D) Black's alternative 8 ... d6 has been assigned marks ranging from '!' to '?!'. It tends to drift into other lines, but a non-transpositional issue is 9 tZ:lxc6 bxc6 10 c5!, when some analysis by Carsten Hansen ends in a mild advantage for White. w This is the starting point of the old main line, which has produced some wonderful po- sitional play. We'll look at two games follow- ing 8 ... tZ:le5. Botvinnik - Levenfish USSR Ch, Moscow 1940

[diagram]
tZ:lxd4 i.b4 6 i.g5 h6 7 i.h4 i.xc3+ 8 bxc3 tZ:le5 9 e3 After 9 tZ:lb5 O-O, the initially attractive 10 iLxf6 gxf6 is a funny-looking position in which White's pieces are far away from Black's weak points. He will try to maintain his spatial edge, while Black will aim for quick development and pressure on the c-pawns. If White decides upon the slower 10 e3, Black might still try to provoke the exchange by 10 ... a6!?; for exam- ple, 11 iLxf6 gxf6 12 tZ:ld4 d5 !. That might lead to 13"iVb3 dxc4 14 i.xc4 b5 15 i.e2 c5 16 tZ:lf3 "fie7 17 ~c2 i.e6 with a kind of dynamic equality. These are instructive positions to play about with. 9 . tZ:lg6 9 ... O-O is a well-known alternative, when White can set up a flexible formation by 10 f3 d6 11 i.e2 tZ:lg6 12 i.f2; that position can also arise via 8 ... d6. 10 i.g3 tZ:le4 11 "iVc2 tZ:lxg3 12 hxg3 d6 13 f4! Wile714 ~f2 tZ:lf815 c5! (D)

Just when Black seemed to have consoli- dated, White finds this line-opening shot. 15  dxc5 16 i.b5+! tZ:ld7 Other possibilities are 16 ... c6 17 tZ:lxc6, 16 .. .'llo>d8 17 J:!.adl cxd4 18 l:txd4+ i.d7 19 i.xd7 tZ:lxd7 20 l:thdl, and 16 ... i.d7 17 tZ:lf5! Wilf618 "iVe4+ tZ:le6 19 i.xd7+ ~xd7 20 .l:!.hdl+ <;lo>c8 21l:tabl with a powerful attack. 17 tZ:lf5 'iif6 18 l:tadl Winning. Now 19 ~e4+ and 20 i.xd7 is a huge threat. 18. g6 19 tZ:lxh6l:l.f8 20 g4 a6 21 g5 'iVe622 i.e2 tZ:lb6 23 tZ:lg4 <;lo>e7 24 tZ:lf6 'iVc6 25 l:th7 i.f5 26 e4 i.e6 27 f5 1-0 G. Shahade - Akopian New York 1998

[diagram]
tZ:lxd4 i.b4 6 i.g5 h6 7 i.h4 i.xc3+ 8 bxc3 tZ:le5 9 f 4 tZ:lg6 Greed doesn't pay: 9 ... tZ:lxc4? 10 e4 tZ:le3 (or 1O ... d5 11 e5 g5 12 fxg5 tZ:lg4 13 i.xc4 dxc4 14 O-O hxg5 15 ~f3 tZ:lh6 16 e6! gxh4 17 exf7+ <;lo>f8 18 llael with an unstoppable attack) 11

114 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

~e2 lbxfl? (but White is still well on top fol- lowing 11 ... g5 12 fxg5 lbfg4 13 h3 hxg5 14 i.g3 with the idea 15 hxg4) 12 e5! O-O 13lbf5 W d6 14 i.xf6 gxf6 15 ~g 4+ 1-0 Kottnauer-Holas, Zlin 1945. 10 i.xf6 ~xf6n g3 (D)

A key position. Notice how Black is a full tempo ahead of Kottnauer-Euwe given in the note to move 6 in the introduction to this sec- tion. But White was so well off there that the extra move is still not a guarantee of equality. n . lbf8!? Karpov's exotic idea. Because White has no immediately threatening moves, Black wants to relocate the knight via e6 to c5, the ideal block- 18 ... l:!.fd8 threatens ... c5 under safer circum- stances. 19~xf6?! White should play the apparently risky 19 ~xd6! and mobilize his centre. Then 19 ... l:!.fd8 20 e5! l:!.xd6 21 exf6 is unclear in view of

21...i.xc4 (2l...l:!.b8) 22l:!.fell:!.xf6 23l:!.e4!.

19.  gxf6

An unusual structure. White's queenside pawns are weaker than Black's kingside ones, and e5 is restrained for the moment. 20 l:!.fdl lbb2! 21 l:!.xd6 lbxc4 22 l:!.d3 b6!

(D)

ading square. This is not possible after castling, W although Black found another plan in A.Maric- Galliamova, Women's Candidates, Groningen 1997: 11...O-O 12 ~d2 c6 13 i.g2 b6! (the weak- ness of the c4-pawn shows up) 140-0 i.a6 15 e4, and now best is 15 ... i.xc4! 16 e5 "ViIIe7 with equality. 12 i.g2 lbe6 13 e4 d6 14 O-O O-O 15 "iWd2 lbc5 (D) Black has equalized; his powerful knight and better bishop cancel out White's aggres- sive pieces and big centre. 16lbb3 23 e5 This innocent move can't be too bad, but has the wrong idea behind it. In the original super- GM game Kramnik-Karpov, Las Palmas 1996, a quick draw followed 16 l:!.ael .l:tb8 17 Ite3 i.d7 18lbb3lbxb3!? (paradoxically straight- ening out White's pawns; 18 ... l:.fd8 is also equal) 19 axb3 i.c6 20 'iVd4 a6! 21 "ViIIxf6 1/Z-1f2.

16. . lba4! 17 .l:!ac1i.e618 ~d4 c5!?

White wins a pawn, but still suffers from a lasting structural deficit, which to some extent rose organically from the opening itself. In the end, Black triumphs with a fine technical dis- play: 23 .. l:.ad8 24 l:!.xd8 l:!.xd8 25 exf6 lbe3 26 i.f3 lbg4 27 i.xg4 i.xg4 28 l:!.c2 l:!.d3 29 c4 ~h7 30 lbc1.l:tdl+ 31'it'f2 'it'g632lbe2 i.f5!

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 115

Now we get to see the customary superiority of bishop over knight when there are pawns on both sides of the board. 33l:tb2 i.d3!? 34 ttJc3l:tfi+ 35 ~g2 i.xc4 36 ttJd5 l:tc1 37 ttJe7 + ~xf6 38 ttJc8 l:ta1 39 ttJxa7 l:txa2 40 l:txa2 i.xa2 41 ~f2 ~e6 42 f5+ ~e5 0-1 The Cautious 4 e3

1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 3 ttJf3 ttJc6 4 e3 (D)

For a long time this safe move was quite pop- ular, since it prepares the highly desirable ad- vance d4. Naturally Black has to be careful, but has positive chances for the usual reason: White has made some rather committal moves which allow Black to react accordingly. In particular, ... ttJf6 and ... e6 aren't normally used together in the reversed Sicilian position, unless White has already committed to d4. But you can see in the diagram that ... dS hasn't been played. I'll begin with a game that is perhaps over- used as an example of 4 ... i.e7, but it combines important positional ideas with an instructive attack. Timman - Karpov Montreal 1979

[diagram]
a) 4 ... dS S cxdS ttJxdS was discussed at the beginning of Chapter 4.6 i.bS has a good repu- tation for White, but Black seems to be able to equalize. As suggested there, 6 'iWc2 is more promising. b) 4 ... g6 S d4 exd4?! (S ... d6 transposes to 4 ... d6) 6 exd4 (6 ttJxd4 i.g7 is passive for White and must be equal) 6 ... i.g7 7 dS 'iWe7+!? 8 i.e2 ttJeS 9 ttJxeS 'iWxeS 10 O-O O-O 11 l:tel gives White space and the better game. c) The most logical way to punish a slower move such as 4 ... d6 is to play actively by S d4, but it will be hard to break down Black's solid structure after S ... g6 6 dxeS (nothing else im- presses; 6 dS ttJe7 7 e4 i.g7100ks like a King's Indian Defence a tempo ahead for Black: White has played e3-e4, and thus is short of the nor- mal move i.e2; maybe he could use the fact that the bishop is on f1 to play 8 h3!? with an unusual mix of plans that appear in other King's Indian Variations) 6 ... ttJxeS 7 ttJxeS dxeS 8 ~xd8+ ~xd8 9 b3! i.e6!? (9 ... c6! 10 i.b2 i.d6 11 l:!dl ~e7 looks like the ideal piece reorganization) 10 i.b2 c6 11 O-O-O+ ~e8 (ll...~c7? would be consistent with Black's last two moves, but then comes 12 ttJbS+!) 12 i.e2 i.e7 (D). w This was played in Illescas-Karpov, Villar- robledo (rapid) 1997. Now, instead of the game continuation 13 h3 l:td8 with equality, Illescas suggests the ingenious 13 ttJbl! ttJd7 14 ttJd2, hoping to put pressure on the diagonal via ttJe4 and looking at the d6-square. Black would be only slightly worse after 14 ... f6 IS ttJe4 (1S f4 exf4 16 exf4 Rf7 17 ttJf31lad8 18 ttJd4 ttJcS 19 ttJxe6 ttJxe6 20 g3 i.cS and Black's d4 outpost neutralizes the bishops) IS ... ttJcS 16 ttJd6+ i.xd6 17 l:txd6 ~f7 18 f3. Now we return to the position after 4 ... i.e7

[diagram]
116 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w S a3 is a popular and less committal option which doesn't contain much force; for exam- ple, S ... O-O 6 b4 (6 ~c2l:!.e8 7 ..td3!? ..tf8 8 b3 d6 9 ..tb2 is a more provocative set-up, espe- cially in the case of9 ... g6 10 M!? with the idea of ttJgS and then ttJdS) 6 ... dS! 7 cxdS (7 bS can be met by 7 ... d4! 8 bxc6 dxc3 9 ttJxeS ..td6!) 7 ... ttJxdS 8 ..tb2 ttJxc3 9 dxc3?! (9 ..txc3 might be answered by 9 ... e4 10 bS exf3 11 bxc6 fxg2 12 ..txg2 b6; then White has a mobile centre whereas Black combines a better structure with light-square play) 9 ... e4 10 'tWxd8 l:!.xd8 11 ttJd2 ttJeS! (this remarkable pawn sacrifice comes from nowhere! Also good, if less ambi- tious, is ll.....tfS 12 c4 !:td6) 12 ttJxe4 ..tfS (or 12 ... ..te6!) 13 ttJg3?! (the best try is 13 c4! ttJd3+ 14 ..txd311xd3 IS ttJg3) 13 ... ..te6! (D). w This position explains the pawn sacrifice initiated with l1...ttJeS. The threat of ... ..tc4 is serious, and White's bishop on b2 is awful. Agrest-Anand, Villarrobledo (rapid) 2001 went 14 f4?! ttJg4 IS fS ..tb3 16 e4 ttJe3. The opening has ended in a complete success for Black, who went on to win. 5 ... exd4 6 ttJxd4 6 exd4 dS 7 ..tgS tries to conquer dS, but un- successfully, in view of7 ... O-O! 8 ..txf6 ..txf6 9 cxdS (9 ttJxdS ..tg4! 10 ..te2 ..txf3! 11 ..txf3 .l:Ie8+ 12 'it>f1 ttJxd4 gives Black a hefty advan- tage because White has serious weaknesses and his king is stuck on a terrible square) 9 .. .l1e8+ 10 ..te2 ttJb4 11 O-O liz-liz Ibragimov-Iliushin, Russian Clubs Cup, Maikop 1998. In fact, Black has two bishops and a moderate advan- tage after l1...ttJxdS. 6  O-O 7 ttJxc6 7 ..te2 dS! is consistent with Black's idea: quick development and a central break. Play can go 8 cxdS ttJb4! with the idea 9 e4? ttJxe4! 10 ttJxe4 ~xdS 11..tf3? ~xd4! 12 'iVxd4 ttJc2+ 13 'it>d2 ttJxd4. Naturally a move like 9 i.f3 is better, and equal. 7 . bxc6 8 ..te2 d5 9 O-O ..td6 (D) w Now that the centre is secured, Black feels that he has time to aim his bishop at the king- side. Notice that White lacks a defending knight there. 10b3 These days 10 cxdS is generally preferred, when Black remains comfortable after 10 ... cxdS 11 b3!? c6 or ll...cS. 10  'tWe711..tb2 It's too late for 11 cxdS?? 'iVeS. 1l  dxc4! (D) Either White abandons g4 to a black piece or opens the way for an attack on the dark squares, as follows in the game. 12 bxc4?!

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 117

It's better, although difficult, to abandon the kingside by means of 12 ..txc4. Then after 12 ... ltJg4! 13 g3 (13 h3? 'ijeS 14 g3 ltJxe3), Black has 13 ... ltJeS! 14 ..te2 ..tfS!, hitting the weakness at d3. 12  .l:tb8! 13 ~el White surrenders his control of g4, because 13 .l:tbl is met by 13 ... .l:txb2! 14 .l:!.xb2 ~eS IS g3 ~xc3, winning material. This simple fork is the main idea behind 11.. .dxc4. 13  ltJg4 14 g3? Kasparov gives 14 ..txg4 ..txg4 IS h3 ..thS! 16 ltJa4 cS 17 ..tc3 .l:tfe8 as the lesser evil. 14. .l:te8! ISltJdl? ltJxh2! (D) w 16 eS ltJxfi! 17 exd6ltJxg3! A wonderful combination anticipated by 14 ... .l:te8. Because of the fork on e2, White has no time to capture the queen, and his kingside is decimated. 18 fxg3 ~xd6 19 ~f2 ~h6 20 ..td4 ~h2+ 21 'It>el ~xg3+ 22 ~d2 ~g2 23 ltJb2 ..ta6 24 ltJd3 ..txd3 2S ~xd3 .l:tbd8 26 ..to ~e4+ 27 ~e3 eS! 28 ..txeS 'iVe6 29 ~b3 .l:tb8+ 30 ~a3 .l:teS 31..tb4 ~6 0-1 w Ivanchuk - Kariakin Wijk aan Zee 2006

1 e4 eS 2ltJe3ltJf6 3 ltJf3ltJe6 4 e3 ..tb4 (D)

As in almost every 2 ltJc3 ltJf6 variation we have seen, this move is an important option. Given the extent of theory and practice associ- ated with 4 ... ..tb4, I've only looked at a few di- rections of play, and you are encouraged to research the missing details. S'ije2 Formerly, S ltJdS e4 6ltJgl 0-07 a3 ..td6! 8 ltJe2 was held to promise some advantage, but a simple solution is 8 ... ltJxdS 9 cxdS ltJeS 10 ltJg3 fS 11 d3. Now l1...ltJxd3+ 12 ..txd3 exd3 13 'iVxd3 'ijf6 is a known remedy, but 11... ~h4 12 dxe4 fxe4 is also promising. S  ..txc3 This move largely took over from S ... O-O 6 ltJdS .l:te8, when White hasn't achieved much with conventional moves, but the strange-look- ing 7 'ijfS!? d6 8ltJxf6+ poses more problems whichever way Black recaptures. 8 ... gxf6 9 'iVhS (or 9 ~c2) produces some theoretically dense lines which are fascinating but don't in- tersect much with other openings or typical po- sitions; I won't go into them here. The endgame resulting from 8 ... ~xf6 9 'iVxf6 gxf6 (D) has also been deeply investigated. One might think that White should be fa- voured owing to Black's f-pawns, but they strengthen his centre and are potentially mo- bile. White's best chance is to occupy fS and/or

118 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w reach a highly simplified ending, but neither of these is likely to occur if Black is careful. The most popular line goes 10 a3 ~aS 11 b4 ~b6 14 .i.d2 as and Black was doing very well. But White also has 11 d3! (with the idea 11...~xe2? 12 l::!.e1) 11...l::!.e8 (11...~g4!?) 12 ~d2 b6 13 I:Iael ~b7, when Carsten Hansen suggests the odd 14 ~S!? ~d7 IS ~gS. In general, these lines appear to be dynamically balanced and open to creative interpretation. 7  dS (D) It turns out that 7 ... aS doesn't serve its in- tended function of preventing 8 b4, because that move favours White; for example, 8 ... axb4 9 axb4 l::!.xa1 10 ~xal e4 11 bS exf3 12 bxc6 fxg2 13 cxd7 + Wilxd7 14 ~xg2 O-O IS ~b2 with superb bishops. 12 ~b2 as 13 bS, when, for example, nothing W dramatic was happening after 13 ... tiJe7 14 d4 a4 (to give the bishop access to as in situations where cS is playable) IS O-O-O tiJg6 in Agrest- Akopian, New York 1998. I'll leave it to the reader to investigate S. .. O-O; it's been out of favour long enough that some fresh discoveries are overdue! 6 ~xc3 Wile7 7 a3 The traditional move here. Following 7 ~e2 dS (D), White has several ways to sidestep the standard continuation 8 cxdS tiJxdS: w a) The Sicilian formation 8 d3 O-O 9 cxdS tiJxdS 10 Wilc2 is playable, but both 10 ... .i.fS!?

11 e4 tiJdb4 12 ~c3 tiJd4! and 1O ... tiJdb4! 11

~c3 .l::td8 grant Black good chances. b) 8 O-O d4 9 exd4 exd4 10 Wilb3 O-O and now in Short-Morozevich, Sarajevo 2007, White tried 11 .tIel?! ~g4 12 ~dl Wild6 13 d3 tiJd7! 8d4! White has to be wary about exposing his light-square weaknesses; for example, 8 cxdS tiJxdS 9 ~b3 tiJb6 10 d3 as! intends ... a4 with a positional advantage; the moves ... ~e6 and ... tiJaS may follow.

8. . exd4 9 tiJxd4 tiJxd4

9 ... tiJeS!? 10 cxdS tiJxdS is also played. 10 ~xd4 (D)

10. .. cS

After the older move 10 ... O-O, White can play 11 cS! (11 cxdSl::!.d8!) l1...b6 12 b4 bxcS 13 bxcS, when Black has to move fast before the enemy bishops come into play. He couldn't find a way to equalize in Seirawan-Winants, Dutch Team Ch 200S/6, which continued 13 ... .l:.b8 14 ~b2 ~e6 IS ~d3 ~a6 16 ~c2! ~c4 17 ~c3 l:Ife8 18 h3 h6 19 g4 Wila6 20 h4, and White's combination of the bishop-pair and space proved deadly even in the ending that Black managed to reach.

11 Wilh4 ~e6

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 119

Black makes a surprisingly critical choice. He sometimes plays ll...dxc4 12 .ltxc4 O-O 13 O-O .lte6 in order to trade off a pair of bishops. But the most provocative alternative is the pseudo-gambit 1l...g5!? 12 ~xg5 !lg8 13 ~f4 (White accedes to a draw after 13 ~h4 !lg4 14 ~h6 !lg6; here 14 ... dxc4 is a winning attempt for Black) 13 ... .l:tg4 14 ~f3 dxc4 (14 ... .lte6!? 15 b3!? dxc4 16 .ltb2lLle4 is hard to assess) 15 h3 !le4 and Black has satisfactory play with ... .ltd7-c6 coming; for example, 16 .lte2 .ltd7 17 .ltd2 O-O-O 18 O-O-O .lta4 19 ~f5+ .ltd7 20 ~f3 .lta4 with repetition. This line utilizes Black's lead in development and prevents White from consolidating his long-term advantage of the bishops. It should see more tests. 12 cxd5 lLlxd5 12 ... .ltxd5 may be preferable, when White can play ambitiously by f3, .lte2 and e4, but he risks losing too much time. 13 ~xe7+ lLlxe714 .ltb5+ .ltd7 (D) w

15.lte2!

White preserves his bishop-pair. You'd think that Black would have few problems at this stage, but White has the dual strategy of minor- ity attack by b4 and control of the centre by e4, whereas Black has no concrete plan. 15 . f6 l5 ... a5 16 e4 a4 17 .lte3 b6 was suggested, but White retains his bishops and mobile king- side majority, while Black's own queenside majority remains without prospects.

16 e4 'iitf717 .lte3l:the818 f3 (D)

This position bears a look. The bishops both have excellent scope and coordinate in tandem. There doesn't seem to be any way to exploit White's weaknesses on d3 and d4. 18 . .lte6?! Black is waiting around, which is generally a poor policy versus the bishop-pair. Probably l8 ... f5 was the best way to disturb the equilib- rium, trying to gain better squares for his knight. From this point on, White is clearly better. 19 !leI b6 20 .lta6 ::td8 21 b4! (D)

120 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

21  cxb4 22 axb4 .J1l.c8 23 .J1l.e2 .J1l.e6 24 'it'f2 :ac8 2S :al Or 2S .J1l.a6 :xc1 26 :xc1 and Black's pieces have no squares. This is the point at which White would open a second front on the kingside. 2S  .tt:Jc6 26 .J1l.a6 :b8 27 .J1l.bS! ttJxb4 28 :xa7+ 'it'g8 29 :e7 .J1l.f7 30 :al Compare the pieces and you can see that the game is over. Black must jettison the b6-pawn so as not to allow 31 :la7. White went on to win relatively easily. The Main Line: 4 g3

Ivanchuk - Anand Wijk aan Zee 1999

1 c4 eS 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 3 ttJf3 ttJc6 4 g3 (D)

Finally we arrive at the move that most grand- masters play. White's idea should be obvious by now: to control the hl-a8 diagonal, get castled, and attack in the centre or on the queenside. Out of an enormous mass of games and theory, I shall emphasize material with recurring posi- tional and tactical themes. 4  .J1l.cS Although 4 ... .J1l.b4 has dominated high-level play, and 4 ... dS is also popular, 4 ... .ltcS is logi- cal and has had good success. If White plays positionally, he can gain a slight central advan- tage, but only by giving Black's pieces active squares in return. S ttJxeS!? Many players have found this radical solu- tion to be more to their taste than the calmer alternative S .J1l.g2, when Black has generally held his own over the years. After that move follows S ... d6 6 O-O O-O (D). w Then White has two main (and sometimes similar) approaches: a) 7 d3 a6 (7 ... h6 is fully playable but un- necessary) 8 .J1l.gS (8 e3 is slow and gives Black time to consolidate; for example, 8 ... h6 9 b3 .J1l.a7 10 .J1l.b2 :b8! 11 h3 bS 12 :c1 .J1l.d7, Gulko-Wolff, USA Ch, Modesto 1995; the idea of ... :b8 and ... bS is a recurring theme and pre- vents White from undertaking anything aggres- sive for fear of Black opening lines by ... bxc4) 8 ... h6 9 .J1l.xf6 (9 .J1l.h4!? hopes for 9 ... gS 10 ttJxgS! with a strong attack, but 9 ... ttJd4 10 .J1l.xf6 'iWxf6 11 ttJe4 'iWe7 12 ttJxcS dxcS is a sound structure because of Black's restraint of d4, Onishchuk-Sadler, Elista Olympiad 1998) 9 ... 'iWxf6 10 ttJe4!? "fIe7 11 ttJxcS dxcS, Gulko- Waitzkin, USA Ch, Modesto 1995. With this typical pawn-structure it's hard for White to take positive action, and he even has to be a lit- tle careful about ... bS or .. .fS at some point. b) 7 e3 a6 8 d4 .J1l.a7 (D) is a standard posi- tion. White's dilemma is that the moves dS and dxeS both extend the range of the bishop on a7. Right away, Black would like to play 9 ... i.g4, putting pressure on d4, so 9 h3 is usually played. It can be met by 9 ... h6 (9 .. J::tb8 with the idea ... bS is another reasonable plan; or 9 ... .J1l.fS

10 b3 h6 11 .J1l.b2 :e8, when Black is getting se-

rious about.. .e4) 10 b3 :e8 11 .J1l.a3!? (11 dS!? ttJe7 12 e4 gains space, but reopens the diagonal of the black bishop on a7) 1l...exd4 12 ttJxd4 ttJxd4 13 exd4 lIb8! 14 'iWd3 .ltd7 IS ~fel bS,

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 121

w Timman-Sadvakasov, Hoogeveen 1999. Black's dynamic play counteracts White's bigger cen- tre. We return to S lZ'lxeS (D):

S. .. .Jtxf2+ 6 'it>xf2 lZ'lxeS 7 e4 I'm not sure why 7 d4 lZ'lxc4 8 e4! has so sel- dom been played. It may be underrated for White. The game becomes dynamic and un- clear following 8 ... dS 9 exdS! (9 eS lZ'lg4+ 10 'it>gl cS!) 9 ... lZ'lb6 (alternatively, 9 ... lZ'ld6!? 10 ~e2+ 'it>f8 leaves both kings ready to castle by hand; the game is about equal after 11 i.f4 hS!?, which looks a little strange, but strength- ens Black's grip on g4, leaves open the option of ... h4, and provides a square for the king on h7) 10 .JtbS+ 'it>f8 IIl:tel lZ'lbxdS 12 'iVb3 c6 13 i.c4 hS!? with an unclear position in which ... h4 and ... ~b6 are themes. 7 ... cS (D) Black discourages d4 and sets up another im- balance between bishops and knights, space, and other dynamic factors. w 8d4!? For many years this move was entirely ig- nored, since it isolates White's e-pawn. Now it has put some players off 4 ... i.cS altogether! White's idea is simply to get his pieces out while exerting pressure down the d-file and maintaining a space advantage. White has various slower moves. He can play 8 i.e2, for example, covering g4. For his part, Black can insert ... O-O and/or ... a6 before committing to ... d6. However, it turns out that the positional themes tend to be similar regard- less of move-order, so I'm only going to look at the traditional main line 8 d3 (8 h3 d6 9 d3 will transpose) 8 ... d6 (D). Black's obvious intent is to control the out- post on d4, at the same time using the pseudo- outpost on eS for his pieces. White wishes to develop as actively as possible and use his good bishop to make threats, normally in conjunc- tion with play down the f-file and/or a break with M. In addition, he has an outpost on dS,

122 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

which in comparison with Black's on d4 is somewhat difficult to make use of, because he hasn't another piece to support it. White generally covers g4 first by 9 h3, and after 9 ... O-O, Black has a number of possible plans, but the time-tested idea of ... ttJe8-c7-e6 almost always seems a good remedy. For exam- ple, 10 ~g2 (or 10 .tg2 ttJe8 11 .:tn ttJc7 12 ~gl ttJe6 with equal chances) 1O ... ttJe8 II.te2 ttJc7 12 g4?! (this doesn't really do much, espe- cially as ... f5 is not Black's plan; better is 12 .te3 ttJe6 13 ttJd5 ttJc6, Garcia Gonzales-Uhlmann, Leipzig 1973, and now White should consider exchanging off his bad bishop by 14 .tg4, be- cause 14 ~d2 ttJed4 15 .th5 .l:.b8 gives Black excellent queenside prospects) 12 ... ttJe6 13 .te3 a6!? (attack with ... b5 is part of Black's arsenal; he can also play simply 13 ... ttJc6 and ... ttJed4, followed by a similar queenside expansion) 14 'ii'd2.l::i.b8 15 ttJd5 b5 16 b3 ttJd4!? 17 .tdl .te6! with a pleasant advantage, Garcia Marti- nez-Boey, Skopje Olympiad 1972. White has- n't a very constructive plan, and he has to watch out for a well-timed ... .txd5. 8  cxd4 9 WNxd4 O-O (D) Now White can't play 10 'iVxe5?? ttJg4+, of course, but he has got quite a bit of traction from these positions. Along with the two bish- ops and pressure against Black's weak d-pawn, the open f-file and outpost on d5 can come in handy. It's worth noting, however, that Black has his own trumps, most importantly a won- derful knight on an outpost square that is in front of an isolated pawn on an open file! Fur- thermore, his remaining bishop is a good one, which can exert pressure on that weak e-pawn. In those respects, his position resembles a Sicil- ian Defence. Notice that Black's two knights, rook and queen are poised to maintain a piece on e5 after exchanges, whereas White some- times has to recapture with a pawn in response to a piece exchange on d5. Although White can exert a degree of pressure in this position, I think that it is acceptable for Black.

10.tf4

10 ~g2 has also been played, when I think a good plan is 1O ... d6 11 h3 (11 .tg5 i.g4!)

11...b6!, targeting the e-pawn.

[diagram]
11 ~g2? .tg4! threatens ... .tf3+. 11  .te6 This innocent-looking move seems to lead to some edge for White. It looks better to maintain some pressure against the e4-pawn by means of 1l...l:te8 12 ~g2 (12 .:tdl!? runs into 12 ... ~a5! with the idea 13 'ii'xd6? ~xc3! 14 bxc3 tLlxe4+ 15 ~gl ttJxd6 16 .:txd6 ttJg6 and Black has the upper hand; after the better 13 ~g2, Black has 13 ... .td7! with ... .tc6 next) 12 ... b6! 13 .te2 .tb7 (D). Black's attack is more effective than White's, especially as White's king is exposed. 12 .te2 ~c8!? Now the queen attacks the pawns on h3 and c4, but it is not ideally placed. 13 .:tac1! .txh3!? 14 ttJd5 (D) 15 ttJe7+ is threatened, and 14 ... ttJxd5? 15 cxd5 ~d7 16 .txe5! dxe5 17 'ii'xe5 is too strong ('iVh5 would be the immediate threat). So Black gives up the exchange, getting some real com- pensation for it, although White could have kept some advantage in what followed:

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 123

14  :~e6 15 ljjc7 "fie7 16 ljjxa8 ljjc6! 17 ~e3 ljjxe4+ 18 'it>f3?! ~f5! 19 ~d3 .l:f.e8! 20 l:thel ~d8 21 'it>g2 "fixa8 22 ~f3ljjd4 23 'iie3 ljjc6 24 "fif3 1/2_1/2 With accurate play, I think Black stands sat- isfactorily in this 5 ljjxe5 variation. Of course, White has a variety of ways to dispute that statement, and some original analysis would be both educational and useful. 4 .... Bb4 and its Descendants

1 c4 e5 2 ljjc3 ljjf6 3 ljjf3 ljjc6 4 g3 ~b4 (D)

w As in other variations of the English Four Knights, 4 ... ~b4 is the theoretically most ad- vanced and complex answer to 4 g3. Some people consider it the main line of the entire Reversed Sicilian, which is hard to argue with. As we see with other lines involving ... ~b4, the simple development of a bishop spawns an as- tonishing number of unique situations. My aim is to find unity where I can by relating similar structures. 5~g2 For reasons of space, I'm going to forego a treatment of the moves 5 ljjd5 and 5 ~g2 O-O 6 ljjd5. Some specialists use one or the other, pri- marily as a way to steer clear of main lines and perhaps to play with less risk as White. This may come at the cost of reducing one's winning chances, because according to current theory Black has some fairly clear solutions that per- mit him to equalize without too much trouble. That is not to say that he shouldn't study these lines in order to be prepared, nor that White won't want to investigate them for potential use as a surprise weapon. 5  0-060-0 At this point Black's main moves are 6 .. J:te8 and 6 ... e4. In fact, other moves are legitimate, and the subtleties of move-order, including transpositions, are too complicated to go into here (nor are they well covered in theory books). But I think that it's worth thinking about the ef- fects of playing 6 ... ~xc3 (D), which is a rea- sonably good move in and of itself, but also a very instructive one. w Black's two recaptures illustrate the overlap of this ... ~b4 system with earlier ones in this book: a) After 7 dxc3, 7 ... e4 8ljjel transposes to a main line below, but here Black can play solidly by 7 ... d6, when White will have difficulties breaking down Black's centre. For example, 8 "fic2 (White wants to get e4 in; the alternative 8 ljjel ~e6 9 b3 'ilVd7 10 ljjc2 ~h3 llljje3 ~xg2 12 'it>xg2ljje7 gives Black at least equality; for

124 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

example, 13 lZ)d5 lZ)fxd5 14 cxd5 c6! 15 c4 cxd5 16 cxd5 .:tac8) 8 ... .:te8 9 e4 a6! (with the idea ... b5; this becomes a theme once White has B played e4, as we saw after 1 c4 e5 2lZ)c3lZ)f6 3 g3 .tb4 4 .tg2 O-O 5 e4 .txc3 6 dxc3) 10 a4 b6

w White lacks a d-pawn to attack in the centre, and playing f4 at some point may come up short after ... exf4, since so many black pieces can be trained against e4. This kind of position can fairly be called equal. b) Thus the recapture 7 bxc3 is generally pre- ferred. Then Black can play 7 ... e4 (for 7 ... .l:!.e8, see below). In doing so, he agrees to 8 lZ)g5 l:!.e8, transposing to a main line considered later, but he has prevented White from playing some of the effective lZ)el lines below, since now 8lZ)el d5 9 cxd5 'iVxd5 is fully satisfactory for Black. The main drawback to this move- order is that White can play 8lZ)d4, possibly en- tering into a notorious and important line that goes 8 ... .:te8 (8 ... d5 should definitely be con- sidered, when 9 d3! isn't clear) 9 d3 h6!? (the- ory holds that 9 ... exd3 10 exd3 h6 is adequate for Black, but that can be challenged) 10 dxe4!

This is Kasparov's move, which may yield White some advantage. The idea is to open lines for White's pieces and mobilize his king- side majority: 1O ... lZ)xe4 11 ~c2 d5!? 12 cxd5 'iVxd5 13 l:!.dl ! (Kasparov himselflost a classic battle to Karpov after 13 e3 lZ)a5!? 14 f3 lZ)d6

15 e4 'iVc5 16 .te3 lZ)dc4 17 .tf2 fie7 with

double-edged play, Kasparov-Karpov, World Ch match (game 16), Seville 1987) 13 ... .tf5 14 'iVb2! lZ)xd4 15 cxd4 and White stands better, Portisch-Salov, Tilburg 1994. It's up to Black to decide whether he thinks that the elimination of White's dxc3/lZ)elline is worth allowing the one with 8lZ)d4 .:te8 9 d3. To that end, Black's 8th- and 9th-move options should be consid- ered. Uhlmann - Reshevsky Skopje 1976 1 c4lZ)f6 2lZ)c3 e5 3lZ)f3lZ)c6 4 g3 .tb4 5 .tg2 O-O 6 O-O l::te8 (D) This straightforward rook development is still common, but less so than 6 ... e4. Since it is not as committal as the pawn advance, 6 ... .:te8 al- lows a number of independent methods of play for White; these are instructive in and of them- selves, while showing the evolution of strategy in this variation. w 7lZ)el!? What a strange idea! White reduces his con- trol of d4 and e5, while taking two extra moves

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 125

to land on the uninspiring c2-square. OK, then White attacks the b4-bishop, but as we have re- peatedly seen, Black is going to play ... ~xc3 anyway. What's the point? For one thing, White's bishop on g2 is unmasked, covering the key e4- and d5-squares. If, after ... ~xc3, White opens the d-file by dxc3, a subsequent ~g5 and ttJe3 will strengthen that pressure. Before turning to 7 ttJel, here are the open- ings of two other famous games involving other logical responses to 6 ... ne8: a) Petrosian-Gheorghiu, Moscow 1967 went

7 d3 h6!? (preventing ~g5; 7 ... ~xc3 would re-

turn to normal lines) 8 ttJd5! ~f8 (8 ... ~c5 keeps the bishop more active; the trade-off is that White may gain time by attacking it with M) 9 ttJxf6+ fVxf6 10 ttJd2! d6 11 ttJe4! ~d8 12 ttJc3 (D).

White's knight has gone from gl to c3 in four moves! As a result, we have arrived at a typical English Opening position, in which the emphasis is upon exploitation of the long diag- onal above all else. Black would normally be ahead in development, but he too has expended time in playing ... h6 and ... ~M-f8, whereas the rook on e8 might be better-placed on f8 anyway, to support .. .f5. The game continued 12 ... ~d7 13 b4! fVc8 14 nbl ~h3 15 e4! (a re- markable move! It's not so strange to put one's pawns on light squares if the g2-bishop is coming off the board, but White does so at the cost of granting Black a ready-made outpost on d4; the point is revealed by moves 17 and 18) 15 ... ~xg2 (15 ... ~e6 16 ~e3 ~e7 17 f4! is the other idea behind 15 e4) 16 'it>xg2 g6 17 h4! ~g7 18 h5! g5 19 ttJd5 ttJd4 20 ttJe3 f5 21 ~b2!, and White has won the crucial f5-square, dooming Black's bishop to passivity. He went on to win. b) Smyslov-Mestel, Hastings 1972/3 was another inspiration for English Opening devo- tees: 7 ttJd5 e4 (7 ... ~c5! is a solid alternative) 8 ttJel d6 9 d3 ~xel 10 Ihel exd3. Now 11 'iYxd3 should favour White, but Smyslov finds a more ingenious solution: 11 ~g5! dxe2 12 lhe2 I:txe2 13 'iYxe2 ~e6 14 ttJxf6+ (Smyslov mentions 14 ~xf6 gxf6 15 nel) 14 ... gxf6 15 ~h4. For a pawn, White gets to shatter his op- ponent's kingside and retain his well-placed pieces. 7 . ~xc3 8 dxc3 e4?! 8 ... h6 is normal; compare the next game. It's instructive to see how White happily gives back the bishop-pair for control of the centre: 9 ~g5! h6 10 ~xf6 ~xf6 11 ttJc2 d6 12 ttJe3! (D)

The ttJel-c2-e3 manoeuvre is employed in most situations involving dxc3 and ... e4. What wasn't realized for some time was how much more powerful this set-up is when White has had the opportunity for ~g5 and ~xf6. Black will have considerable difficulty protecting his e-pawn, and the idea of a timely ttJd5 keeps Black off balance. 12. l:i.e5 One of White's main ideas is f4, and in the case of 12 ... ~f5 13 f4! it is particularly strong, threatening g4. 13 ~b3! l:tb8 14 nadl b6 15 ~c2 ~f5?! 16 nd5! White uses d5 as a pivot point and threatens to win the e-pawn.

126 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

16  l:!.be8 17 l:!.fdl ~d7 For example, 17 ... tLld8 18 l:!.xe5 l:!.xe5 19 l:!.d5! will pick up a pawn, even after 19 ... g6 20 l:!.xe5 ~xe5 21 g4 ~d7 22 'i!i'xe4. 18 l:!.xe5 tLlxe5 Black also loses a pawn following 18 ... 'i!i'xe5 19 tLld5. 19 ~xe4 h5 20 ~d4!? tLlg4 21 'ilixf6 tLlxf6 22~f3 White is materially ahead, and after more than 70 moves he managed to bring home the full point. After this game, Black almost never permitted ~g5 in this type of position; instead, players dedicated a move to ... h6, as we'll see next. Uhlmann - Plachetka TrenCianske Teplice 1979

[diagram]
.Bg2 O-O 6 O-O e4 (D) w This immediate advance has taken over as the primary continuation in the 4 g3 .Bb4 varia- tion. It can transpose to 6 ... l:!.e8 lines, but here White is denied the possibility of tLld4, as hap- pens in the line 6 ... l:!.e8 7 d3 ~xc3 8 bxc3 e4 9 tLld4. Furthermore, Black can try to save the move ... l:!.e8 in order to get on with his plans more quickly. 7tLle1 One potential drawback to 6 ... e4 is that it al- lows the highly tactical 7 tLlg5, which is fea- tured below. 7 ... .Bxc3 An instructive continuation is 7 ... l:!.e8 8 tLlc2 .Bxc3, when 9 dxc3 h6 would return to the game. White should beware of 9 bxc3?! (cap- turing towards the centre must always be done with care in these lines; for one thing, the bishop on c1 still can't get out) 9 ... d5! 10 cxd5 'ilixd5 ! (D) (in addition, this recapture gives Black space and an attack). w Black has in mind a simple attack based upon ... ~h5, ... .Bh3, and either ... tLlg4 or ... tLle5. Bobotsov-Fuchs, Sochi 1967 went 11 d4 (11 d3?! is dubious due to 1l...~c5! 12 .Bb2 exd3 13 exd3 .Bg4, and 11 f3?! is weak in view of l1...exf3 12 .Bxf3 'i!i'c5+ 13 ~hl.Bh3) 11...~ (with the idea ... ~h3, ... l:!.ad8 and ... tLle5, etc.)

12 c4 a6!? 13 .Bf4 b5! 14 f3 (14 cxb5 axb5 15

.Bxc7? tLld5 16 .Bf4 tLlc3) 14 ... bxc4 15 .Bxc7, and with his domination of the light squares, Black would be close to winning after 15 ... tLld5! (the game's 15 ... .Bh3? 16 g4! was less con- vincing) 16 .Bf4 .Bh3!; for example, 17 e3 (or 17 g4?! 'ilig6! 18 .Bxh3 tLlxf4 19 .tg2 h5) 17 ... tLlxf4 18 exf4 .txg2 19 ~xg2 exf3+! 20 l:!.xf3 'i!i'd5!. Black's light-square strategy has met with complete success. 8 dxc3 h6 9 tLlc2 l:!.e8 We see 9 ... b6 in the following game. 10 tLle3 White has completed the plan we described in the note to 7 tLlel in the previous game. ... d6 (D) 11 'ilic2 This traditional move is still easily the most popular one, but 11 f4, 11 tLld5 and 11 b3 have been played a lot, each with their own advan- tages and disadvantages. In the next game you'll see a combination ofb3 and tLld5. 11 ... a5!?

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 127

w You can almost count upon a unique game in this variation because both sides have so many positionally sound options. Black has tried at least five logical moves here, with a similar choice on the following move, so transpositions abound. Common continuations have been l1...b6, 11....l:te5, l1...ttJe5 (a gambit, with the idea 12 .1xe4 ttJxe4 13 ~xe4 ttJg4) , and the game move. A sequence like 11.. .. 1d7 12 .1d2 a5 13 .l:tael epitomizes White's preferred plan: the slow build-up for f4. But even here Black has his own useful moves, and 13 ... ttJe5 14 f4 exf3 15 exf3 .1c6 should be roughly level. This is truly a variation in which knowledge of char- acteristic ideas will serve you better than pure memorization.

12 f4 (D)

White strikes quickly. Black gets time to re- organize after 12 .1d2 ~e7 13 f4 exf3 14 exf3 "ii'e5! 15 .l:tael "ii'c5 16 ~hl .1d7 17 b3 (17 f4 a4! prepares ... ttJa5 and ... .1c6) 17 ... .l:te7 18 ~d3 .l:tae8 with excellent activity and the initia- tive, Uhlmann-Popov, Berlin 1979.

12  exf313 exf3 Wlie714 f4 (D) White has denied Black time for the ... "ii'e5- c5 redeployment of the previous note.

14. .1d7 15 .1d2 "ii'd8 16 h3 Wlib8!? Black wants to put the queen on the active a7-square, but this looks strained. 17 ttJd5! ttJxd518 cxd5'W1a7+ 19 ~h2 ttJe7 It's fair to say that White has won the open- ing.

20.l:tael?

But this move gives Black a chance. 20 f5! has the simple idea of f6, when after 20 ... "ii'c5

21 c4 f6 22 J::tac1 White maintains control of

the position.

20. . .1f5! 21 'iVa4 (D)

[diagram]
21..:iVb6! has ideas of ... ~xb2 or ... .1d3.

After White's next move, the tactics all favour him. I'll skip the analysis: 22 g4! .1d3 23 .1e3 "ii'a6 24 .l:If2 ~c4 25 'iVdl! ttJg6 26 Wlid2 ttJh4 27 b3 "ii'a6 28 c4

128 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

tiJxg2 29l:txg2 i.e4 30 l:tge2! f5 31 i.d4 c6 32 gxf5 cxd5 33 ~c3! l:!.e7 34 cxd5 l:tae8 35 f6 gxf6 36 i.xf6 1-0 B Seirawan - Salov Brussels 1988

[diagram]
i.g2 O-O 6 O-O e4 7 tiJel i.xc3 8 dxc3 h6 9 tiJc2 b610 tiJe3 i.b711 tiJd5 tiJe512 b3 .l:le8 (D) w 13 a4 Eventually, White has to play f4 to make progress in this position, but he inserts an im- portant move-pair first. Note, by contrast, 13 f4 exf3 14 exf3 llb8! IS l1el!? tiJxdS 16 cxdS 'iVf6!, from Uhlmann-Makarychev, Sarajevo

1982. Without a4 and ... as, White doesn't have

recourse to the idea 1:ta2, which Seirawan plays in the game before us. Another point is that 17 f4 can now be answered by 17 ... tiJg4! with the idea 18l:!.xe8+ ~xe8 19 ~xg4? 'iVxc3. 13  a5!? 14 f4 exf3 15 exf3 tiJxd5 16 cxd5

(D)

... iVf6?! This is a move that has been tried in several similar positions. Black wants to connect rooks and target some interior weaknesses on e3 or d3 (following ... 'iYfS, for example). Nevertheless, Black's knight can be driven to an inferior square and in some cases the queen can be ex- posed to attack. The more accurate order seems to be 16 ... d6! 17 f4 tiJd7 18 i.b2 'iYf6, and Black has equal play based upon the idea ... tiJcS.

17 Ita2

A move worth noting. The rook travels to the centre, and the bishop on c 1 stays on what is arguably its best square. However, attacking the knight by 17 f4! improves, because it would end up stranded on g6. 17 .. JWf5 17 ... c6!? is an interesting alternative. 18l:td2 c6 19l:td4! cxd5! Upon 19 ... cS, Black's bishop on b7 will be imprisoned following 20 l:te4! and c4. 20 g4! ~f6 21 f4 tiJg6 22 g5 ~f5! 23 ~h5 lle7 23 ... l:tac8 was also possible, with the idea 24 i.h3? 't/Vc2 2S i.d2 l:txc3!. My impression is that the opening as a whole has been dynami- cally equal. In the rest of the game, White launches an attack which is probably sound enough but goes wrong: 24 i.h3 ~c2 25 f5!? 't/Vxc3 26 I!.ddl tiJe5 27 f6 ~c5+ (D) w 28 'it>hl? Now Black's pieces become too strong. 28 ILf2! is correct. A sample line is 28 ... ctJd3! 29 ':xd3 ILel+ 30 i.fl .l:lxfl+ 31 'it>xfl i.a6 32

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 129

fxg7!! .Jixd3+ 33 ~g2 .Jie4+ 34 ~g3 with a messy but roughly equal position. 28 d4+ 29 .Jig2 .Jixg2+ 30 'it>xg2 .l:f.e6! 31 gxh6 ~d5+ 32 ~h3 ~xb3+ 33 ~g2 ~d5+ 34 ~h3 l:txf6 35 hxg7 'iVe6+ 36 ~h4 tbg6+ 37 ~g3l:tc8 and Black went on to win with no difficul- ties. A good illustration of this variation's deli- cately balanced nature. Both sides can play it with ambitious intent. Elwert - Tiemann World Correspondence Ch 2003-5

[diagram]
.Jig2 O-O 6 O-O e4 7 tbg5 .Jixc3 8 bxc3l:!.e8 (D) This introduces the most tactically critical variation of the 4 g3 .Jib4 English Four Knights. It's impossible to cover more than a small frac- tion of the many variations, so I'm going to show one main game with many notes of spe- cial interest. My selection of examples is meant to reflect how representative tactics and posi- tional trade-offs interact. The positions are rather unstable, however, and there is certainly no hard-and-fast rule as to where both sides should put their pieces. A correspondence game between two top players is an appropriate vehicle for examining such a theoretical varia- tion. 9f3 White challenges e4 with the f-pawn, by far the most common strategy in modem chess. It's worth looking briefly at the pawn-structure and the play that results from the older and natural 9 d3 exd3 10 exd3 (D). White has opened up his bishop's long diag- onal and kept the bishop-pair. On the other hand, his centre is relatively immobile and Black has no weaknesses. I'm not going to cover the position in any depth, but the follow- ing options seem most important: a) 1O ... d6 is solid. A logical continuation is II ~b I h6 12 tbe4 tbxe4 13 .Jixe4 tbe5 with only a faint edge for White, if any, after 14 .Jif4. b) 1O ... b6 is also sensible, when White will usually aim for d5 with his knight; for example, II tbh3.Jib7 12 tbf4 with a small advantage. A significant alternative is 11 .Jid5!? tbxd5 12 cxd5, when 12 ... h6 can lead to the drawing line 13 tbxf7!? 'it>xf7 14 ~h5+ ~g8 15 dxc6 dxc6 161i.xh6 gxh6 17 ~g6+ ~h8 18 ~xh6+ ~g8 19'iiig6+~h8 20~ael!? J.d7!, and here White should repeat! c) The best move may well be IO ... h6. Then 11 tbf3 b6 is Black's standard plan to oppose the long diagonal, but he might also consider ll...d5!? 12 cxd5 tbxd5, which is a familiar type of position in which White's central pawns are targets. White's most frequent reply to IO ... h6 is 11 tbh3, when 11...d6 is usually played. But I think that it would be consistent with similar positions in this book to open things up for the knights by 11...d5!. Then it's White who has to work to get his share of the play. For example, 12 cxd5 tbxd5 13 J.d2 tbe5! 14 d4 J.g4! 15 f3 J.xh3 16 J.xh3 tbc4 with dominant knights and weak squares in White's camp, or 12 tbf4!? dxc4 13 dxc4, and either 13 ... .Jig4 14 'iiib3 tbe5 or the simple 13 ... 'iVxdl 14 .l:f.xdl tbe5 favours Black because of White's weak light squares. Thus 9 d3 isn't terribly promising. We return to 9 f3 (D):

130 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

9 ... e3!? This is I.Zaitsev's remarkable move, made famous by Karpov's use of it versus Kasparov. The very important alternative is 9 ... exf3 10 lL'lxf3 d5, after which White has two primary choices: a) The traditional main line (condensed) af- ter 11 cxd5 goes 11..:~xd5 12 lL'ld4 ~h5 13 lL'lxc6 bxc614 e3 .i.g4 15 ~a4l:te6 (D) (the al- ternative 15 ... .i.e2 also leads to equality after 16 l:txf6 gxf6 17 .i.xc6 .i.f3 18 .i.xa8 l:txa8 19 fVh4 ~xh4). w 16 .l:i.b1 (or 16 .i.a3 .Jte2 17 !!f4lL'lg4 18 h3 lL'le5) 16 ... .Jte2. Now the stem game Sigurjons- son-Smyslov, Reykjavik 1974 saw 17 .l::te1?, losing to 17 ... lL'lg4 18 h3 ~f5 19 .u.xe2 ~xb1 20 ~xg4 'iVxc 1+ 21 'it>h2 I:!.d8 22 fVb4 h6 23 c4 ~d 1 24 lIf2 ~e 1 0-1. Best is 17 .Jtxc6! lL'lg4 18 ltf2 lL'lxf2 19 .Jtxa8 lL'lh3+ 20 'it'g2 .i.fl+! 21 'it>xfl ~f5+ 22 'it'e2 'iixb123 .Jtd5 'iixc1 24 .Jtxe6 lL'lgl + 25 'it>f2 'iVxd2+, when Black achieves a nominally better endgame. b) It is generally agreed that Kasparov's 11 d4! is the most serious threat to Black's set-up, and a solution has been hard to come by. There's a lot of unexplored territory here. Black plays

11...lL'le412 'iVc2 (D) (versus ... lL'lxc3) and now:

bI) 12 ... dxc4 13 l:tb1 f5 14 g4! is Kaspa- rov's fine conception, to break down Black's grip over e4. There have been many tries for Black, but nothing looks very good. Briefly: b11) The original game Kasparov-Ivanchuk, USSR Ch, Moscow 1988 went 14 ... ~e7 15 gxf5 lL'ld6 16 lL'lg5 'iVxe2 17 .i.d5+ ~h8 18 'iVxe2 l:txe2 19 .i.f4 lL'ld8 20 .i.xd6 cxd6 21 lIbel! l:!.xe1 22l:txe1 .i.d7 23 l:te7 .i.c6 24 f6! 1-0. b12) Kasparov thinks that 14 .. .fxg4 15lL'le5 lL'ld6 16lL'lxc6 bxc6 17 e4 is best, but White has the better chances. b13) 14 ... lL'ld6!? 15 .i.g511Vd7 16lL'lh4 (Stohl suggests 16 .i.f4) 16 ... lL'lf7 (P.David-Polak, Olomouc 1995) and I think White should play 17 .Jtcl! with the idea 17 ... f4 18 l:txf4 g5 19 .l::txf7 ~xf7 20 lL'lf5 with e4 to follow. b2) 12 ... .Jtf5! seems underestimated. Several games have gone 13lL'lh4 .i.g6 14lL'lxg6!? (14 .Jtf4 can be met by 14 ... lL'lxg3 15 lL'lxg6l:txe2 16 ~d3l:txg2+ 17 'iitxg2lL'lxflI8lL'le5, leading to a piece-versus-three-pawns ending, which is probably even! Another wild line was seen in Maslak-Sulypa, Olomouc 2007: 14 ... lL'la5!? 15 cxd5 'iixd5 16 .i.e5!? l:txe5! 17lL'lxg6 hxg6 18 dxe5 ~c5+ 19 e3lL'lg5 20 l:!.f4!? lL'lc4! 21 'iif2 lL'lxe5 with fair compensation) 14 ... hxg6 (D). The light squares are always the key to Black's play against the bishops. White has at least four logical moves here.

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 131

w b21) The most direct is IS 1:.f4, which is well met by IS ... fS 16 g4?! (16 1:.bl ~aS 17 cxdS 'iixdS) 16 ... ~aS 17 gxfS gxfS 18 1:.xfS ~xc4 with a positional superiority for Black, Solonar-Meins, Altenkirchen 200S. b22) A second way to prosecute this line is IS .Bf4; for example, IS .. .fS 16 cxdS 'iixdS 17 g4! 1:.e7! 18 e3 'iic4 19 1:.ac1 1:.ae8 with an equal position, Gretarsson-Stefansson, Reykja- vik 2004. b23) Also critical is IS 'iid3 fS, and Black seems to hold his own after 16 .Bf4 1:.c8!? 17 g4 1:.f8, or 16 1:.bl ~aS 17 cxdS 'itxdS 18 .Bf4 1:.ac8!; for example, 19 1:.bS 'itxa2 20 .ieS c6 21 1:.bbl 'iidS. b24) Arguably the most important sequence is IS 1:.bl ~a5 16 cxdS 'iixdS, when 17 .Bf4 ~c4 18 'iid3 1:.ac8 19 1:.b4 bS 20 a4 a6 21 axbS axbS 22 g4 is given by Pritchett as favouring White. However, Black seems OK if he plays 22 ... c6. So perhaps 9 ... exf3 is satisfactory for Black, but let's return to 9 ... e3!? (D). w lOd3 Various grandmasters have played 10 dxe3!?, in order to get rid of the annoying pawn on e3 and acquire a central majority of sorts. Natu- rally, White's pawn-structure suffers, but two bishops often become effective with shattered pawns and pawn sacrifices. Black seems to have several methods of holding his own, yet I can't help showing the game Kasparov-Sad- vakasov, Astana 2001, which is illustrative of broader issues: 1O .. :+}Ve7 11 ~h3!? 'itcs 12 ~f4 llVxc4 13 e4 d6 14 ~d3 (Kasparov men- tions 14 .Be3!? ~xc3 IS .Bf2 with compensa- tion; that will take the form of the bishop-pair coming to life after ~dS) 14 ... ~eS IS 'itxc4 ~xc4 (D). w White has two bishops, but they're passive and his queenside pawn-structure is weak and blockaded. What to do? White continued 16 g4! (space, friend of the bishop-pair!) 16 .. J:rb8 (versus gS and ~dS) 17 l:tdl b6 18 gS ~d7 19 ~dS 1:.b7 (Karpov gives 19 ... c6 20 ~e3! with pressure on the d-pawn) 20 f4 ~f8 21 1:.bl .Bd7 22l:!d4 ~aS 23 fS cS! 24 :d3 .Ba4 2S .Bf4! (an incredible exchange sacrifice, in order to straighten out White's pawn-structure and mo- bilize his pieces to the maximum) 2S ... .Bc2 26 .l:!.b2 .Bxd3 27 exd3 1:.d8 28 h4 ~c6 29 hS ~e7! 30 ~e3 l:tbd7 31 ~g4 ~c6! 32 h6 ~eS 33 .ixeS dxeS 34 hxg7 ~xg7 3S .in (3S ~xeS al- lows Black to return the exchange by 3S ... 1:.xd3 36 ~xd3 1:.xd3, which favours Black by virtue of his d-file control) 3S .. Jld6 36 ~xeS f6 37 ~g4 fxgS 38 1:th2 1:.e8 39 eS 1:.dS 40 f6+ ~h8 41 ~h6 1:.dxeS! 42 ~f7+ ~g8 43 ~h6+ liz-liz. lO ... dS 11 'itb3!

132 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

After this we enter a relatively forced se- quence. 11 cxdS tDxdS 12 ~b3 hasn't been deeply explored: 12 ... tDaS!? (12 ... 'iVxgS 13 f4 'iVhS 14 i.xdS and now 14 ... 'iVxe2!? IS i.xf7+ c;t>h8 is interesting and probably OK for Black, while 14 ... i.g4 has also been suggested) 13 'iYa3 b6 (13 ... 'ilVxgS 14 ~xaS 'iVeS is considered equal, although White might want to look care- fully at IS i.b2) 14 f4 i.b7 IS i.b2 cS with chances for both sides, Gulko-Ivanchuk, Hor- gen 1995. 1l. .. tDaS 12 'iVa3 c6 13 cxdS cxdS 14 f4 i.g4 14 ... tDc6!? was played in Kasparov-Karpov, World Ch match (game 2), Seville 1987, when IS l:tbl is held to give White the advantage, but that could bear some further investigation. IS tDf3 Likewise, I'll skip over ISl:!.el, which is con- sidered equal due to the line IS ... h6 (IS ... l:!.c8!?) 16 tDf3 tDc6 17l:!.bl 'iVd7; for example, 18 i.b2 i.h3 19 c4 i.xg2 20 c;t>xg2 d4, Schacher-Maki Duro, European Clubs Cup, Izrnir 2004. IS. . tDc6 (D) w All right, what have we here? Black com- mands more space and his intrusive pawn on e3 interferes with White's pieces. His king is safe and his pieces are well-developed (the queen's rook can be placed aggressively on c8 or take on a useful defensive role on b8). Black may also be able to scare up some kingside chances, if only because several of White's pieces are cut off from that sector, a result of the e3-pawn 'di- viding the board in two', in Kasparov's phrase. For all that, White may stand slightly better from a theoretical point of view. His position is very elastic, in that most attempts by Black to make progress will serve White's pieces well, in particular his bishops. Given enough time, he may be able to create and exploit weak- nesses on Black's queenside, as well as open- ing lines for his queen's bishop, probably by means of c4 at some point. Of course, not all of this is necessarily achievable, and practice has yielded mixed results. I'll simply indicate a few paths.

16 h3 (D)

Possibly 16 nb 1 'ilVd7 17 'iVb3 b6 18 i.b2 is better because it avoids weaknesses. On the flip side, Black can keep his bishop aggressively posted on g4 and hold forth the option of a properly-timed ... i.h3.

16. . i.d7

Two other ideas give you a feel for the com- plexity of this variation: a) 16 ... i.xf3 and now: al) 17 l:!.xf3!? d4 18 i.b2 :tc8 19 lIbl, Gulko-Komeev, Montreal 2006. Now 19 ... dxc3 20 i.xc3 tDdS would cement the influential pawn on e3. On the other hand, the disappear- ance of Black's d-pawn does wonders for the white bishops. a2) 17 i.xf3 allows Black to do without ... d4 for a while: 17 ... hS!?(orI7 ... 'iVd718Wh2 hS) 18 ~cS nc8 19 nbl b6 20 'iYbS 'iVd6 21 c;t>g2?! h4! 22 gxh4 tDe7 with the ideas ... tDf5 or ... tDg6, Jensen-Soza, correspondence game 2002. b) A flippant retreat by 16 ... i.c8 is worth thinking about. Many of Black's difficulties stem from weaknesses as a result of attacks on b7, but these cease to be a factor with the bishop

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 133

defending. Black could divert White by using ... h6, ... gS and ... lbhS to attack his somewhat loose kingside; for example, 17lbe 1 (intending B lbc2 and/or ':f3) 17 ... lbhS!? 18 ':f3 (18 Rh2 gS) 18 ... gS!? 19 fxgS (19 lbc2 g4 20 hxg4 i.xg4 21 ':xe3 ':xe3 22 lbxe3 i.xe2 23 lbxdS i.xd3 is unclear, to say the least!) 19 .. :~VxgS (with the idea ... d4 and ... lbeS) 20 lbc2 lbxg3 21 i.xe3 'iVh4 and Black has an opportunistic position, intending 22 i.f2lbxe2+ 23 'it>f1 ~S 24 ':e 1 i.fS! with unclear prospects. 17 'iio>h2 "fic718 ':bl (D) Good enough, although 23 i.xf6! gxf6 24 B i.xdS looks stronger still. 18 ... b6?! Finally giving White a weakness to exploit. Black can play the natural 18 ... .:ac8 instead, when White may not like 19 i.b2 bS!? with the idea 20 "fics "fiaS, but he will have to defend the c-pawn somehow. Equality seems a fair assess- ment. 19 i.b2 ':ad8 20 c4!? Pritchett points out that White could also prepare this move by 20 ':fc 1. Perhaps then 20 ... lbhS with the idea 21 c4 d4 could be tried, but it's all a bit dodgy. 20 . dxc4 21 ':bcl! Finally White's pieces all spring to life! 21 .. i.e6 Black can't be too greedy: 21...cxd3 22 i.eS! "fib7? (22 ... "fic8 23 "fixd3) 23lbd4. 22lbg5 (D) 22 . i.d5!? I like Pritchett's general comment that "the fundamentals tell against Black". For example, White gets further open lines after 22 ... lbaS 23 lbxe6 ':xe6 24 i.c3! "fid7 2S ':fdl !. 23 i.xd5!? 23 ... lbxd5 24 l:.xc4 ~d7 25 :fc1 f6 26lbf3 l:.e6 27 l:te4 l:Ide8 28 l:txe6lIxe6 29 ~a4 White is clearly in charge and went on to win. Reversed Dragon: 4 ... d5

[diagram]
lbxd5 6 i.g2 (D) 6 . lbb6 This is the basic position of the Reversed Dragon. In Chapter 4 (the 2 g3 section) we looked into the Reversed Dragon lines in which White doesn't play lbc3, but rather sets up with d3, lbbd2 and a3. The move 6 ... lbb6 mirrors the Classical Dragon Sicilian, also covered in some detail in Volume 1. Since the ideas in these two systems tend to be the same, r m not going to go into the Reversed Dragon very

134 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

deeply, but the set-up is popular with leading players and if White plays the English Four Knights he definitely should know the funda- mental themes and strategies . . If Black doesn't like to retreat with 6 ... lbb6, he has to put up with the early pawn-break d4 by White. For example, 6 ... .lte6 (White was threatening 7 lbxe5, and 6 ... .lte7 doesn't help: 7 lbxe5! lbxc3 8 .ltxc6+ bxc6 9 dxc3; further- more, after 6 ... lbxc3 7 bxc3 e4, 8lbd4lbxd4 9 cxd4 'iVxd4 10 lIbl is a promising gambit, with White a tempo ahead of a similar Sicilian line, in a position where a tempo truly counts! 8lbgl is also good, since it's not possible to protect e4 without concessions) 7 O-O .lte7 8 d4, and 8 ... lbxc3 9 bxc3 e4 can be met by 10 lbel f5 11 lbc2 with the idea f3, or 10 lbe5!? lbxe5 11 dxe5 'iVxdl 1211xdl; for example, 12 ... .ltf5 13 lId411d8 14 .lte311xd4 15 cxd4 f6 16 f4 fxe5 17 fxe5 c6 18l:tbl b6 19 llf1, Marin-Kveinys, Istanbul Olympiad 2000. Black's more natural move is 8 ... exd4 (D). w Then White has two moves which are equal- izers with reversed colours, but with a tempo in hand, they seem to give him a small advantage: a) 9 lbxd4lbxc3 10 bxc3 lbxd4 11 cxd4 c6 12l:tbl! ~d7 13 'iVa4 threatens 1411xb7!. An old game Carls-Antze, Hamburg 1930 contin- ued 13 ... O-O 14 d5! .ltxd5 15 .ltxd5 'iVxd5 16 lIxb7.ltc5 1711dl 'iVe6 18 'iVc2 .ltb6 and in ad- dition to Black's weak c-pawn, White had the more active pieces beginning with 19 .ltf4. b) 9lbb5!? 'iVd7 (9 ... d3 10 ~xd3lbdb4? was played in Nogueiras-Gagunashvili, World Team Ch, Beersheba 2005; now 11 ~b 1! would be extremely strong, with ideas of .ltf4, lldl and a3; for example, 11....ltc4 12lbc3! O-O 13 lIdl 'iVc8 14 a3 lba6 15 b4 with a killing position) 10 lbfxd4lbxd4 l1lbxd4 i.h3 12 e4! .ltxg2 13 ~xg2 lbb6 14 lbf5! .ltf6 15 "iVc2 g6 16lbh6 O-O-O 17 .ltf4, Larsen-Dlickstein, Cala Galdana

1974. White will follow with a queenside at-

tack. Benko - Palme Bad Gastein 1948

[diagram]
lbf3 lbc6 6 O-O lbb6 7 lbc3 i.e7 8 d3 By far the most natural and common move, but there are others: a) 8 lIbl is sometimes played in order to hurry along White's b4-b5 attack. It isn't con- sidered terribly dangerous, and Black has more than one reasonable response, including 8 ... .lte6 and 8 ... a5, but the most unique riposte is the bi- zarre-looking 8 ... g5!? (D). w Black's brute-force idea is ... g4 and ... h5-h4. That is naturally no guarantee of advantage, or even equality. But it has been successful in enough games, sometimes devastatingly so, that one wonders why White isn't using the idea versus the regular Dragon. The answer, of course, is that he has already castled! I'll leave you to the books and databases if you want fur- ther details on 8 lIbl. b) 8 a4 a5 has fallen from favour, perhaps because b4 is a 'real' outpost for Black, whereas b5 is only a temporary one. Be that as it may, 9 d3 .ltg4 is fine and may transpose to 9 a4 below, whereas Korchnoi-Chekhover, Leningrad 1955 went 9 ... .lte6 10 .lte3lbd5 (already assessed as

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 135

equal by Korchnoi) 11 ii.d2 ('?'; he calls this 'foppish'!) 11...O-O 12 lbe4?! f6 13 ~c1 'iVd7 14lbc5 ii.xc5 15 ~xc5 b6 16 ~c1 lbd4, with ... c5 coming and the better game. 8 . O-O 9 ii.e3 (D) This is a traditional set-up that has been overtaken in popularity by plans with a3 and b4, but it remains an interesting way to proceed. The strategies of a Dragon Sicilian proper can be used for both sides. The older line 9 a4 a5 10 ii.e3 is well met by 1O ... ii.g4 (in fact, this move is generally a good choice when White proceeds slowly) 11 l:Ic1 .i:!.b8! (protecting the b-pawn), when White has nothing very special to do, and his main idea 12 lbd2 can be met by 12 ... lbd4!.

9  f5 Of course, 9 ... ii.e6 is playable. Then one tac- tical device for White to watch out for is 10 lba4?! e4!, when best play is 11 lbel! (11 dxe4?? ~xdl) l1...exd3 12lbxd3 ii.d5!, cen- tralizing and protecting Black's queenside. 10 'ilVc1 An idea borrowed from the Dragon. White has the dual ideas of ii.g5, trying to clarify his positional advantages by avoiding attack (see below), and ~dl, to enforce d4. The immediate 10 b4!? is also played, as it is in the Reversed Dragon, with White having gained the extra move ii.e3. As so often, Black can try to use the fact that he is a tempo down to his advantage, in this case by replying 1O .. .f4!? (1O ... .tf6 11 ii.c5 ~e8? 12 e4! is a standard way of grabbing the centre; White will aim for b5 and a well-timed exf5, winning the e4-square, just as Black does in the Sicilian Defence) 11 ii.xb6!? (it's always risky to part with the dark- squared bishop in the Dragon if one doesn't ex- change its counterpart; safer is 11 ii.d2, when Black should be courageous and grab the pawn:

11...ii.xb4! 12 ~b3+ J:!.f7 13 lbxe5 lbxe5 14

'iYxb4 f315 exf3lbxd3!?) l1...axb612 b5lbd4 13 lbxe5 fxg3 14 hxg3 ii.f6!? 15 lbc4 ~e8! (eyeing both e2 and the kingside) 16 l:Ibl 'iYh5 17 ~el ii.e6 18 lbd2 (heading over to protect the king) 18 ... 'it'h8 19 lbde4!? ii.e5 20 ~d2 J::txf2!! (D). w Out of nowhere! It's often the case that White's positional niceties are opposed by an all-out assault. Lerner-Kaidanov, Kuibyshev 1986 continued 21 ~g5?! (21lbxf2? ii.xg3 22 lbce4 ~h2+ 23 'it'f1 ii.xf2 24 lbxf2 lbf5! threatening 25 ... lbg3#; this is the key idea be- hind 20 .. JIxf2; correct is 21 Rxf2! 'iYh2 22 ~g5! lbc2! 23 ~xe5! .l::f.f8+ 24lbf6 ii.h3! 25 l:Igl l:Ixf6+ 26 'iYxf6 gxf6, with a position lacking coherence), to which Black replied

21...J::tf5?! 22 ~xh5 l:Ixh5 23 e3, but 21...l:.xg2+!

22 'it'xg2 ~h3+ 23 Wgllbf5! 24lbf2 ~xg3+ 25 ~xg3 lbxg3 is correct, when Black has the better chances. Back to 10 ~c1 (D): 10. ii.f6 A classically elegant illustration of White's strategy went 1O ... Rh8 11 ~dl ii.f6?! 12 d4! exd4 13lbxd4lbxd4 14 ii.xd4 ii.xd4 15 e3 c5 16 exd4 cxd4 17 ~f4 ~e7 18 ~xd4, when ev- ery white piece is better than its counterpart: 18 ... ~f6 19 a4 a5 20 .l:Iadl h6 21 l:td8+ 'it'h7 22 h4 ~b4 23 ~xb4 axb4 24 lbd5 1-0 Pfibyl- Kozlov, Stary Smokovec 1976. 11 ii.g5! ii.xg5 12lbxg5lbd4 13lbf3!

136 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is not even necessarily the best move, but it shows the understanding that, once the forcing nature of the game is reduced and Black's tactical opportunities are kept under control, White has the long-term advantage in the Reversed Dragon just as Black does in the Sicilian. Let's see that play out: ... ttJxf3+ 14 iLxf3 c6 15 b4 White's minority attack is extremely annoy- ing. 15 .. ttJd5!? 16 b5! ttJe7?! But 16 ... iLe6 17 bxc6 bxc6 18 ttJa4 is better for White. 17 l:tbll:tf6 18 'iUa3! 'iVd6 19 ~xd6 .l:i.xd6 20 !:tfc1 WfS (D) The Reversed Sicilian in a nutshell. 21 bxc6 ttJxc6

21...bxc6 22 ttJb5! .l:f.d7 23 iLxc6 (or 23

ttJa3) 23 ... ttJxc6 24 !:txc6.l:!.b7 25 .l:i.c7! !tab8 26 lIbel and White has both pawn and position. 22 ttJb5lId7 23 iLxc6 bxc6 24 .uxc6l:tb8 25 .llbc1l:txb5 26l:txc8+ White went on to convert his extra pawn into victory. Janous - Soza Correspondence game 2002

[diagram]
cxd5 ttJxd5 6 iLg2 ttJb6 7 O-O iLe7 8 d3 O-O 9 a3 iLe610 b4 (D)

White chooses a favourite contemporary line. The plan with a3 and b4 features queenside ex- pansion, which is undoubtedly logical. In the Sicilian Dragon, Black only achieves ... b5 by dint of great effort. 10 . ttJd4!? (D) 1O .. .f6 and 10 ... a5 11 b5 ttJd4 are more com- mon, and 1O .. .f5 is an old main line that isn't seen much any more. w 11 iLb2 A neglected juncture. White seldom cap- tures by 11 ttJxe5, probably fearing ll...iLf6

FOUR KNIGHTS VARIATION 137

(1l...a5!?) 12 f4 lbb3, although then the ex- change sacrifice 13 .lie3! lbxal 14 'it'xallooks intriguing; for example, 14 ... .lixe5 15 fxe5lbd5 16 .lid4 'it'd7 17 ~2 with the idea lbe4. The bishop-pair and a pawn with a potentially dan- gerous 3:0 central majority add up to sufficient compensation, and in practice Black won't en- joy defending this position. 1l. .. lbxf3+ 12 .lixf3 c6 13 lbe4 lbd7 14 'ilNc2 .lidS Islbd2 .lixf3 16lbxf3 .lid6 (D) We're still in theory. White has a pleasant form of Sicilian Defence, yet Black has no weaknesses and should be OK. 17 lbd2 "fie7 18 lbe4 Itae8 19 lbxd6 ~xd6

20 a4 fS!? 21 bS cS 22 e3 (D)

White's idea is d4, but he is also looking at the f4-square. Either side might put a pawn there. 22 ... 'i.t>h8?! This doesn't work out well. In Salov-Kaspa- roY, USSR Ch, Moscow 1988, Black played more carefully: 22 ... :f7! 23 ~fel (23 d4? cxd4 24 exd4 e4) 23 ... lbf8 24 'iWc4?! (24 Itad1 ::'d8 25 'iWc4 is more accurate), and here 24 ... lbe6! would have equalized. 23 d4! exd4 Black can't capture with the c-pawn due to .lia3. 24 exd4 Itc8 2S 'iWc3 Itf7 Black defends g7. If he does so by 25 ... lbf6? then White wins at least a pawn after 26 dxc5 l:txc5 27 'it'd4! 'iWxd4 28 .lixd4 ltc2 29 .lixa7. 26 dxcS lbxcs 27 Itac1 f4?! 28 'it'eS!? 'iWfS 29 !:tfel b6 30 .lid4 fxg3 31 hxg3 (D)

White's centralized bishop is somewhat better than the knight, and his control of the e-file makes life difficult for his opponent.

31...'i.t>g8 32 'iWdS 'i.t>h8 33 IteS ~d7 34 'iWc4

~dc7 3S 'it'e2 .l:.d8 36 ~c3! h6 37 Itf3 'ilNg8 38 ~e3 ':cd7 39 .lixcs bxcS 40 ~xcS ':c8 41 'ilNe3 White eventually converted the pawn into victory. Bareev - Shirov Poikovsky 2006

1 c4 eS 2 g3 lbf6 3 .lig2 dS 4 cxdS lbxdS S

lbc3 lbb6 6 lbf3 lbc6 7 O-O .lie7 8 a3 O-O 8 ... .lie6 9 d3 f5 10 e4! is an old positional 'trick': 10 ... O-O (l0. .. fxe41llbxe4 gives White the crucial e4 outpost and an eye on g5) 11 exf5 .lixf5 12 ':e11. Now the exchange of d-pawn for e-pawn activates White's pieces, but other- wise White plays lbe4 with a strong outpost.

9 b4 .lie6

White's plan of .lig5 versus the Dragon doesn't work with reversed colours: 9 ... .lig4?

138 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

10 bS tiJd4 11 tiJxeS .i.e6 12l:!.bl. 9 ... l:!.e8 10 d3 .i.f8 11 .i.b2 .i.g4 is more realistic, although 12 h3 .i.e6 13 tiJe4 can follow. 10 l:!.bl f611 d3 (D)

Black's choice of a structure with .. .f6 has become more popular than any other. Perhaps White should be looking at this same formation in the Sicilian Defence, if only as a way to avoid enervating theoretical work. 11  a5 Compare this more aggressive move with the idea of playing ... tiJd4 directly from the previous game. Here l1...tiJd4 12 tiJd2 c6 13 tiJde4 has been played a lot, having in mind some combi- nation of e3, .i.b2 and a queen move to prepare lIdl. Black should steer clear of 11...~d7?! 12 tiJe4! tiJdS 13 ~c2, which favoured White in Karpov-Hjartarson, Candidates match (game 2), Seattle 1989.

12 b5 tiJd4 (D)

w 13 tiJd2 White's most common idea versus ... tiJd4 is this retreat. It covers b3 and prepares to boot Black's knight out with 14 e3. 13 ... ~c8 A surprising number of strong players have barely settled in their chairs when they had to get up again, as a result of playing 13 ... tiJdS?? 14 .i.xdS! .i.xdS IS e3 tiJe6 16 e4. Ouch! But 13 ... c6 and 13 ... .i.dS!? are also playable.

14 e3 tiJf5 15 ~e2

White can also go the other way: IS 'iiVc2 fol- lowed by l:!.dl and, with luck, tiJce4-cS. At some point, the move a4 may become essential to stop ... a4. Compare the game. 15 . tiJd6 This stops tiJc4, which might be the answer to IS ... a4.

16 a4 .i.g4! 17 f3 .i.e6 18 f4 tiJf7 19 tiJb3?

White takes his eye off his charge on a4. Probably 19 .i.b2 is correct. ... .i.b4! 20 ~c2 .i.h3 (D) There's no reason for 20 ... .i.xc3?! 21 ~xc3 tiJxa4 22 ~c2. While this is playable for Black, giving up his dark-squared bishop is a high price to pay. w 21 tiJe4 .i.xg2 22 ~xg2 f5 23 tiJf2 At this point, 23 ... exf4! 24 gxf4 ~d7! would target a4 again, after which 2S tiJd2 tiJdS! 26 tiJc4 ~e6 leaves White all bottled up. We can safely say that the relevant part of the opening is over. Even discounting White's errors above, Black seems able to equalize in this variation by means of natural moves. In general, the Reversed Dragon produces unbalanced positions which continue to attract master players on both sides of the board.

6 Three Knights and Closed English

The main subject of this chapter is the Closed English, which, broadly speaking, is defined by

1 c4 e5 2 lbc3 lbc6, but I use it to refer to the

lines that continue 3 g3 g6 4 .tg2 .tg7. An- other set of independent variations begins with 3 lbf3, and I'll start with those.

1 c4 e5 2 lbc3 lbc6 3 lbf3 (D)

White is willing to transpose to the English Four Knights variation after 3 ... lbf6. Other- wise, Black has two main ways to go his own way, as illustrated in the next two games, with alternatives in the notes. Three Knights Variation

[diagram]
Yakovich - Peek Amsterdam 1995 This is called the Three Knights Variation'. Apart from 3 .. .f5 (featured below), Black's other options are unimpressive; for example, 3 ... d6 4 d4 takes the centre, and Black is also vulnerable to the advance d5. 3 ... .tc5 is well met by 4 e3! (with the idea 5 d4), after which White wins the centre with tempo; Black has the particular problem that the normal idea 4 ... d6 5 d4 .tb6 runs into 6 b4!

Now 7 c5 is threatened, winning the bishop, while 6 ... lbxb4? loses to 7 ~a4+ lbc6 8 d5, and the best sequence 6 ... exd4 7 exd4 as still leads to a clear advantage for White following 8 b5 lbce7 9 .td3. After 3 ... .tc5, by the way, the trick 4lbxe5!? is best met by 4 ... .txf2+! 5 ~xf2 lbxe5 6 d4 ~f6+!' This favours White after, say, 7 ~el lbg4 8 ~d3 ~f2+ 9 ~d2, but not by much. The best irregular 3rd-move option from Black's view might be 3 ... .tb4!? Then 4lbd5 e4!? and 4 ~c2 d6 5lbd5 are directions to look in. It's likely that White will come out with a modest advantage. 4d4 White takes the principled course of grab- bing the centre when it is offered him. He can also play slowly by 4 d3 or 4 g3, heading for a Closed English. More significantly, some play- ers may not feel comfortable facing 4 e3 intend- ing 5 d4. Then 4 ... .tg7 5 d4 d6 is a natural course, but Black has to be willing to play with less space if White chooses d5 soon; his main consolation is that e4 will follow at the cost of a tempo (e3-e4). The most interesting option is 4 .. .f5 5 d4 e4, which might be compared with 3 ... f5 4 d4 e4 below. In that case, Black may

140 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

not like having spent a tempo on ... g6; on the other hand, that move doesn't go badly with the ... fS/ ... e4 pawn-structure. 4 .. exd4 5 tbxd4 In the old days it was thought that S tbdS!? was advantageous for White: S ... i.g7 (certainly not S. .. tbge7?? 6 tbf6#; but perhaps S. .. tbf6 is all right, with the idea 6 i.gS i.e7 or 6 i.f4 i.d6!? 7 i.xd6!? cxd6) 6 i.gS. Then Black dis- covered the nice solution 6 ... tbce7! with the idea of ... c6 and rapid development. Mellado- G.Georgadze, Manresa 1995 continued 7 tbxd4 c6 8 tbxe7 tbxe7 9 'iVd2 h6 10 i.h4 0-011 e3 dS with a level game. 5 . i.g7 6 tbxc6 bxc6 7 g3 tbe7 A distinguishing move, which prepares cas- tling, covers c6 in anticipation of ... d6 or ... dS, and keeps the long diagonal open. The alterna- tive 7 ... tbf6 is seen in the next game. S i.g2 O-O 9 O-O (D)

9  d6 Both sides have open lines for their bishops, so the most important elements are White's control of space and Black's doubled c-pawns. The latter can be a target, as can Black's a- pawn, but they can also be an advantage, in that they help to cover the central squares, and the b-file has been opened for Black's rook. 10 i.g51IbS iO ... i.e6 is well met by 11 'iVd3. Oddly enough, iO ... f6!? is a reasonable move based upon the idea 11 i.d2 i.e6, when 12 ~d3 isn't available, and 12 ~a4 'iVd7 is fine for Black. Still, either 11 i.f4 or 11 .te3 should be enough to maintain a modest advantage. 11 'iVd2 c5 121Iadl i.e6 Black would like to neutralize the powerful g2-bishop, but after 12 ... i.b7?? 13 i.xb71:txb7 14 tbdS f6 IS tbxe7+ ~xe7 16 'iVdS+ White wins material and the game.

13 b3 f6 14 i.h6! i.xh6 15 'iVxh6 a6!? 16

~e3! ~cS 17 tbe41Bg7 IS h3!? Best is 18 .i:!.d2! followed by .i:!.fdl and/or 'iVc3. IS. . .i:!.f7?! White's idea was 18 ... i.xh3? 19 tbxd6!, but Black should respond with 18 ... tbfS. 19 'iVc3! h6 20 g4! tbg8 21 f41Bh7 22 tbg3! f5 23 e4! (D)

23  tbe7 Black's position collapses after 23 .. .fxg4 24 fS! gxfS 2S exfS i.d7 26 i.dS. 24 exf5 gxf5 25 l:i.del i.d7 Again, 2S ... fxg4 loses to 26 fS! tbxfS 27 l:txe6! ~xe6 28 i.e4 .i:!.bf8 29 hxg4. 26 tbh5 'iVhS 27 tbf6+! 1Bg6 2S g5! tbgS 29 .td5 .i:!.xf6 30 gxf6 ~xf6 31 .i:!.f3 'iVxc3 32 .l:.xc3 and White won shortly. Uhlmann - Rajkovic Hastings 1972/3

[diagram]
tbxd4 i.g7 6 tbxc6 bxc6 7 g3 tbf6 Black contests the central squares more di- rectly than he did by 7 ... tbe7. S i.g2 O-O 9 O-O (D) This position can also arise via 1 c4 eS 2 tbc3 tbf6 3 tbf3 tbc6 4 g3 g6 S d4 exd4 6 tbxd4 i.g7 7 i.g2, etc. 9 ... l:teS

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGUSH 141

An elegant display of White's positional su- periority was seen in Psakhis-Ekstrom, Dresden Zonal 1998: 9 .. J:tb8?! 10 'iVa4 a6 11 ~a5! ..Bb7 12 c5! d6 13 Itdl 'ile7 14 ..Bf4ltJd5 15 ltJxd5 cxd5 16 cxd6 cxd6 17 Itd2! Itfd8 18 Itc 1 Itbc8

19 Itdc2 Itxc2 20 Itxc2 Itc8 21 Itxc8+ ..Bxc8

22 'iVb6 ..Bf8 23 'ilb8 ..Bg4 24 ..Bh6 ..Bxe2 25 iofl! ..ixfl 26 'litxfl d4 27 'ilxf8+ "YWxf8 28 ..Bxf8 'litxf8 29 'lite2 and White wins! 10 'ila4!? White clears dl and watches both a7 and c6. The alternative 10 ..Bf4 allows the active reply 1O ... Itb8. Nevertheless, White keeps an edge after 11 'iVd2 or 11 Itbl ltJg4 (Black is in some trouble after 1l.....Bb7 12 'ila4 a6 13 Itfdl) 12 'ild2 ..Ba6 13 h3 ltJf6 14 b3, Onishchuk-Ako- pian, Elista Olympiad 1998. 10  a511 Itdl (D)

11 ... ..Bh7 Black would like to exchange bishops by ... 'iVb8 and ... c5.

12 Itd3!?

White also has 12 ..Bg5 h6 13 ..Be3 with the idea 13 ... ltJg4 14 ..Bd4. Instead, 13. .. l:txe3!? 14 fxe3 "fIie7 is a standard sacrifice that puts pres- sure on White's dark squares and kingside. However, Black's bishop on b7 is a liability, and White seems able to consolidate, at least partially, after 15 i:td3 ltJg4 (notice that the move ... h6 prevents ... ..Bh6) 16ltJe4! f5 17ltJf2. ... ltJg4 13ltJe4 f5 14 ..Bg5 fxe4? 14 ... 'iVc8! 15 ltJc3 ..Bxc3 16 bxc3 .l::txe2 17 "fIid 1 results in attacking chances for both sides. 15 ..Bxd8 exd3 16 exd3! l:taxd8 No better is 16 ... ..Bd417 c5! ..Bxf2+ 18 Whl Itaxd8 19 "fIixg4. 17 c5! White's point: he wins material because of the dual threats ~xg4 and'iVb3+. ... h518 h3 .l::te219 hxg4 Itf8 Now 20 l::tfl was sufficient to win, but 20 ~b3+ ~h7 21 "fIixb7 nfxf2 22 ..ifl .l:!.xb2 23 "fIixc7 would have done so more rapidly. The Independent 3 ... f5

1 c4 e5 2 ltJc3 ltJc6 3 ltJf3 f5 (D)

w The move 3 ... f5 takes on extra significance when you realize that, apart from the slightly shaky 3 ... g6, it is the main way to bypass 3 ... ltJf6 with a transposition to the English Four Knights Variation. Since Black has played 2 ... ltJc6 in- stead of 2 ... ltJf6 3 ltJf3 ltJc6, it's likely that he is trying to steer clear of the latter position. Thus if White is happy playing against 3 .. .f5, he can use 3 ltJf3 to steer the game away from the Closed English (i.e. 2ltJc3 ltJc6 3 g3 g64 .Jtg2 ..Bg7).

142 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

4d4 Rohde - Zsu. Polgar New York 1992 White challenges the centre, in order to es- tablish a superior pawn-structure. This is easily the most significant independent continuation, because 4 d3 ttJf6 S g3 can be answered by S ... g6 (or S. .. .tb4) 6 .tg2 .tg7 7 O-O O-O, trans- posing into the Closed English section with ... fS below. 4 ... e4 (D) w In a sense Black's opening is anti-positional, because dS is under White's command, and if Black's centre is attacked by f3 he may well have to surrender his e4 strongpoint. On top of that he always has to deal with the tempo- winning advance dS. Finally, as we have seen in similar positions, Black's pawn-structure invites a white piece to land on f4, presenting further difficulties in freeing his game. It turns out that none of this is of decisive consequence, because of the specific circum- stance that White is not only losing a tempo due to the attack on his knight, but that the knight apparently has nowhere to go that doesn't in- volve further loss of time (or positional conces- sions). As a result, while White is rearranging his pieces, Black has time to get his own forces out and shore up his centre. After 4 ... e4, White has many legitimate moves. I shall only look at them very briefly, but you might want to do your own investiga- tion, and compare the position to 2 ttJc3 d6 3 ttJf3 fS 4 d4 e4 from Chapter 3. 5 ttJg5 This leap forward is White's most popular response to the attack. Notice the difference be- tween this position and 2 ttJc3 d6 3 ttJf3 fS 4 d4 e4 S ttJgS. With the pawn on d6, Black can play ultra-flexibly with ... c6 and perhaps ... ttJa6-c7, as he did there. But in this line his knight on c6 gives the game a different character. It attacks d4 (in conjunction with ... .tg7 in some lines), and can go to the useful square eS if White at- tacks it by dS. Here are some pickings from other moves: a) One might think that White could profit- ably avoid loss of time by S dS exf3 6 dxc6 fxg2 7 cxd7 + ~xd7 (7 ... .txd7 8 .txg2 c6 9 "iVb3 is a little awkward for Black) 8 "iVxd7+ .txd7 9 .txg2, but what looks like a small pull turns out not to be even that after 9 ... O-O-O 10 .tf4 .tcS

11 e3 ttJf6, lakat-Knaak, Plauen 1980.

b) S ttJd2 ttJf6 6 e3 is a safe line. One stan- dard solution consists of 6 ... g6 with the idea ... .tg7, since then any advance by dS extends the range of Black's bishop. But perhaps White could stir the pot by 7 g4!?, intending 7 ... ttJxg4 8 ttJdxe4 fxe4 (8 ... ~h4 9 ttJg3) 9 "iVxg4 dS 10 ~g2 with superior central control. It's an idea, anyway. c) S ttJeS!? is one of those moves that mainly aims to escape the disadvantages of the alterna- tives! White retains options of bring his queen's bishop out quickly; for example, S ... ttJxeS!? (S ... ttJf6 is safe and sound) 6 dxeS ttJe7 7.tgS h6 8 .th4 c6 9 e3 ~aS 10 .tg3 g6 11 .te2 hS, Christiansen-Browne, Las Vegas 1989, and now 12 h4! .tg7 13 ~d6! .l:i.h6 14 O-O-O is extremely strong, in view of 14 ... gS? IS "iVd2 g416 ttJxe4. d) S .tgS develops a tempo. The idea is that after White plays e3, he will have rid himself of his bad dark-squared bishop. Everyone who loves chess traps should see the outrageous grandmaster miniature S ... ttJf6 6 dS (6 ttJd2 is better) 6 ... exf3 7 dxc6 fxg2 8 cxd7+?? ttJxd7! 0-1 Doroshkevich-Tukmakov, USSR Ch, Riga 1970! Instead, the main line is S ... .te7 6.txe7 ttJcxe7 (D). There are two relevant retreats here: dl) Marin's perceptive comment about the following game is that "[White] did everything he was supposed to do, but only reached the better side of a draw": 7 ttJgl ttJf6 8 e3 d6 9 h4 c6 10 ttJh3 .te6 11 .te2 (indeed, we see here White's standard reorganization, in which his

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 143

w bishop is 'good' and White's knight has a strong pseudo-outpost on f4, but nothing much comes of it) 1l...i.f7 12 ttJgS O-O 13 'iVb3 "fib6

14 f3 dS IS fxe4 fxe4 16 "fixb6 axb6 17l:!.n h6

18 ttJxf7 riixf7, Vaganian-Nikolic, Barcelona

1989. Black has few problems.

d2) Kavalek-B1atny, Luhacovice 1968 went 7 ttJd2 ttJf6 8 e3 d6 9 f3 exf3 10 ~xf3! (cover- ing e4, so that Black has to go to lengths to con- test that critical square) 1O ... c6 11 i.d3 dS 12 cxdS cxdS. Pritchett notes that this is a kind of reversed French Defence with a tempo more and some special advantages for White. For example, Black has a terrible bishop and ex- tremely weak dark squares, especially eS. The game continued 13 O-O O-O 14 ~g3! i.d7 IS ttJf3 l:!.c8 (1S ... ttJe4 16 ~e1! ttJxc3 17 ~xc3 l:!.c8 18 "fib3 attacks dS and b7 while preparing ttJeS). Here White should transfer to the queen- side and make threats; for example, 16 'iVd6! ttJe4 17 i.xe4 fxe4 18 ttJeS i.fS 19 'iib4 with a serious advantage. Let's return to the main game with S ttJgS (D).

5  ttJf6 S ... h6 6 ttJh3 gS and now 7 ttJg1! ttJf6 8 e3 transposes to the main game. Instead, 7 f3?! exf3 8 exf3 i.g7 9 dS "fie7 +! 10 ~e2 ttJd4 11 'iVxe7+ ttJxe7, as in 1.Adamski-Mi.Tseitlin, Lodz 1980, is an example of what Black is aiming for. If he wants to play the ... i.b4 system in the next note, Black should employ the move-order S ... i.b4! 6 ttJh3 (6 i.d2 i.xc3 7 i.xc3?? 'iVxgS) 6 ... i.xc3+ 7 bxc3 ttJf6. 6e3 6 ttJh3 i.b4 7 e3 (had Black used the S ... i.b4 order above, he would have avoided 7 i.d2! ttJxd4 8 ttJxe4 i.xd2+ 9 ~xd2! ttJxe4 10 ~xd4 with an advantage for White, M.Haag-B.An- derson, New Zealand Ch, Christchurch 2002) 7 ... i.xc3+! 8 bxc3 d6 9 i.e2 O-O 10 O-O b6! 11 ttJf4 ttJaS (the attack on c4 resembles a Nimzo- Indian Defence) 12 cS gS! 13 ttJh3 h6 14 cxd6 cxd6. In this position, we see the important Nimzo-Indian theme that when the forward pawn is exchanged, the weakness on c4 remains. Cvetkovic-Govedarica, Belgrade 1982 contin- ued IS f3 i.e6 16 ttJf2, when both 16 ... exf3 17 i.xf3 l:!.c8 18 e4 "fic7! and 16 .. :~c7! 17 fxe4 fxe4 are greatly in Black's favour. 6 . h6 (D) The best alternative is 6 ... g6 7 ttJh3 i.g7 8 ttJf4 d6 9 h4 O-O 10 i.e2 with an edge for White, Psakhis-Kharitonov, Sverdlovsk 1984. w 7 ttJh3 g5 Black's pawn keeps the knight from f4 and, if he responds to White's move f3 by ... exf3, White won't be able to recapture with a piece due to ... g4.

144 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

8lbgl! (D)

White moves his knight four times only to return to its original square! In the meantime, Black is to move and has a lead in development. Nevertheless, White's apparently absurd ma- noeuvre is a lesson in the importance of struc- ture, because White can force a favourable transformation by playing h4 and winning ei- ther the f4-square or the h-file, when Black's king will be insecure. 8 ... .tg7 9 h4 'ii;f7? It turns out that Black won't be able to prevent the exposure of his kingside. The superior 9 ... g4 grants White f4 but temporarily clamps down on that side of the board. After 10 lbge2 hS I1lbf4 d6 12 dS, Black has serious weaknesses; for ex- ample, 12 ... lbeS 13 lbbS! .th6 14lbd4 .txf4 IS exf4lbg6 16 .te3 0-017 .te2 with a nice ad- vantage. Eventually, White will advance on the queenside and force open lines there. 10 lbh3 'ii;g6 11 f3 'WIe7

11...d6 12 lbf2 increases the attack on e4,

and 11.. .. l:te8 can lead to the pretty 12 hxgS hxgS 13 fxe4lbxe4? 141lVhS+! 'it>xhS Islbf4++ 'it>g4 16 .te2+ 'it>g3 17 .l:.h3#. 12 fxe4lbxe4 13lbxe4 ~xe4 14 .td3! Setting up the following decisive combina- tion: 14. JWxg2 IS .txfS+!! 'ii;xfS 16l:tf1+ 'ii;e6 16 ... 'ii;g6 17 ~d3+ 'ii;hS 18 lbf4+!. Black has other defences, but none that hold. 17 ~hSlbeS! Temporarily staving off the attack by return- ing a piece, but it's of no avail. 18 dxeS .txeSl9 'WIf7+ 'it>d6 20 .l:!.f6+! 'ii;cS! 21 b4+ ~xb4 22 .i.d2+ <;;t>a3 23 cS! dS 24 cxd6 .tg3+ 2S :tf2 ~hl + 26 '>te2 .tg4+ 27 '>td3 .tdl 28 .tel+ '>ta4 29 ~c4+ '>taS 30 .td2+ 1-0 Introduction to the Closed English

1 c4 eS 2 lbc3lbc6 3 g3 g6 4 .tg2 .tg7 (D)

w As indicated at the beginning of the chapter, I have designated this as the starting point of the Closed English, one of the most popular of 1 c4 eS systems. It begs for comparison with the Closed Sicilian, which goes 1 e4 cS 2 lbc3 lbc6, and more often than not 3 g3 g6 (3 ... e6 is also a traditional move) 4 .tg2 .tg7. In the Closed English, White has a large number of Sth-move options, some of a similar nature and others varying radically in character. But each one of them defines a structure that Black can use against the corresponding Closed Sicilian lines (1 e4 cS 2lbc3 lbc6 3 g3 g6 4 .tg2 .tg7), and as in so many cases throughout this book, White's extra tempo is partially compensated for by Black's greater information about what his opponent is doing. Naturally, White stands better than Black does in the corresponding Closed Sicilian lines, but the play tends to be fluid and hard to assess, and the opposing forces frequently don't clash at an early stage. Thus both players have a wide variety of moves to choose from, and this variation covers an enormous amount of theoretical territory. I'll try to supply examples that overlap between as many lines as possible.

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGUSH 145

Closed English with liJf3 Tempone - Vescovi Cascavel1996

[diagram]
Jf3 This knight development is not held in the highest regard when Black plays it in the Sicil- ian Defence (although objectively it isn't bad); White hopes that an extra move will change matters.

[diagram]
Black's most important reply, especially if we're speaking of putting some pressure on White as opposed to defending patiently. If Black plays ... ttJf6 without ... f5, we move into King's Indian territory, covered in Chapter 12. 60-0 d6 7 d3 ttJf6 8 J::!.bl (D)

White prepares M-b5, an advance that works together with the bishop on g2 by controlling squares along its diagonal. He also removes the rook from aI, where it stands exposed to pro- spective attacks by the g7 -bishop.

8. .. O-O

This can be called the main position of the Closed English, and one of the most important for the English Opening with l...e5. It arises via a large number of move-orders beginning with either 1 c4 or 1 ttJf3; for example, 1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 d6 3 g3 f5 4 .ltg2 ttJf6 5 d3 g6 6 ttJf3 .ltg7 7 O-O ttJc6. Or it might even transpose from a Lenin- grad Dutch Defence set-up: 1 c4 f5 2 ttJc3 ttJf6

3 g3 g6 4 .ltg2 .ltg7 5 ttJf3 d6 6 O-O e5 7 d3 O-O

8 J::!.bI ttJc6.

The strategic ideas are multifaceted, but more often than not Black works for a kingside attack. Typical moves are ... g5, .. .f4, ... ttJg6, ... ttJf5, ... .lte6 with ... 'it'd7 and ... ii.h3, and ... 'iWe8-h5. Black can also play for a central advance, usu- ally ... d5, by itself or in conjunction with ... e4. White's plans on the other side of the board include moves such as b4-b5 and c5 (with cxd6 or c6), a4-a5, 'iVb3, .lta3/b2, J::!.fc1 and ttJd2-c4. Alternatively, or additionally, White will play in the centre, usually with the pawn advance d4 or working to place a knight on d5. Turning to defensive strategies, Black often uses the move ... b6 to thwart White's pawn ad- vance c5, or he can play ... c6, perhaps with ... d5 in mind, which challenges White's efforts to lengthen the reach of his g2-bishop. White's main defensive idea on the kingside involves a timely f4, to prevent .. .f5, but there are ad hoc kingside moves that can also prove effective. Black's 8 ... O-O is a major decision. His alter- native is to insert 8 ... a5 9 a3, and then 9 ... O-O 10 M axM 11 axb4 (D).

We shall see this in the games below. This choice is very complicated, and in fact, it comes up often enough in various contexts that it might be compared to the 'which rook?' prob- lem that confronts chess-players in so many po- sitions. When he interpolates 8 ... a5 9 a3, Black removes his a-pawn as a potential target and opens the a-file for his rook; that comes in handy by preventing an early .lta3 and gener- ally keeping an eye on squares such as al and a2. On the other hand, after White gets orga- nized by, for example, ii.b2 and 'iVb3!iVc2, he

146 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

can win the a-file by means of l:tal, taking over the open line that he so much needs in order to make progress on the queenside. B

9 b4 h610 b5 0,e7 (D)

w 11 a4 On the face of it, White is preparing as, which might be followed by a6 or b6. That is in- deed the case, and if Black gets the blocking move ... b6 in, White would especially like to open the a-file by means of as. But equally im- portantly, he wants to play i.a3 without allow- ing Black to indirectly harass the bishop by ... a6 and ... axbS at some point. After the imme- diate 11 i.a3 i.e6, intending ... a6, he should therefore consider 12 cS!? 11 cS!? immediately is the most attractive al- ternative, because it cracks open the queenside before Black can set up defensively. The obvi- ous drawbacks are White's loss of central con- trol (dS) and failure to develop a piece. The game Leer Salvesen-Nordahl, Gausdal 2002 continued 1l.....te6 (ll...dxcS? 12 0,xeS 0,hS 13 'ifb3+ cJ;>h7 140,f3 and aside from White's positional advantage, Black's c-pawn is diffi- cult to defend) 12 cxd6 cxd6 13 i.a3 (D). 13 ... gS?! (Black should pursue a central strat- egy by 13 .. :iVd7 or 13 ... 0,fdS 14 0,xdS 0,xdS) 14 'ifa4 (or 14 0,d2, hitting the b7-pawn and in- tending 0,c4, when l4 ... 0,edS! IS 0,xdS 0,xdS l6l:tb3 apparently gives White a small advan- tage) 14 ... 'ifd7 IS 'i1Vb4!? (IS 0,d2 0,edS 16 l:tfcl) lS ... l:tad8? (an oversight; it's hard to find a good move in the face of ~xd6, 0,xeS or 0,d2, but lS ... l:tfc8! at least has the idea of 16 'iixd6!? .l:txc3 17 'fIxe7 'fIxe7 18 i.xe7l:tc2) 16 0,xeS! dxeS 17 'ifxe7 .~.f7 18 'fIIxd7 nfxd7 19 b6! a6 20 l:tbcl and White is a pawn up for no real compensation. 11 ... i.e612 i.a3 (D) Here's a trick to know: 12 cS?! dxcS! 13 0,xeS?? 0,hS, winning a knight, because 14 f4 fails to l4 ... i.xeS IS fxeS 'iid4+. But after 12 i.a3, 13 cS is a real positional threat.

12. .l:tc8! Black escapes the indirect pressure from White's bishop on g2. His idea is to block the advance of White's c-pawn by ... b6, thus delay- ing his queenside attack long enough to be able to launch his own on the kingside. There's an- other standard tactic here to watch out for: l2 ... b6 13 0,xeS! with the idea l3 ... dxeS? (if 13 ... 0,hS, then 14 i.xa8 'iixa8 IS d4!) 14 i.xa8 iYxa8 IS i.xe7. 13c5 Advancing immediately seems White's best shot at advantage. 13 0,d2 lets Black reach his defensive goal by means of 13 ... b6. Then Psa- khis-Kasparov, Match (game S), Murcia 1990

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGliSH 147

went 14 e3 gS IS d4 exd4 16 exd4 f4 17 Itel i.g4 18 LDf3 (or 18 f3 i.fS 19 LDde4) 18 ... ~d7 19 cS l:f.ce8 20 l:tc1 LDfS with chances for both W sides. 13  b6 The immediate advance 13 ... gS allows 14 b6!?, and 14 as has to be considered as well. I think this may be the right time for another of Black's standard moves: 13 ... LDd7! 14 cxd6 (White doesn't have enough compensation af- ter 14 c6?! bxc6 IS bxc6 LDxc6 or IS ... LDb8!) 14 ... cxd6 (D). w Now White's knight on c3 has no square to go to, so on the next move, ... e4 is actually go- ing to win a piece by force! In return, however, White will get a couple of pawns and threats: IS l:tc1 e4!? (declining the piece by Is ... LDcS! would keep a level game; for example, 16 LDd2 ~d7 17 as l:tfd8!) 16 dxe4l:txc3 17 ~xd6 Rf7 (17 ... l:txa3 18 'ii'xe6+! Rh7 19l:tfdl) 18l:txc3 i.xc3 19 l:f.c1 i.g7 20 LDd4! with good attack- ing chances. 14 cxd6 cxd6 (D) 15 l:f.c1 This reserves d2 for White's knight. Psakhis proposes IS 'ii'd2 'ii'd7 16 l:tfc1 gS 17 LDa2!? with the idea LDb4-c6. The text-move also anticipates simplifica- tion along the c-file. That will normally help White if Black has brought most of his pieces towards the kingside to pursue an attack. With fewer pieces, White has less to fear in that sec- tor and can increase his queenside advantage. On the other hand, if Black is playing in the centre when such exchanges occur, he has as many chances of success there as White has. In that case, simplification tends to be neutral, fa- vouring one side or another only because of particulars. 15 ... g5 Opting for the kingside plan. With the pre- ceding comments in mind, Black is well-placed and should consider keeping his pieces central- ized by IS ... ~d7! (planning ... l:tc7 and ... l:tfc8) or by Is ... LDd7!? with the ideas ... e4 and ... LDcs (16 i.xd6? e4). The game continuation isn't bad but gives White a bit more time.

16 LDd2

16 e4 f4 17 LDd2, intending ltJc4, is more

ambitious, if loosening. ... d517 a5 (D)

17 . f4!? Seeking kingside counterplay. Another course is 17 ... bxaS 18 ~b3 i.f7, when 19 LDa4l:txc1 20 l:txc1 l:te8 should level things. After 17 ... f4, White played 18 LDa4, probably inaccurately due to 18 ... l:f.xc1 19 ~xc1 bxaS. Instead, 18 axb6 axb6 19 'ii'b3 connects rooks

148 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

and retains the idea of ttJa4. As a whole, this variation offers fairly equal play and interesting middlegames. B Anilkumar - Saravanan Calcutta 1993

[diagram]
l:tbl!? (D)

A fairly popular move, one often associated with e3 and ttJge2 rather than ttJf3. White wants 7".ttJf6 Whenever Black meets b4 by ... a6, White has to look out for a change of positional strat- egy by 7 ... aS!? 8 bS (8 bxaS ttJf6 9 d3 O-O 10 ttJf3 .IhaS leaves White with an isolated a- pawn) 8 ... ttJb4!. Black's point is seen after 9 .i.a3 (9 d3 ttJe7 has the idea 10 ttJf3?? e4) 9 ... cS 10 bxc6 (10 d3 is more cautious) 1O ... dxc6 11 .i.xb4 axb4 12 .l:f.xb4 ttJf6 (D). to get b4-bS in as quickly as possible in order to W disrupt Black's development. In this game, it transposes back to a S ttJf3 position, but we get to see a few important ideas along the way. 5  f5 Instead, S ... aS 6 a3 fS 7 b4 axb4 8 axb4 ttJf6 would be a typical move-order that can lead to the main lines, but Black retains options by playing .. .fS first.

6 b4 a6!?

Oddly enough, this can also transpose ex- actly to the main line (see the next game), but the move has its own complexities. A potential drawback to Sl:tbl is that 6 ... ttJf6 7 bS ttJe7!? leads to a situation in which ... dS is an issue: 8 ttJf3 (8 d3 dS) 8 ... e4 (8 ... d6 9 O-O O-O

10 d3 returns us to the main line) 9 ttJd4 O-O

(9 ... dS!?) 10 O-O, and here 10 ... cS is playable, in view of 11 ttJb3 dS! 12 cxdS c4 13 ttJcS ttJfxdS. 7 a4!? (D) White should be aware of the difference be- tween the ... as and ... a6 defences. He can play 7 d3 ttJf6 8 ttJf3 O-O 9 O-O d6 but can still run into

10 a4 as! 11 bS ttJb4 12 .i.a3 cS!, the important

idea explained in the next note. Black has compensation for his pawn, based upon his two bishops as well as White's weak dark squares and a-pawn. The cS-square is es- pecially inviting for a minor piece; for example, 13 ttJh3 0-0140-0 ttJd7! IS d3 ttJcS, having in mind either simple development or the immedi- ate attack by ... gS.

8 b5 axb5 9 axb5 ttJe7 10 ~b3!?

This not only stops ... dS, but also tries to force Black to burn up a move for the purposes of pre- vention. That isn't a one-sided gain, but it gives White's new opportunities compared to the main line (i.e., the one with an early d3, ttJf3 and O-O).

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGliSH 149

10 ... d6 11 d3 O-O Here's a point at which Black can undertake to exploit the early 'iVb3 by 11...tiJd7!? This B might lead to 12 tiJf3 (12 i.a3 tiJcs 13 i.xcS?! dxcS is generally a poor trade-off for White because of the lack of a defender - or attacker - of the dark squares) 12 ... tiJcS 13 'iVc2 O-O 14 O-O f4!? (this advance tends to be good or bad depending upon the efficacy of a white knight on e4, and how long it takes to get there) IS i.b2 i.g4 16 .i:1al 'iVd7 with a complex imbal- ance. 12 tiJf3 (D)

12. . 'it>h8

Here Black would ordinarily play 12 ... h6. With the queen on b3 he can still do so, but has to be prepared for the standard advance 13 cS+ 'it>h7 14 b6!?, trying to demolish the pawn- chain. In that case, 14 ... c6! (14 ... dxcS IS tiJxeS) IS O-O tiJfdS intending to meet 16 tiJxdS with 16 ... i.e6! would be double-edged.

13 O-O h6

Again, 13 ... tiJd7 is possible and may well transpose to the line we saw after 11... tiJd7 . Generally, ... h6 together with ... ~h8 is a little slow, as we shall see. 14 c5!? A good move that opens the position favour- ably. Taking over the a-file by normal means is also effective: 14 i.b2! i.e6 IS .i:1al 'iVd7 16 b6!? (16 .i:1a4) 16 ... .i:1xal 17 .i:1xal c6 18lla7. 14  g5?! Black stands worse, but this is inferior to 14 ... e4! IS cxd6 cxd6 16 dxe4 fxe4 17 tiJd4. 15 b6! (D) 15  c616 i.a3! tiJe8 17 cxd6 tiJxd6 18 'iVb4 As so often, putting the lesser piece in front would cause the most problems, in this case in- surmountable ones: 18 i.cS! threatens 19 'ii'b4 and completely ties Black down. 18  e4! 19 tiJd2 :e8?! 20 dxe4 tiJxe4 21 tiJdxe4 fxe4 22 .i:1fdl! tiJd5 23 tiJxd5 cxd5 (D) w 24 i.b2 i.f5 25 .i:1bc1 .i:1e7 Black's position is too exposed. 2S ... .i:1c8 (to prevent 26 .i:1c7) loses material anyway to 26 l:txc8 i.xc8 27 i.xe4!. After 2S ... .i:1e7, White could have ended things quickly by 26 i.xg7+ .i:1xg7 27 ~d4 ~g8 28 'ii'eS!. He eventually brought the point home by slower means. B. Schneider - Short Solingen 1986

[diagram]
d6 6 tiJf3 f5 7 O-O tiJf6 8llbl If White wants to steer clear of complica- tions, he can exchange pieces via 8 tiJdS (D), which is not as harmless as it looks.

150 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) After the obvious capture 8 ... liJxd5 9 cxd5 liJe7 10 liJg5!, the e6-square makes a differ- ence; for example, 1O ... c6 11 liJe6 i.xe6 12 dxe60-0 13 'iWb3 'iWc8 14 e4!, when White's in- trusive pawn on e6 survives, at least long enough for him to use his two bishops and central pawn-breaks. b) Black can also play 8 ... O-O 9 i.g5! liJe7 (9 ... i.e6 10 'iWd2 'iWd7? opens the way for White to exploit Black's piece placement by llliJxf6+ i.xf6 12 i.xf6 .l::[xf6 13liJg5) 10 liJxf6+ i.xf6 11 i.xf6 .l:lxf6, when Mulyar-Revesz, Philadel- phia 2006 went 12 c5!? (perhaps 12 'iWb3 rt;g7 13 'iWc3 is better) 12 ... rt;g7 13 'iWb3 liJc6 14 'iWc3 'iWe7 15 b4, and now 15 ... dxc5 16 bxc5 ~b8 17 ~abl b5! 18 cxb6 axb6 would be about equal. c) A third option is the simple 8 ... liJe7 9 i.g5 (9 e4!?) 9 ... liJfxd5 10 cxd5 h6 11 i.xe7 'iWxe7 12 .l:lc1 O-O with a small advantage for White due to his c-file pressure. d) In view of all this, Black may prefer the slow but useful 8 ... h6, preparing either . ..ttJe7 or ... liJxd5 and not permitting i.g5 or liJg5. White probably does best to ignore this and ex- pand via 9 .l::r.bl O-O 10 b4liJxd5 (or 1O ... liJe7 11 liJxf6+ .u.xf6 12 i.b2 i.e6 13liJd2 c6 14 a4!?) 11 cxd5 liJe7 12 'iWb3 with chances for both sides. S. a5 Black follows the most common move-order, used in an untold number of games over the years. The resulting themes overlap to a large extent with 8 ... O-O 9 b4 above, so these games should be studied together. For the record, the game before you actually went 8 ... O-O 9 b4 a6

10 a4 h6 11 b5 axb5 12 axb5liJe7, transposing.

9a3 Once the move ... a5 has been played, White sometimes changes course with 9 i.g5, striving to win the light squares. This is relatively harm- less if Black sticks to central play; for example, 9 ... h6 10 i.xf6 i.xf6 11 a3 O-O 12liJd5 i.g7!?

13 b4 axb4 14 axb4liJe7 15 liJd2, E.Ragozin-

Chemiaev, Biel 1992, and Black should play 15 ... c6! 16liJxe7+ "ilxe7 17 b5 "ilc7. ... 0-010 b4 axb411 axb4 (D)

We have arrived at the most commonly seen position in the Closed English, in part because in so many lines the moves d3 and liJf3 have been played at an early stage. For an overview of the basic ideas, see Tempone-Vescovi above. 11 .. h6 Otherwise Black can't play ... g5, and if he brings his bishop to e6, it will be subject to at- tack by liJg5. 12 b5liJe713 i.b2 (D)

13  i.e6

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 151

Black hurries to clear his back rank. He has an especially popular manoeuvre in mind. Less precise is 13. .. g5 14l:ta1l:txa1 (upon 14 ... iLe6, White wins the a-file regardless by 15 l:txa8 'iVxa8 16 'iVb3 and l:ta1; that's why ... g5 is usu- ally delayed until ... iLe6 and either .. :ilkd7 or ... l:tc8 can be arranged) 15 'ilkxa1 with the better game; e.g., 15 ... lbg6 16lbd2 h5 17 'iVa8! b6 18 l:ta1 .Bh6 19 l:ta7 g4 20 lbn f4 21 'iVb8 and White wins, Hickl-Maus, Bundesliga 1992/3. 14l:tal (D)

... l:tc8 Black's strategy is to play ... b6 and then switch his attention to the kingside. Alterna- tively, the unsophisticated 14 ... 'iVd7, which con- nects rooks so as not to cede the a-file, may be as good as any other move. At that point, Marin suggests that White shouldn't give up the fight for the a-line, to which end 15 'iib3 g5 16 !Ia4 intending 17 l:tfa1 is logical. The risk is that af- ter 16 ... l:txa4 17 'iVxa4 f4 18 'iVa7 b6, Black gains time for an intimidating attack. Even if that ought not to win out with accurate play (for one thing, White's queen will get to b7 and be a good defender of his kingside!), it is still dan- gerous. In the end, which side you want to play is largely a matter of taste. At any rate, the game Istratescu-Mateuta, Romanian Ch, Iasi 1999 continued 14 ... 'iVd7 15 l:txa8!? l:txa8 16 'iVc2 g5 17 lbd2 c6 18 l:ta1 l:txa1 + 19 iLxal 'iVc7 and both sides could claim a harmonious mix of structure and devel- opment. This looks equal. 15l:ta7 Hitting the b-pawn to force the creation of weaknesses. 15 lbe 1 is less clear because Black can play in the centre with lS ... c6. Instead, White sometimes gets his queenside break in immediately by 15 c5. Then Ivanchuk-Topalov, Wijk aan Zee 1996 continued 15 ... lbd7! 16 cxd6 cxd6 17lba4 d5 18lbd2 'iVe8 19 e3 g5?! (19 ... 'ilkf7) 20 'ilke2 'ilkf7 21 f4! lbg6? Black is moving his pieces and thoughts away from the centre, where the true theatre of war is. Now White should play 22 fxg5 hxg5 23 e4! f4 (23 ... dxe4? 24lbxe4) 24 exd5 iLxd5 25 lbe4, attacking g5 and forcing 25 ... iLxe4 26 iLxe4 lbf6 27 iLa3!? lbxe4 28 dxe4 !Ife8 29 lbb6 lIb8 30 ~h5 ~e6 31 lbd5 with a clear posi- tional advantage. 15 b6 (D) w 16 'ilkc2 White has a beautiful diagonal of squares to work on, and it's not obvious which move is best: a) 16 'ilkb3 has the advantage that he can put a piece on d5 at the right moment: 16 ... g5 (l6 ... lbd7 will win a tempo, but takes a piece away from the kingside attack: 17 .l:.fa1lbc5 18 ~c2 g5 19 lbd2 is promising, although obvi- ously the whole game lies ahead) 17lbd2 f4 18 l:tfallbf5 19lbd5! fxg3 20 hxg3lbg4 21lbe4 lbd4 22 iLxd4 exd4 23 iLh3 'it>h8 24 f3 iLxd5, Hickl-S.Mohr, Bundesliga 1994/5, and now 25 cxd5 lbe3 26 iLe6 is absolutely winning. b) 16 lbel is a good option, with the idea lbc2-b4, now that ... c6 is not on the cards as it was above. But of course that encourages Black's kingside attack by removing a defender from that sector. A superb game Mirumian- Oral, Olomouc 1998 went 16 ... g5 17lbc2 f4 18 lbb4 ~e8 19 lbe4 lbxe4 20 iLxe4 iLh3 21

152 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lba6?! lbf5!? 22 .:!.el (22 .:!.xc7 .ixfl 23 'iVxfl fxg3 24 hxg3lbxg3; 22lbxc7? 'iVe7!) 22 .. .'~h8

23 e3 fxe3 24 fxe3 'iVf7 25 ~f3 (25 .Bd5 lbxe3 !

26 .Bxf7lbxdl 27 .:!.xdl ':!'xf7 and Black wins, with the idea ... .l:.cf8) 25 ... lbxe3! 26 ':!'xe3'iVh5!

w Black wins the queen, which was just good enough to win the game after considerable ef- fort. This position reminds me of a King's In- dian Defence in which White breaks through on the queenside and establishes an optically monstrous knight on the 6th rank (usually c6 or b6), which then watches from afar as Black shreds his king's position. We return to 16 'iVc2.

16.  g5 17 ':!'fa1 f4 18 lbd2 fxg3 19 hxg3

~e8 Brute force; the queen seems to be heading forh5. w 20 lbce4lbg4 21lbnlbf5 With the idea of ... lbd4.

22 e3 ~g6! (D)

Black comes up with an original attacking idea. In this position, White can probably de- fend, and may even stand better, but as happens so often in practical play, the kingside attack crashes through: 23 .:!.b7?! lbh4 24 gxh4 gxh4 25 f3?! Better (or at least more manageable) was 25 , 'iVe2, which Short analyses to an unclear result. 25  .:!.xf3! 26 'iVe2! .:!.f7 27lbh2 ':!'cfS (D) w 28l:!:aa7? The last chance was 28 .:!.fl!, also resulting in an unclear position. 28  h3 29 .:!.xc7 .:!.xc7 30 .:!.xc7 lbf2 0-1 In this game and notes, you can see the most important themes of this critical variation. Closed English with e3 In this section I'll take a selective look at varia- tions in which White includes e3 in a Closed English variation, concentrating on 5 e3.

1 c4 e5 2 lbc3lbc6 3 g3 (D)

[diagram]
THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGliSH 153

by Kosten's suggestion 8 ... c6! with the idea 9 dxc6 ~d3) 8 ... liJxd5 9 a3liJf6 10 liJf3 .Bd6 11 0-00-0 with approximate equality. c) Up to recent years, 3 ... .Bc5 was not com- monly played at this stage, but the move has be- come more popular in many variations of the Reversed Sicilian. One line deserves notice be- cause of the unique placement of Black's king's knight: 4 .Bg2 d6 5 e3 a6 6liJge2 .Ba7 7 a3!? (7 d4) 7 ... liJge7 8 b4 O-O 9 d3 .Bf5 10 .Bb2 ~d7 (D) (intending ... .Bh3). Black has the idea ... ~d7; instead, 6liJa4 O-O 7 W liJxc5 dxc5 8 .Bxc6?! bxc6 9 d3 imposes tri- pled pawns upon Black, but he gets excellent pressure down the d-file, speedy development, and kingside prospects after 9 ... I!.e8 or 9 ... I!.b8) 5 ... d5! 6 cxd5liJb4 (D). w This is the surprising idea: Black gives up the d-pawn for a moment, but prepares to re- capture it while aiming at the weak d3-square. The moves ... .Bf5 and even ... c6 are also in the air. Foisor-Komeev, Paris 1995 went 7 d4 exd4 8 exd4 .Be7 (8 ... .Bxd4?? 9 ~a4+) 9 liJge2 liJbxd5 10 O-O .Be6 11 liJf4 liJxf4 12 .Bxf4 c6 13 .Be5 O-O 14 .Bxf6!? (14 ~e2 ~b6 15 I!.adl I!.ad8) 14 ... .Bxf615 d5 cxd516liJxd5 .Bxd517 'i6xd5 with equality. b) 3 .. .f5 can lead to the same idea: 4 .Bg2 liJf65 e3!? (5 d3 is a better way to approach this position) 5 ... d5! 6 liJxd5 (6 cxd5 liJb4 7 d3 liJbxd5) 6 ... liJxd5 7 cxd5 (7 .Bxd5?! liJb4 8 .Bg2? 'i6d3!) 7 ... liJb4 8 d3 (8 e4!?, of Filippov- Volzhin, Merida 2000, is very well answered These are all normal moves for both sides when Black's knight is on f6. The knight on e7 has more flexibility, but the one on f6 covers the important central square e4. Damljanovic- Predojevic, Serbian League 2007 continued 11 h3 h6 12 nc1 I!.ae8 13 "iVd2. Now Black tried to establish himself in the centre with ... c6, and got White to commit: 13 ... liJd8 14 d4 exd4 15 exd4liJdc6!? with the idea ... .Bh7 and ... liJf5. Black appears to have enough play in this line, but one feels that direct central action by White would be more testing. d) 3 ... d64 .Bg2 .Be6 (D) is an independent move-order. The bishop move attacks c4 and is flexible enough to support more than one plan, the most exotic being along the lines of ... ~d7, ... h5 and under the right circumstances, ... g5 and ... O-O-O. In practice, Black's strategy tends to be more positional; for example, after ... ~d7 White's naturalliJd5 can sometimes be met by ... liJd8 and ... c6. For his part, White would like to exploit the committal nature of 4 ... .Be6; for example, 5 d3 (Black takes his share of the centre just in time after 5 b3 "iVd7 6 e3liJge7 7

154 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w d4 d5!) 5 ... 1'*'d7 6 b4! (D) (6 liJd5 liJge7 7 i.d2 liJd8 8 ~3 c6 9 liJe3 d5 10 liJf3 f6 is unclear, and of course there are options for both sides, such as 6 ... liJce7!?, an idea we see below).

Now: dl) 6 ... liJge7 is too slow: 7 b5 liJd8 8 liJf3 i.h3 9 i.xh3 1'*'xh3 10 ~a4 ~d7 11 O-O. d2) 6 ... g6?! 7 b5 liJd8 8 liJf3 gives White some advantage. A classic example of positional play went 8 ... i.g7!? 9 liJg5!? e4?! (9 ... i.f5 is better) 10 i.b2 exd3 11 ~xd3 a6 12 h4! axb5 13 cxb5 liJe7 14 ~d2 0-015 h5 gxh5?! (15 ... h6 16 liJxe6 1'*'xe6 17 a4! favours White, whose bishops take on exceptional power down the long diagonals) 16 ~xh5 i.f5 17 i.e4! i.g6 18 l:.xh7! i.xh7 19 i.xh7+ 'it>h8 200-O-O liJg8 21 l:!.hl liJh6 22 liJd5 f6 23 liJe4 .l:!.xa2 24 .uxh6 i.xh6 25 ~xh6 Wig7 26 ~h4 1-0 Petrosian- Estrin, Moscow 1968. d3) Although it has always been considered better for White, Black should look into captur- ing by 6 ... liJxb4!; for example, 7 l:!bl c5 or 7 i.xb7 .l:r.b8 8 i.g2 liJf6 with the idea ... d5. In spite of Black's inferior pawn-structure, the po- sition is unclear. 4 i.g2 i.g7 S e3 (D) There are various ways to end up in this kind of e3 system; for example, 5 l:tbl d6 (5 ... a5 6 a3 f5 or 6 ... d6 is more common, so as to open the a-file after 7 b4 axb4) 6 b4 f5 7 e3 liJf6 8 d3 O-O 9 liJge2 or 5 d3 f5 6 e3 liJf6 7 liJge2.

S. fS Once again, the variations with ... f5 are probably the most important in the Closed Eng- lish, because Black challenges for space and gains the most positive chances. Not surpris- ingly, the move 5 ... d6 can and usually does come first. Delaying it isn't necessarily an ad- vantage, but we'll see how that can affect things. 5 ... d6 6 liJge2 lines with ideas other than .. .f5 will come later in this section. 6 liJge2 liJf6 (D) w 7 d3

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 155

7 d4 O-O 8 O-O d6 makes a more aggressive

impression, but then White's position has be- come inelastic and he needs a plan; the further advance d5 would only release the pressure so that Black could launch an attack by ... g5 with- out being disturbed in the centre. Strange to say, the modest 7 d3 generally creates more problems: it goes better with the ideas ttJd5 and if need be, f4. The whole scheme may be famil- iar to you from the Sicilian Defence, and in this case White's extra tempo only helps. 7 .. 0-080-0

8 Itbl tries to save a move by not castling. In

Rogozenko-Sadler, Dutch Team Ch, Hengelo 2000, a sort of waiting game occurred follow- ing 8 ... a6!? 9 b4 ~h8 (9 ... d6 transposes to the main lines) 10 a4!? (D) (upon 100-0, Black could still delay ... d6 and prepare queenside counterplayby 1O ... Itb8; then 11 a4?! a5! 12 b5 ttJb4 13 ii.a3 c5! is even better than in the game, since after 14 bxc6 bxc6 White doesn't even win a pawn).

1O ... a5! 11 b5 ttJb4. We have seen this ... a6- a5 idea in the variations with White's knight on f3. In this instance the tempo saved on ... d6 is useful: 12 ii.a3 c5 13 bxc6 dxc6 (opening the important d-file). At this point, 14 ii.xb4 axb4

15 Itxb4 'iWd6 would cede the bishops to Black

and leave important dark squares weak. In the game, therefore, White decided not to win the pawn and continued 140-0 ttJh5! 15 ttJc1 f4!? (it's always risky to cede the e4-square to White, but Black extends the range of his c8-bishop and threatens to advance further; 15 ... ii.e6 is more solid) 16 ttJe4 ttJf6! 17 ttJxf6!? 'iWxf6 18 ii.xb4 (the position after 18 'iWf3 fxg3 19 'iWxg3 ii.f5 is difficult to defend) 18 ... axb4 19 Itxb4 f3 20 ii.hl g5 (the fate of the bishop on hI is obvi- ously becoming critical) 21 ttJa2! e4! (a posi- tional sacrifice to stop the knight from coming to e4 via c3; instead, even though White is only one pawn up, 21...g4 22 ttJc3 makes it hard for Black to win because of the combination of a knight on e4 and White's b-file pressure) 22 dxe4 g4 23 ~c2 Ita5! (this rook-lift covers key squares like c5) 24 c5?! (it's better to come back to the centre by 24 ttJc1!) 24 .. :~i'e7 25 Itc1 ii.e6 26 h3 h5! and Black stood clearly better. 8 .. d6 9 Itbl (D)

This is a standard position that has been reached many times over the years. The follow- ing game and notes show some of the character- istic ideas. Adianto - Sorbe Kuala Lumpur 2005

[diagram]
f5 6 ttJge2 ttJf6 7 d3 O-O 8 O-O d6 9 Itbl a5 (D) As in the 5 ttJf3 lines, Black hopes to get more out of the opening of the a-file than White. Instead, 9 ... ttJe7 prepares to meet White's flank attack with a central advance: 10 b4 c6 (l0. .. d5!? 11 cxd5 ttJexd5 12 ttJxdS ttJxd5 is close to equal, but White has the better chances after 13 e4! ttJf6 14 'iVb3+ ~h8 15 ii.e3) 11 b5 ii.e6 (ll...c5!? 12 'iVa4! prevents the reorganiza- tion by ... Itb8, ... b6 and ... d5) 12 bxc6 bxc6 13 ii.a3 'iVc7 14 d4! exd4 (l4. .. ii.xc4 15 dxe5 dxe5 16 ii.d6 'iWd7 17 ii.xe5) 15 ttJxd4 ii.xc4 16 Itel and with the ideas of ~a4, Itec1 and occasion- ally e4, White has a nice initiative for the pawn.

156 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w 10a3 See the next game for a strategy based upon b3 and J.b2.

10. . J.e611 liJd5

11 b4 lets Black through in the centre fol-

lowing 11...axb4 12 axb4 dS; then White can still play for the initiative by 13 bS liJe7 14 ~b3, having in mind J.a3, but Black has vari- ous resources including the forcing sequence 14 ... dxc4 IS dxc4 'iVd3 16 J.a3 J.xc417 ~b2 'iVd7 18 J.xb7 l:.ab8 19 l:.fdl ~e6, with dy- namically balanced play. 1l. .. l:.b8! (D) w

12 J.d2!

White has to pay heed to his opponent's plans; for example, 12 b4?! allows the standard equalizer: l2 ... axb4 13 axb4liJe7. 12 ... liJd7!? Perhaps Black is considering ... bS. Still, f6 was a good square for the knight and moving it away may not be best. 13 b4!? 13 ~c2! prevents Black from undertaking anything.

13. .. axb4 14 axb4 liJe7 15 liJec3 c6 16

liJxe7+ 'iVxe717 b5 e4! 18 dxe4 J.xc419 l:.e1 fxe4 20 liJxe4 d5!? (D) This exchange sacrifice gives Black a beauti- ful combination of central control and active bishops, but the specific consequences are diffi- cult to judge. Probably 20 ... liJf6 is more accu- rate. w

21 J.b4! ~f7

And not 2l...cS? 22liJxcSliJxcs 23 i.xdS+ J.xdS 24 ~xdS+, etc.

22 J.xfS l:.xf8 23 bxc6

23 liJd6 'iVxf2+ 24 ~hl J.c3 is unclear, and liJd6 should be considered on White's next move, too. 23 ... bxc6 24l:tb7 dxe4 (D) w 25 l:.xd7 ~xf2+ 26 ~hl J.c3?! Black has enough for the exchange after 26 ... J.d3!.

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 157

27 !:tgl ~xe3 28 ~c1 !:tf3! 29 .i:!.d8+ White could launch a dangerous counterat- tack by 29 ~a3!. 29 ... ~g7 30 !:td7+ ~g8 31 !:tgdl ~d5 After this, White's counterattack won't suf- fice to win and the game should have been drawn. You can see, however, how exciting a seemingly slow opening like this can become. M. Gurevich - Kamsky Reggio Emilia 1991

[diagram]
d6 6 lLlge2 f5 7 .:!.bl a5 8 d3 lLlf6 9 b3 White wants to get this move in before cas- tling to help suppress his opponent's central breaks. As a bonus, he won't have to deal with the kind of mad flank-pawn attacks that Black himself might throw at him from an uncastled position. I'm using the above move-order for clarity, but the game's actual sequence 5 !:tbl a5 6 d3 d6 7 e3 f5 8 lLlge2 lLlf6 is also quite common. 9 .. O-O 10 ~b2 (D) The modest fianchetto with 9 b3 is the sort his bishop-pair. A typical combination of struc- ture and piece placement follows 12 lLlxf6+ ~xf6 13lLlc3 ~d7 140-0 (D).

White has no immediate threats, but he con- trols d5 and Black has a hard time finding a pos- itive plan. In most cases, ... g5 can be met quite effectively by f4. Given time, White can look to expand on the queenside and/or the centre. Of course, Black has no cause to panic, and should come out all right if he plays accurately. Such positions may appear dull, but they can liven up in a hurry if the players are up for a fight. 11 ~d2 lIb8 12 O-O b6 This seems rather negative. The idea is prob- ably to defend a5 after White plays lLld5 or d4- d5; nevertheless, there is no immediate prob- lem, and 12 ... ~e6 with the idea 13 d4 ~f7 looks better. In such positions, Black needs to be careful about playing ... exd4 without a spe- cific reason, because that surrenders f4 to a knight. 13 .l:tbel! (D) of ultra-positional plan that gives the English B Opening its technical reputation. It introduces a prophylactic formation that makes it more difficult for Black to playa successful ... d5 or pursue a primitive kings ide assault. Thus both sides will jockey to improve their forces and only engage each other further down the road.

[diagram]
1O ... ~e6 11 lLld5 Ji.f7 is an idea directly from the Closed Sicilian. Black will then be able to capture on d5 with a knight and preserve

158 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White prepares f4 followed by e4. 13  'it>h8 14 f4 (D) This is the standard blocking move from the Closed Sicilian and, in fact, from several King's Indian Attack lines. White has potential pawn advances (b4 and e4), whereas his opponent can't undertake much. The game continued 14 ... ~g4?! (an odd move, although a knight on h6 can be useful if White is playing for e4) IS ~dS i.e6 16 h3 ~h6 17 ~ec3 (now ~bS is a problem for Black) 17 ... "fid7 18 ~bS :bc8, and instead of 19 d4?! i.xdS! 20 i.xdS ~b4, the more circumspect 19 i.c3 prepares d4. Then, for example, 19 ... i.xdS 20 cxdS ~b4 21 i.xb4 "fixbS 22 i.c3 is positionally very nice for White with his c-file advantage. Sadomsky - Murei Moscow 1965

[diagram]
d6 6 ~ge2 ~ge7 Now we'll look at an old main line. The de- velopment of the knight on e7 is less dynamic than the alternatives, but fully playable. A related move 6 ... i.e6 (D) has been almost forgotten but perhaps not resolved. Here are the key lines: a) 7 ~dS ~ce7! is an idea from the Closed Sicilian, in which Black's 'lost' tempo is .. :tikd7, not necessarily a bad trade-off: 8 d4 c6 9 ~xe7 ~xe7 10 dS i.g4!? 11 f3!? i.d7 12 ~c3 cxdS 13 cxdS bS! with good prospects on both wings, Benko-Hort, Venice 1969. b) 7 d3 "fid7 can lead to any number of vari- ations such as 8 ~dS ~d8 with the idea ... c6, or w 80-0 hS!? 9 fib3 ~ge7! 10 "fixb7!? :b8 11 ~a6 h4 with a serious attack. c) 7 d4 i.xc4!? 8 dS i.xe2 9 'iVxe2 ~b8 10 'iVbS+ ~d7 11 'iVxb7 (D).

Now 11...:b8 12 "fia6! has favoured White and given this line a bad name. But 11... ~cS!? may improve, forfeiting castling for the sake of a light-square attack: 12 "fic6+ 'it>f8 13 ~bS nb8 14 "fie2 (now d3 is covered, but Black can keep the initiative alive) 14 ... e4!? IS ~xe4 (or IS O-O i.xc3!? 16 bxc3 fS 17 c4 ~f6 18 i.b2 ~f7; the knights seem a match for the bishops) IS ... i.xb2 16 i.xb2 :xb2 17 'iVc4 (17 'iVxb2?? ~d3+) 17 ... ~xe4 18 i.xe4 cS! 19 O-O ~f6 20 lltbl .l:.b6 and the position is unclear. 70-00-08 d4 (D) The direct move. In the next game we look at a combination of e3 and d3. 8 ... exd4 9 exd4 Black has sufficient play following 9 ~xd4 i.d7 (9 ... ~xd4 10 exd4 ~fS 11 dS :e8 12 ~e4! is a position to mark; Black lacks a plan) 10

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 159

tLJde2 (but now 10 h3 tLJxd4 11 exd4 tLJfS 12 dS l:te8 13 tLJe4 c6! yields counterplay) 1O ... ~c8 11 tLJf4 tLJeS (another approach is 11...i.xc3!? 12 bxc3 b6!?, preventing cS and preparing ... 'ii'a6) 12 'ii'e2. Here, apart from 12 ... l:te8 (Smyslov-Radovici, Tel Aviv 1964), 12 ... i.g4!

13 f3 i.e6 is a typical equalizing manoeuvre, in

view of 14 tLJxe6 'ii'xe6, hitting c4. 9 . i.g4! The innocent-looking 9 ... tLJfS?! led to posi- tional trouble in Botvinnik-Reshevsky, AVRO tournament, Rotterdam 1938: 10 dS ttJeS (or 1O ... tLJcd4 11 tLJxd4 tLJxd4 12 tLJe4! with extra space) 11 b3 as (Botvinnik suggests 11...a6!?) 12 i.b2 tLJd7 13 a3 tLJcs 14 b4! and White was on top. 10f3(D)

10 h3 i.xe2 11 tLJxe2 ttJfS 12 dS tLJeS and

... l:te8 gives Black active and centralized pieces.

10  i.f5 The situation is also balanced after 1O ... i.d7 11 i.e3; e.g., 11 ... ttJfS 12 i.f2l:te8 13 'iVd2 a6, planning ... l:tb8 and ... bS. In addition, Botvin- nik gives 1O ... i.c8! 11 i.e3 dS 12 cS b6 with equal chances. 11 g4!? i.c8!? (D) 12 d5!? In Larsen-Spassky, Belgrade 1964, White played 12 i.f4 and ran into 12 ... dS! (also possi- ble is 12 ... a6!?, to stop tLJbS and prepare ... bS) 13 cS (13 ttJbS dxc4 14 ttJxc7 l:tb8, when White can't even get a repetition by IS ttJbS due to IS ... i.e6! 16 i.xb8 'iVxb8 followed by ... l:.d8) 13 ... b614ttJbS i.a6!? IS ttJxc7 i.xe216 'iVxe2 ttJxd4 17 'iVd3 l:tc8 18 cxb6 axb6 19 i.e3 ttJec6 20 ttJa6 l:te8 (threatening 21... ttJeS !) 21 ~fe 1 ttJe6 22 f4 'iVh4 with several threats and a win- ning game. 12. tLJe5 13 b3 c6! Black has to move quickly before White consolidates his space advantage by, say, h3, i.e3 and f4. 14 i.e3 'iVa5?! Instead, 14 ... cxdS! IS cxdS hS! secures an outpost on eS in the line 16 h3 (16 gS ttJfS 17 i.f2 b6) 16 ... hxg4 17 fxg4, when 17 ... fS is the most ambitious choice. 15 'iVd2?! White stands better after IS dxc6! tLJ7xc6 16 ~d2. 15  b5! (D) By pounding away at the enemy pawn-chain, Black is finally able to compromise White's cen- tral pawn-structure, achieving a dynamic equal- ity. Black even got the better game after some tactics: 16 cxb5 cxb517 a3 i.b718 h3? ttJxdS! 19 i.d4?

160 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Black's ideais that 19lbxdS ~xd2 20 lbe7+ 'it>h8 21 i.xd2 J:1fe8 traps White's knight. Nev- ertheless, White could play 22 f4 i.xg2 23 'it>xg2 lbd3 24 lbc3 l:txe7 2S J:1ad1 and have some play for the pawn. After 19 i.d4?, the game continued 19 ... .l:Ife8

20 J:1a2 lbxc3 21 lbxc3 l:tac8 with an extra

pawn and better position. Dvoretsky - Timoshchenko USSR Team Ch, Moscow 1966

[diagram]
d6 6 lbge2 lbge7 7 d3 O-O (D) w A wealth of practice stems from e3/d3 sys- tems, which are too flexible to describe in any detail. Usually White plays for b4-bS, and Black aims to resolve the central situation, as we see in this game and notes. 80-0 8 llb1 i.e6 9lbdS 'iVd7 10 b4 a6 is Karpov- Zsu.Polgar, Bilbao 1987 (which reached this position by another move-order): 11 lbec3 lbd8 12 a4lbc8! (D). w Black threatens to win a piece by 13 ... c6. This retreat, also normal in the Closed Sicilian, is the standard way to prepare expansion in the centre. The game continued 13lbe4 f6?! (more assertive is 13 ... fS! 14lbgS c6, and now lslbc3 e4!, or IS lbxe6 lbxe6 16 lbc3, when 16 ... e4! equalizes, as does 16 ... lbe7 17 O-O f4 or 17 ... dS) 140-0 c6 IS lbdc3 lbf7 16 ~c2 fS 17 lbd2 (White is finally ready for bS) 17 ... gS!? 18 as hS 19 f4!. Again, this blocking move gives White the advantage because his queenside at- tack is ongoing, whereas Black's is temporarily stuck on the kingside. 8 . i.e6 9lbd5 ~d7 10 l:tbllbd8! 11 b4 (D)

11 ... lbxd5?! At this point 11...c6 allows 12lbxe7+ ~xe7 13 bS, launching a standard queenside attack, with some advantage to White. Nevertheless, Black can play the idea from the last note,

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 161

11...tbc8!, in order to drive back the knight on

d5 without permitting tbxe7; for example, 12 b5 a6 13 a4 axb5 14 axb5 c6 15 tbdc3 d5 16 bxc6 bxc6 with mutual chances. 12 cxd5 i.h3 13 e4! This is typical; once the bishops are ex- changed on g2, White wants his pawns on light squares. 13 . i.xg2 14 'it>xg2 f5 15 f3 tbf7?! The knight is passively placed here and as it turns out, Black has a faulty idea. Better is 15 ... a5 16 b5 b6 17 i.e3 tbb7, followed at the right moment by ... tbc5. Then White has more options than Black in terms of central breaks, and the exchange exf5 should produce an ad- vantage, but it's hard to make progress. 16l:tb3 (D) Dvoretsky awards this move a '!!' because he says that it anticipates ... i.h6. But we've seen in other openings how the exchange of a defending bishop on h6 is often disadvantageous anyway, since the benefit of eliminating White's more ef- fective bishop is cancelled by the creation of kingside weaknesses. Furthermore, simplifica- tion favours the side with the space advantage in such positions, and strengthens White's direct attack on c7. 16 . i.h6?! Thus Black should consider 16 ... c5! 17 i.e3! (17 dxc6 bxc6 18 i.e3 a5) 17 ... .l:!fc8 18 ~d2 (18 bxc5 dxc5 19 tbc3 tbd6!), when White still has the better bishop, but only a small edge. After 16 ... i.h6?!, the game proceeded 17 i.xh6 tbxh6 18l:tc3l:tf7 19 ~c 1 'it>g7 20 ~a3?! (White would have a more serious advantage with 20 ~b2!, which has the idea of f4 and thus interferes with Black's ... tbg8-f6) 20 ... a6 21 l:tfc1 .l:f.c8 22 ~3 (better 22 ~2!), and here 22 ... tbg8! would be nearly equal. Black can also seek to punish 5 e3 directly by playing ... h5, intending simply ... h4, a strat- egy always to be aware of in a position with a fianchettoed king's bishop. I'm going to spend some time on this move, because it both typifies a flank attack that isn't represented elsewhere in this book and illustrates how someone using even the most conservative of set-ups (5 e3, 6 tbge2 and 7 d4 or 7 d3) must nevertheless con- tend with radical imbalances. Cu. Hansen - Hodgson Bundesliga 200112

[diagram]
d6 6 tbge2 Interpolating 6 ~bl a5 before playing 7 tbge2 actually has drawbacks compared to the game after the aggressive advance 7 ... h5!? 8 h3 i.e6!

9 d3 (one twist here is that Black's knight is

protected on b4 after 9 d4 i.xc4! 10 d5 tbb4, and therefore won't be captured following 11 ~a4+) 9 ... ~d7 10 tbd5 tbf6 11 tbec3. In Foi- sor-Ibragimov, Linares 1994, Black now played

11...tbh7!?, with the thought of an eventual

... f5, but it might have been easier to continue

11...O-O; for example, 12 a3 .l:!.fb8!? 13 i.d2

i.xd5 14 tbxd5 tbxd5 15 cxd5 tbe7 160-0 c6 and Black's centre guarantees him fully-fledged play.

6. .. h5 (D)

162 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

The justification for this move does not con- sist entirely in Black's attacking chances, but also in the fact that the h-pawn advance will take advantage of the light squares weakened by the conjunction of g3 and e3. As so often in chess, a flank advance serves to keep the centre under control, and has the side benefit of gain- ing space. From White's point of view, it is en- couraging to see Black using time that could be spent on development, and one should always be cognisant that pawn advances imply weak- nesses on the wing where the advance takes place. How both sides react to and resolve these conflicting factors is best seen by example. 7d4 Surely the most critical response to an ad- vance with ... h5 is a counter advance in the cen- tre. But White has alternatives: a) Both here and in several other variations (such as S e4 d6 6 ttJge2 hS!?), White can halt Black's advance by playing h4 in order to do away with the issue of dealing with Black open- ing lines on the kingside. However, you could make the case that Black gets more use out of the g4-square than White does from gs. As we shall see, that's initially so, but in the long run that depends very much upon the specific ways in which play develops. Thus 7 h4, and then: al) 7 ... ttJh6 is flexible, eyeing both fS and g4; the drawback is that it cedes piece control over dS. a2) A familiar positional trick occurs after 7 ... ttJge7 8 d3 .Bg49 ~bUtb8 iOb4a611 a4!? As we have seen elsewhere, Black has 11.. .as! 12 bS ttJb4. Now, as usual, 13 .Ba3 cS gives Black his share of queenside influence and strengthens his control of dS. Pfleger-Nunn, Bundesliga 1985/6 continued 14 .Bxb4 axb4 IS ttJdS ttJxdS 16 .ixdS O-O 17 'iVc2 b6 18 ttJcI .Be6! 19 ttJb3 .ixdS 20 cxdS e4! 21 dxe4.Bc3+ 22 'it>f1 'iVe7 23 'it>g2 ~be8 24 'it>f3? fS 2S exfS c4 26 ttJd4 .Bxd4 0-1. Black's point is 27 exd4 b3, winning massive amounts of material. a3) 7 ... .Bg4 8 d3 (8 b4!?, as played in Seira- wan-Kriventsov, USA Ch, Seattle 2002, should be answered boldly by 8 ... ttJxb4 9 'iVa4+ ttJc6 10 .r.:tbl .Bc8!, when the paradoxical 11 d4 i.d7! makes it difficult for White to get play for his pawn) 8 ... ttJf6 9 ttJdS O-O looks fine for Black. White has no particularly effective plan, and the normal-looking 10 lIbl is slow, allowing iO ... ttJxdS! 11 cxdS ttJe7 followed by ... c6, which more than equalizes in the centre and is very comfortable for Black. b) The modest 7 h3 can be answered by 7 ... ttJf6, a common-sense move, or by the bolder 7 ... h4!? 8 g4 fS 9 gxfS .ixfS 10 d3 (10 d4 should be considered) iO ... 'iVd7 11 ttJdS, when instead of 11 ... ttJd8 (Karlsson-Lobron, Randers Zonal 1982), Black can play the consistent move

11...O-O-O! (D).

w Obviously Black has chosen a risky side of the board to set up house in, but you should re- member that White's king has no safe haven ei- ther. Here's a sample line: 12 ~bl (12 'iVb3 ttJf6 13 .Bd2 lldf8 140-O-O 'it>b8 is equal, since the tactic IS ttJe7!? 'iVxe7 16 .Bxc6 .Bc8 doesn't accomplish anything) 12 ... ttJce7 13 b4 ttJxdS 14 cxdS W1e7 and Black will simply develop. Af- ter the natural IS e4 .Bd7 16 .Be3, he can get rid of White's best bishop by means of 16 ... 'it>b8 and ... .Bh6. We now return to 7 d4 (D):

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 163

This move sets up an important choice. 7. exd4 In the next game we'll see 7 ... h4. 8lbxd4lbge79lbde2?! White uses this standard way of avoiding ex- changes and strengthening his grip on dS, but it's too passive. Others: a) 9 h3!? lbxd4?! (this obvious move is un- impressive; simply 9 ... O-O or 9 ... ~d7 is better) 10 exd4 lbfS allows White to defend by coun- ter-threat: lllbe4! O-O 12 ~gS! ~d7! 13 ~f6 (not 13 lbf6+?? ~xf6 14 ~xf6 'i!Ve6+, but 13 O-O! lbxd4 14lbf6+ ~xf6 IS ~xf6lbc6 gives White compensation and more for his pawn) 13 ... dS! 14 cxdS ~bS IS ~e2! lbxd4! with chances for both sides. b) There have been a number of games with 9lbxc6. But exchanging the knight that has al- ready moved twice is time-consuming: 9 ... lbxc6 10 h3?! (White prepares O-O, in view of 10 O-O h4) 1O ... ~e6 (or 10 ... O-O) 11 ~a4, Cvetkovic- Raicevic, Vrnjacka Banja 1989. Here Black should take advantage of his faster develop- ment and better pieces to castle and switch to the attack: 11...O-O! 12 ~xc6 (or 12 O-O ~c8 13 'it>h2lbeS) 12 ... bxc6 13 ~xc6 (D). 13 ... i.xc3+! 14 bxc3l:tb8 with threats based upon combinations of moves such as ... 'i!Vf6 and ... .tc8-b7. This is very bad for White. 9 ... h410 O-O The temptation is to query this move, since White seems to be cooperating with the attack. However, White's light squares and pawn on c4 are serious problems, and the alternatives have their own drawbacks. For example, 10 lbf4 lbeS! 11 ~e2 ~g4 12 f3 ~d7 13 e4 gS 14lbfdS lbxdS IS cxdS h3 16 ~f1 g4!, etc.

... hxg3 11 hxg3 ~h3 12 ~xh3 .l:!xh3 13 lbf4 .l:th7 14 c5!? White pitches a pawn to stop the attack. ... ~xc3! 15 bxc3 dxc5 16 'iVf3 'iVd7 17 ~a3 O-O-O! (D) w 18 :adl? But 18 ~xcS lbeS 19 'iVe4 lb7c6 threatens .. .fS and ... gS. 18 ...l be5 19 'iVe4 'iVxdl 20 l:txdl .l:!xdl + 21 'it>g2lb7c622lbh3 Black's attack is overwhelming. A pretty line goes 22 ~xcS fS 23 ~c2 l:.dhl (24 .. .l:t7h2# threatens) 24 g4 .l:!7h2+ 2S 'it>g3l:tgl +! 26 'it>xh2 lbf3+ 27 'it>h3 fxg4#. ... b623 g4 'it>b7 24 'iitg3 f5 25 gxf5 gxf5 26 'iVxf5 l:tg7 + 0-1 Hulak - Almasi Croatian Team Ch, Pula 2001

[diagram]
d6 6lbge2 h5 7 d4 h4 8 d5lbce7 9 e4 f5 (D)

164 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black strikes at the centre while retaining his option of ... hxg3 or ... h3. w 10 -igS 10 lbgl (versus ... h3) is well answered by 1O ... lbf6 11 -igS hxg3 12 hxg3 ':xhl 13 .ixhl Rf7! 14 ~e2 (Korchnoi queries this and sug- gests 14 ~d2 intending -iB) 14 ... ~h8 (the point of Black's 13th move) IS .Bg2 -Bd7 16 O-O-O, Korchnoi-Short, Rotterdam 1990, and now 16 ... 'iYh2 17 Wkn -Bh6 18lbB WkhS is dy- namicallyequal. 10  h3!? 11 -Bf3 This may be less practical than 11 -in be- cause it exposes White to attack. The latter move keeps White in touch with the h3-pawn, which can easily fall. Larsen-L.Karlsson, Co- penhagen 1985 continued 11...lbf6 12 exfS -ixfS (D). w Usually, the bishop capture is preferable if that piece can stay in contact with h3. After all, Black should get some pieces out! Now Larsen suggests driving the bishop back via 13 B, in- tending g4. Black needs to react quickly with 13 ... c6, aiming to isolate White's d-pawn, after which play might go 14 g4 -Bd7 IS cS! lbexdS 16 'iYd3 Rf7 17 cxd6 'iYaS 18 O-O-O -Be6. White owns the important e4-square as a base for a potential attack versus Black's exposed king. Nevertheless, Black is beginning to have his own attacking ideas on the queenside, and we can best call the position unclear. 11 ... lbf6 120-00-0 13 ~d2lbh7! 14 i.e3?! f4! IS gxf4 exf416 -Bd4 (D) Not 16 .Bxf4? gS.

16. . -Bh6! 17 cSlbgS! 18 -ihl

Now a strong way for Black to play it was 18 ... dxcS! 19 -ixcs b6! 20 -Ba3lbf7. Then his knight on f7 both covers d6 and can, at the right moment, dominate play from the outpost on eS. The immediate threat of ... f3 is also a problem, especially since White's bishop on hI would truly be a pathetic sight if White were to defend by 21 B. Botvinnik System: 5 e4

1 c4 eS 2 lbc3 lbc6 3 g3 g6 4 -Bg2 -Bg7 S e4 (D)

As described elsewhere in this book, the for- mation c4/d3/e4 in conjunction with lbge2, g3 and .Bg2 is called the 'Botvinnik System', and it appears throughout the English Opening. We find it in the 3 g3 -Bb4 system of Chapter 4, for example, and on both sides of the Pure Sym- metrical variations in Chapter 7. Let's take a quick overview of the ideas. At first it may seem bizarre for White to close off

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 165

the long diagonal for his favourite piece in the English Opening, the bishop on g2. After all, that's the piece that works in conjunction with b4-b5 to put pressure on Black's queenside, and it is often the best replacement for a knight which is exchanged on d5. To add insult to in- jury, White creates a hole on d4, in fact, a won- derful outpost for his opponent's knight, which is already poised to occupy it! Black also has an easy time developing and castling, and can con- sider preparing the pawn-breaks ... b5 and .. .f5. Finally, it doesn't appear that White will achieve d4, his traditional central advance, for some time. As you might suspect, White has an answer to these objections. On the most basic but im- portant level, he stops Black's main freeing idea ... d5; White has five pieces controlling that square already! Then, when you examine the pawn-structure, you'll see that White has sev- eral attacking methods. He can use the pawn- lever f4, putting pressure on e5 and often threat- ening to play f5 followed by the traditional pawn-storm with g4-g5. Alternatively, White has available straightforward expansion on the queenside with moves such as b4-b5, c5 and a4-a5. Furthermore, Black's most natural at- tacking method involves .. .f5, but if in that case White can play exf5, his bishop on g2 comes to life again! In fact, the set-up with a pawn on e4 and bishop on g2 can be considered a prophy- lactic measure against Black's move .. .f5. The same situation arises with a pawn on e5 and bishop on g7 in the King's Indian Defence. As for that weakness on d4, I have men- tioned elsewhere a recurring theme in chess openings (particularly in modem ones) that giving the opponent outright control of a single central square early in the game is acceptable, provided that there are countervailing advan- tages. There are far too many examples to list, but you might think about, for example: a) the numerous variations in the Sicilian Defence in which Black surrenders the d5- square facing White's pieces on an open file; b) variations of the French Defence in which Black grants White an outpost on e5, also along an open file; c) variations of the Ruy Lopez in which Black plays ... c5 and gives up d5; d) variations of the King's Indian Defence in which White gives Black an outpost on d4; e) isolated queen' s pawn positions from any number of openings, with the outpost in front of the isolated pawn. One mitigating factor in the Botvinnik Sys- tem of the Closed English is that Black's out- post is not on an open file. So it's unlikely that we shall see rooks, for example, occupying d4; moreover, the bishop on g7 has a rather remote chance of getting there soon (although to be fair, White's break with f4 might be answered with ... exf4, changing that equation by freeing Black's g7-bishop). Just as importantly, the d4 outpost isn't as secure as it may look, and in- deed, White's third method of making progress is the advance d4 itself. That's because the move d4 is naturally assisted by the queen on dl, knight on e2, and potentially, a bishop on e3. This results in Black having to keep an eye on his d4 asset. Of course, there are other more concrete considerations, such as the nature of the struc- tural change that takes place when Black puts a piece on d4 and White exchanges it. Issues like these will hopefully be clarified in the exam- ples. P. Taylor - Gallagher British League (4NCL) 200213

[diagram]
lDc6 6 lDge2 lDge7 The most flexible move, in the sense that it retains the option of ... f5 without committing to it. Even the possibility of ... h5 remains via- ble, as shown below. In the game before us, Black will combine the moves ... lDge7 and

166 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

... f5, which has traditionally been the most pop- ular set-up versus the Botvinnik pawn-struc- ture. It's worth mentioning that a plan with ... a6 W and ... b5 is also common, and logical; we'll see that elsewhere in the book.

[diagram]
8 ... f5 9 ttJd5 .te6 10 .te3 is a common move-order, in which 9 ... h6 will be seen in the next game. 9 ttJd5 'iVd710 .te3 f5 11 'iVd2 (D)

These are typical developing moves for both sides. Now White is ready to advance on the queenside by b4-b5, perhaps in conjunction with llac1 and c5. The question is, what is Black to do? If he plays ... lbd4, White has the dual option of lbxd4 followed by .tg5, or .txd4 and placing a knight on f4; one of these two captures will generally yield an advantage. But a retreat by the c6-knight will encourage White to make the thematic break d4. So Black begins by picking the more aggressive course of dou- bling rooks. 11 . 1:[f7 12 f3 This modest nudge of the f-pawn is position- ally ideal, because it frustrates Black's main plans for counterplay. Another logical move is 12 .:tac1, to make c5 a possibility, perhaps af- ter b4-b5. The famous game Benko-Botvinnik, Monte Carlo 1968 illustrates play for both sides that radically differs from our main game: 12 ... l:taf8 13 f4!? (13 b4 f4!? 14 gxf4 .th3 gives Black some interesting counterplay) 13 ... fxe4 14 dxe4 lbc8! (D) (Dvoretsky proposes that 14 ... exf4 15 gxf4 .th3 is also satisfactory, be- cause 16 .txh3 'iVxh3 17 lbxc7lbe5! leads to eventual equality). We've seen this idea before: Black prevents White from simplifying by ttJxe7+, and he has in mind ... lbd8 and ... c6. He is also ready to play ... .th3, because c7 is now defended by the rook on f7. The game continued 15 c5 .th3 16 b4 .txg2 17 ~xg2 exf4 18 gxf4 .l:te8 19 lbg3 (Botvinnik gives 19lbec3) 19 ... h5!? (with the disappearance of the bishop on g2, White's e4- pawn is just enough of a sore spot that Black can scare up play to counter White's space advan- tage) 20 b5, and now Botvinnik suggests that 20 ... ttJd8 was a safe choice, whereas 20 ... h4!? 21 bxc6 bxc6 22lbc3 hxg3 23 hxg3 .txc3 24 'iVxc3 "V/iHe6 would have been about equal. Thus White's set-up with f3 tends to be more popular than the one with f4. 12  .l:tafS 13 .l:tael An instructive game Csom-Gulko, Biel Inter- zonal 1976 is very similar to the text: 13 .l:tac1 ~h8?! (later Jansa played 13 ... lbc8 here, when White has a small advantage) 14 b3 ttJg8 15 exf5! gxf5 16 f4 lbf6 17 lbxf6 .txf6 18 d4! exd4 19lbxd4 ttJxd4 20 .txd4 b6 21 .l:tfel (D).

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 167

White has a near-winning advantage: space, open lines, and play against Black's weakened kingside. Black never had a chance to play ... f4; compare the game. 13 . 'Iti>h814 b3 tbg8 (D) It's hard to find a positive plan; Black may now be intending .. .fxe4 and ... ~h3, to probe the light squares. Again, the retreat 14 ... tbc8, intending perhaps ... tbd8 and ... c6, was better. w 15 exfS! This exchange has become more attractive You can see that White has hindered the mobility of Black's pawns. The move ... e4 will lose a pawn, of course, and ... exf4 is position- ally disastrous, bringing a knight to a wonder- ful outpost in front of an isolated pawn on an open file. But the real key to the position is Black's bishop on e6. Since there is no pros- pect of his f-pawn advancing, it remains cut off from White's kingside; yet that is where it belongs if Black is to have positive play in the position. The upshot is that White has a free hand to build up on the queenside and in the centre while Black lacks a useful strategy. Blocking moves by bishop's pawns often serve the function of limiting the effectiveness of op- posing bishops. For example, the move ... c5 in many variations of the Nimzo-Indian Defence helps to keep White's light-squared bishop in check. Similarly, in a main-line Griinfeld varia- tion with White's centre pawns on d4, e4 and f4, ... f5 limits the range of White's queen's bishop. 16. tbd4 (D) now that 15 ... tbxf5 is not a possible reply. W IS. .. gxfS?! For reasons we'll see shortly, a better recap- ture was 15 ... ~xf5. Nevertheless, White gains a central advantage by 16 d4; for example, 16 ... .Bh3 17 dxe5 tbxe5 18 f4! ~xg2 19 'lti>xg2, Peyrat-Le Quang, Bagneux 2000. After both 19 ... tbg4 20 ~d4 and 19 ... tbc6 20 tbec3 (or even 20 .Bd4! tbxd4 21 tbxd4), White has more space and he can go to work down the e-file.

16 f4 (D)

17 fxeS!? Not a bad move at all, but 17 tbxd4! exd4 18 B ~f2 (D) is the normal transformation of this structure, clearly favouring White, who still limits the bishop on e6. Then the pawn on d4 will have to be de- fended, and White can attack on the queenside and along the e-file; for example, 18 ... c5 (19 tbxc7! was threatened, and White is doing su- perbly after 18 ... c6 19 .:te2! or here 19 tbc7 ~xc7 20 l:he6) 19 .:te2 ne8 20 l:!.fel tbf621 tbxf6 ~xf6, with either 22 ~xb7 or 22 g4!. 17 .. tbxe2+ 18l::txe2 dxeS 19 d4

168 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

One reason that this advance is strong is that ... exd4 will isolate Black's f-pawn and give away that wonderful f4-square again. 19. f4! (D) The move Black has wanted to play all along. 19 ... c6? 20 dxe5! cxd5 21 cxd5 wins for White, not only positionally but tactically, because af- ter a capture on e6, i..d5 will follow. w 20 gxf4 iLxd5 21 iLxd5 exf4 22 iLxf4 'i!Vg4+ 23 l:!.g2l:!.xf4! The point. 24 l:!.xg4l:!.xg4+ 25 iLg2 iLxd4+ 26 'i!Vxd4+ Itxd427 Itxf8 The end of an eight-move forced sequence. White was apparently in a state of shock at the tum of events, because this well-played game ended abruptly: 27 .. l:.dl + 112_112 Nevertheless, White still has the very real advantage of bishop vs knight on the open board, which is all the more significant because of the simplified situation. He should definitely play on; for example, 28 i..fl .l:ta1 (28 ... '&ti>g7 29 .l:tb8 b6 30 .l:tb7 ttJh6!? holds forth some hope) 29 .1:4f7 b6 (29 ... .l:txa2?? loses a piece to 30 iLd3! - remember that one) 30 .l:txc7 .l:txa2 31 i..d3 ttJf6 32 .l:tf7, etc. Kharlov - V. Popov Kazan 2001

[diagram]
d6 6 ttJge2 ttJge7 7 d3 O-O 8 O-O f5 (D) This has been the starting point for many a struggle. But even the primitive move 8 ... ttJd4!? seems playable; for example, 9 ttJxd4 exd4 10 ttJe2 .l:tb8!? (White seems better, if not by much, after lO ... a5!? 11 i..d2 ttJc6 12 ~c2 i..d7 13 f4 f5, Ziiger-Gallagher, Pontresina 2000) 11 b4 b5 12 cxb5 .l:txb5 13 i..d2 c5! 14 bxc5 dxc5 15 it'c2 it'b6 16 .l:tab1 i..d7 17 .l:txb5 ~xb5 18 .l:tbl 'ii'a6 19 ttJf4 I:tc8 and the game was level in Miezis-Davies, Dhaka 2001. w 9 ttJd5 h6 This direct move has had reasonable suc- cess. Black delays ... i..e6 in order to prevent 10 i..g5, and simultaneously anticipates the use- fulness of ... g5. 10 iLe3 g5!? 11 ttJxe7+ ttJxe7 12 exf5 ttJxf5

(D)

13 ttJc3 If White saves the bishop, Black gains easy equality by 13 i..d2 c6 14 ttJc3 i..e6 having in mind an eventual ... d5. 13 .. c6 There's also nothing wrong with 13 ... ttJxe3 14fxe3 l:t.xfl+ 15 ~xfl c616 'iWe2i..e617.i:Ifl 'i!Ve7, equalizing.

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGliSH 169

w 14 'u'cl iLe6 15 b4!? liJxe3 16 fxe3 l:txf1+ 17 ~f1 ~d7! 18 ~gl d5 This might have been preceded by 18 ... .l:.f8, when Black's two bishops should count for something. At any rate, the opening is over and Black's treatment of it seems a good way to ob- tain promising play. Roca - Peralta Pinamar 2005

[diagram]
d6 6 liJge2 f5 7 d3 liJf6 7 ... liJh6 wilfully ignores the central squares, but has a good pedigree. The only critical at- tempt for a large advantage is 8 h4! (D).

Then Psakhis-Svidler, Haifa 1995 continued 8 .. .fxe4!? (8 ... liJf7!? 9 h5 g5 10 exf5 iLxf5 11 .Bd5 h6 12 iLe3 "iVd7 was about equal in Por- tisch-Sax, Tilburg 1979) 9 iLg5 'it'd7 10 iLxe4 liJf5 11 liJd5 h6 12 iLd2 (not 12 liJf6+? iLxf6 13 iLxf6 'u'f8) 12 ... O-O 13 g4!? (trying to upset the equilibrium, as there is nothing fundamen- tally wrong with Black's position) 13 ... liJfd414 liJxd4liJxd415 g5! 'ilVf7! (15 ... c616 gxh6!) 16 i.e3 iLf5 17 h5!? gxh5 (17 ... i.xe4 18 dxe4 gxh5 19 g6liJf3+ 20 Re2 'ikd7 may even favour Black) 18 g6!? ~d7 19 ~xh5liJc2+ with wild complications.

[diagram]
w 9h3!? A standard move, preventing ... liJg4 in sev- erallines and thus opening the way for an effec- tive iLe3. 9 liJd5 is another main line. Then 9 ... iLe6 10 iLg5 ~d7 is normal, but a promis- ing solution is 9 .. .fxe4 10 dxe4liJxd5 11 cxd5 (Black's last two moves had long been thought to give White both space and an attack on the c-file, but he has an idea) 1 L..liJd4!? (D). w White seems to have the advantage if he ex- changes knights and attacks d4, but Kosten calls 12liJxd4 exd4 13 b3 c5 14 dxc6 bxc6 15 i.b2 'ifb6 unclear. You can see the dynamic

170 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

characteristics of the position when White goes after the d-pawn: 16 'ilVd2 iNe6 17l:!.adl c5 with the idea 18 e5? dxe5! 19 iNxa8 .l:txa8 and White's light squares are barely defensible. So in Mastrovasilis-Nikolaidis, Korinthos 2002, White tried 12 iNe3!? iNg4 13 iNxd4 exd4 14 ~d3, when 14 ... iNxe2 15 'iixe2 is fairly level. Black might even be able to im- prove upon this with 12 ... liJf3+ 13 ~hl iNg4!; for example, 14 h3 (14 ~b3 liJh4!) 14 ... iNd7 15 liJg 1 liJd4! 16 lIc1 c5 17 dxc6 bxc6 18 liJe2 c5. 9 .. f4! (D) Black commits to an aggressive and position- ally-based pawn sacrifice that you will some- times see in analogous Closed Sicilian lines. 9 ... iNe6 is the traditional move. w 10 gxf4 The tactics and their positional basis are not only characteristic of this variation and other openings, they're instructive. It's pretty easy to see that White needs to react immediately before Black gets to play ... g5 and then pursue his at- tack by, for example, ... 'iie8-h5 or ... h5 and ... g4. In fact, if Black gets ... g5 in, White is no longer able to alter the pawn-structure in a productive manner. There's an old saying about countering flank attacks with central action, but in this case 10 d4? actually weakens White's dark squares and burns up a tempo; then Black has a pleasant choice between 1O ... liJh5, 1O ... f3 11 iNxf3 iNxh3 and 1O .. .fxg3 11 fxg3 exd4 12 liJxd4 liJxd4 13 ~xd4 iNe6!, with pressure and the e5 outpost.

10. .. liJh5 11 f5

11 fxe5 'iYh4 will at least win Black's mate- rial back as White tries to defend his king. However, l1liJd5 looks like a better defensive try. Then Black plunges ahead with 11.. JWh4!

w 12 f5! (l2liJxc7? exf4! 13 f3 iNxh3! 14liJxa8 liJd4! wins right away because of the idea of 15 ... liJxe2+ and 16 ... iNd4+) 12 ... gxf5! 13liJg3! (13liJxc7? f4 14liJxa8? - but otherwise h3 falls - 14 ... f3 and Black's attack is simply winning) 13 ... liJxg3 14 fxg3 'ilVxg3 15 liJxc7 l:i.b8 16 ~f3!?, Balashov-Dubinsky, Moscow 1999, and Black can play 16 ... 'ilVg6 with an attack, or 16 .. :~xf3 17 l:i.xf3liJd4 18l:i.fl f4, etc. 11 ... gxf5 (D)

11...~h4 is apparently also equal after 12

liJg3! liJxg3 13 fxg3 'ilVxg3 14l:i.f3 'iVh4 15 liJb5 liJd4. Instead, M.Gurevich-Maiwald, Bundes- liga 2002/3 went 12 'iVd2? h6 (or 12 ... gxf5 13 ~g5 ~xg5 14 iNxg5 fxe4 15 dxe4liJf4) 13 f3 gxf5 14 ~el 'iYxel 15l:i.xelliJb4 16l:i.dlliJc2 17 ~bl c6 18 iNd2 and now the easiest course was 18 ... f4! 19 b4liJe3 with an obvious advan- tage. w

THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 171

12 ttJg3?! 12 exfS! roughly equalizes after 12 ... .i.xfS 13 ttJg3! ttJxg3 14 fxg3 ~d7 IS .i.dS+ ~h8 16 B g4 .i.g6, when e4 is a nice square to put White's pieces on, although Black does get the f-file. 12 ... ttJf4! 13 .i.xf4 exf4 14 ttJxfS .i.xfS IS exfSl:txfS 16 .i.e4 This is White's best continuation, because 16 'ithl f3! 17 .i.xf3 ~h4 18 .i.g2 ~af8 pre- pares attacks by ... ttJd4 and even ... Itf3!. Thus 19 'tW g4! ~xg4 20 hxg4l:txf2, and Black stands better.

16.  l:tgS+ (D)

w 17~h2 Now Black let White reorganize by playing 17 ... .i.eS 18l:tgl ~h8 19 .l:lxgS ~xgS 20 ~g4, with approximate equality. 17 ... ttJd4! is more effective, based upon the line 18 .i.xb7? (18 l:tgl c6 is just a little better for Black) 18 ... J::!.b8 19 .i.dS+ ~h8 with threats of ... l:txb2 and ... f3. This game shows typical tactics that follow .. .f4 versus a g3 fianchetto, as well as the dynamic potential hiding within a seemingly quiet line. Serper - Chernin Groningen peA 1993

[diagram]
d6 6 d3 (D) It can be argued that White's move is less ac- curate than 6 ttJge2 because of the line Black chooses in the game. Both moves have their positive and negative points, however, and of- ten the move d3 will already have been played before this point - on move S, for example. 6 .. hS!? Black employs a dynamic move that will ap- peal to those who really want to unbalance the play and avoid slow positions. Attacking by means of ... hS has been a favourite at high lev- els of play, and runs counter to the notion that Black is stuck with purely technical approaches in these Closed English variations. Black's first idea is obvious: to play ... h4 and attack the kingside. Perhaps ... hxg3 or ... h3 might follow, but in any case White is discour- aged from castling and needs to think about the disposition of his kingside. One of the less ob- vious points about 6 ... hS can be seen by com- paring the following game: 6 ... ttJd4!? 7 ttJge2 .i.g4 8 h3! (this move isn't at White's disposal in our main game) 8 ... .i.f3! (not 8 ... ttJf3+?? 9 Wfl; and 8 ... .i.xe2 9 ttJxe2 ttJxe2 10 'iVxe2 gives up the bishop-pair in a position where pawn-breaks like f4 and b4/cS are likely to hap- pen; even the abject iO ... cS won't exempt Black from lengthy defence) 9 .i.xf3 ttJxf3+ 10 ~fl (White's king will be safe on g2, and Black's knight will get chased back) iO ... ttJe7 11 ~g2 ttJd4 12 ttJxd4 exd4 13 ttJdS (D). This is Kasparov-E.Plihtz, Munich (blitz) 2002; White has a modest advantage. When Black has this 'dead point' on d4, his bishop on g7 has few prospects, and White can usually get good play by working around the pawn by playing f4 and/or b4. Here 13 ... ttJxdS 14 cxdS may be best, but gives White some c- file pressure. 7h4 White can also try 7 h3!? h4 (7 ... ttJd4 8 ttJge2 ttJxe2 and 9 "iVxe2 .i.e6 or 9 ttJxe2 ttJf6

10 O-O .i.e6 is a dull approach, but probably

very close to equalizing) 8 g4 fS 9 gxfS gxfS 10

172 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

liJdS!? (10 exfS i.xfS and ... 'iVd7 with a timely ... O-O-O and ... liJd4 is easy for Black to play) 1O ... liJce7! (seizing the chance to get ... c6 in) 11 i.gS c6 12 liJxe7 liJxe7 13 liJf3 ~aS+ 14 <t>f1!? liJg6 ISliJd2 f4! (now Black gets rid of his bad bishop) 16 i.n <t>f7 17 liJb3 'iVc7 18 i.g4 i.f6 19 i.xf6 Rxf6, Suba-Grigore, Timisu de Sus 1998. This looks equal; the position might even become completely blocked. 7  liJd4 SliJce2! An odd-looking move, but White wants to get rid of the knight on d4, and 8 liJge2 i.g4! is a real bother. White can no longer play h3 as Kasparov did, and so must agree to 9 ... liJf3+, unless he wants to cop out by 9 ~a4+ i.d7 10 'iVdl i.g4 (1O ... liJe6!?) 11 ~a4+, etc. S . liJe6! (D) Black retains control of d4 and clears the way for the useful move ... c6. 8 ... liJxe2 9liJxe2 would leave White a tempo or two ahead in de- velopment in comparison with normal lines. w 9liJf3 9 i.e3 liJf6 10 f3 is solid-looking, intending 'iVd2 and an early d4. But the move is also slow and Black can act quickly in the centre by 1O ... c6, so that 11 d4?! exd4 12 liJxd4 can be met by 12 .. :~aS+! 13 'it>f2liJxd4 14 i.xd4 i.e6 with the idea IS b3 cS! 16 i.e3 liJd7!. 9 .. liJf610 liJg5 0-011 O-O (D) After II liJxe6 i.xe6 12 i.gS 'iVd7, White has achieved nothing, Chemin-Karpov, Tilburg 1992.

11 . .l:1eS!? The easiest way to equality is 11...c6!, when White's only ambitious move, 12 f4 ?!, seems to favour Black after 12 ... ~b6+ 13 'it>hlliJg4 14 'iVel liJcs and ... as. 12 f4!? liJxg5 13 hxg5liJg4 14 <t>h1 The most consistent move is 14 fS, but 14 ... c6! IS f6 i.f8 offers White nothing in the way of a follow-up. 14  c615liJc3 (D)

[diagram]
THREE KNIGHTS AND CLOSED ENGLISH 173

Black has a good alternative in 15 ... exf4, which opens up the centre at a time when White can't successfully advance his pawns, so that after 16 .Bxf4 (16 gxf4 ii.d4 17 ~f3 "iYb6) 16 ... ii.e6, Black can afford the time to expand upon the queenside, perhaps by 17 ~d2 a6 18 .l:!.acl b5. 16 gxf6 ~xf6 17 fxe5 ~xe5 18 ii.f4 'iVd4 The opening has turned out well for Black, and I'll leave the game at this point. In general 6 ... h5 promises equality, and it appears that White needs to play conservatively so as not to expose his kingside. Ree - Van der Wiel Ter Apel1987

[diagram]
e56lbge2 White's move-order with lbge2 before d3 can be thought of as maintaining all of his op- tions, including playing d4 in one move. 6 ... h5!? Black probes White's position in the manner of the previous game. An alternative strategy begins with an early ... a6 and ... b5, chipping away at White's centre. This can be played in conjunction with ... lbge7 or ... lbf6. 7h3

7 h4 has been met by 7 ... ii.e6 and 7 ... lbge7,

but the most independent idea is 7 ... lbh6!? 8 d3 O-O. The knight on the rim has some reach (g4 and f5), but it can also serve to defend g5 from f7. On a specific level, Black will be able to re- spond to lbd5 by moving his own knight to e7 and playing ... c6. The costs to Black are vari- ous, but an obvious general problem is that Black's knight on h6 isn't in contact with any central squares, particularly d4 and d5. Por- tisch-Gulko, Biel Interzonal 1976 went 9 f3 (this covers g4 and thus prepares ii.e3 and d4) 9 ... ii.e6 10 lbd5 (D). Here 10 ... lbe7! followed by ... c6 is the obvi- ous way to kick the knight out of d5, and should suffice to get Black out of the opening with minimal or no disadvantage. The most critical

line would be 11 d4 exd4 12 lbxd4 ii.xd5 13 cxd5 c5! 14 dxc6 lbxc6 15 lbxc6 bxc6 with enough pressure on the b-file and long diagonal to counter White's territorial superiority. The moves ... 1:i.b8 and .. .f5 might follow. 7 .. h4 7 ... ii.e6!? is a flexible move, transposing to O'Cinneide-Sadler, European Clubs Cup, Reyk- javik 1999: 8 d3 h4 9 g4lbf6 10 lbd5lbd7 11 ii.e3!? (11 f4 exf4 12lbdxf4 doesn't do much, as lbxe6 strengthens Black's centre) 11...lbd4 12 "iYd2 c6 13lbdc3 "fIe7 with equal chances.

8 g4 f5!? 9 gxf5 gxf5 10 exf5!

So as not to permit .. .f4. 10. ii.xf5 11 d3 ii.h6!? Black trades his bad bishop and isn't too wor- ried about dark-square weaknesses because he intends to castle queenside. However, 11..:iVd7! 12 ii.e3 ii.h6 is a more accurate move-order, discouraging White's idea in the next note. 12 ii.xh6 ltxh6 13 ~d2 13 'iVb3! was better, forcing Black to defend for the moment while preparing O-O-O. 13 . .J::i.g6 14 ii.e4 ~d7 15 O-O-O O-O-O 16 I:tdgl ? A mistake. 16 "iYe3 and even 16 ii.xc6!? "fIxc6 17 d4 improve. 16  I:txg1 + 17 lbxgl Now 17 ... ii.xe4! would have been very strong: 18 dxe4 (18 lbxe4 d5 19 cxd5 "iYxd5 20 b3 ~d4!) 18 ... "fIf7 19 b3 l:tf8 20 f3 lbd4 with a dominant game.

7 Pure Symmetrical Variation

lc4c5(D) w The move 1...c5 introduces the Symmetrical English, which some think is Black's safest way to counter 1 c4. Positions within the pur- view of Symmetrical Variation theory can arise by a whole array of move-orders extending out to seven or more moves. That is, ... c5 (or even c4) may not arise until after various other moves have been played, but the resulting posi- tion will be one or another variation of the Sym- metrical. Apart from the English Opening proper with 1 c4, it's important to realize that there are a number of ways to get to a Symmetrical Eng- lish via the move 1 tbf3. In that case, both sides jockey to get their preferred variation. For ex- ample, the following lines and sub-lines may arise: a) 1 tbf3 c5 (note that this move-order al- lows White to playa Sicilian Defence by 2 e4)

[diagram]
.Jib7 4 O-O tbf6 5 c4 can lead to systems with ei- ther ... e6 or ... g6) 3 .Jig2 (3 c4) 3 ... tbf6 4 c4 e6 5 tbc3 (5 d4 cxd4 6 tbxd4) 5 ... d5 6 cxd5 (6 d4) 6 ... tbxd5. b) 1 tbf3 tbf6 2 c4 (or 2 g3 g6 3 .Jig2 .Jig7 4 O-O O-O 5 d3 c5 6 c4) 2 ... e6 (or 2 ... c5; for exam- ple, 3 d4 cxd4 4 tbxd4; or 2 ... b6 3 tbc3 c5) 3 d4 c5 4 tbc3 cxd4 5 tbxd4, and so forth. In practice, symmetry in the opening can de- velop into almost any kind of situation, but on a fundamental level we shall want to know if the game will become simplified, perhaps even sterile, or whether breaking symmetry will pro- duce rich and complex positions. In the English Opening, this issue arises most often after the introductory moves to this chapter: 2 tbc3 tbc6 3 g3 g6 4 .Jig2 .Jig7 (D) w For better or worse, I long ago dubbed this position the 'Pure Symmetrical Variation', to distinguish it from lines in which White or Black breaks the symmetry within the first few moves. Before entering into games, ideas and analysis, let me make a few general remarks. As much or more so than in any other varia- tion in the English Opening, this one runs the risk of 'excessive' simplification, mainly from White's point of view, since he has to figure out what to do about copycat moves, whereas Black can almost always find a reasonable way to un- balance the position. For example, play will sometimes peter out in the line 5 e3 e6 6 tbge2 tbge7 7 O-O O-O, when a number of grandmaster draws have resulted from 8 d4 cxd4 9 tbxd4 tbxd4 10 exd4 d5 11 cxd5 tbxd5 12 tbxd5 exd5. As we shall see below, however, White has some refreshing ways to deviate. In the line beginning with 5 a3, the game sometimes

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 175

continues 5 ... a6 6 .l:tb 1 nb8 7 b4 cxb4 8 axb4 b5 9 cxb5 axb5, and while it is certainly still possi- ble to create an imbalance, quite a few top play- ers will stop the clocks at this point (or shortly thereafter). That may be a matter of prior inten- tion, however, and some grandmasters believe that if White enforces a well-timed break in symmetry, he can still get a promising game. At any rate, you will find that the databases are crammed full of games with 5 e3 and 5 a3. And of course Black needn't go along with any of this; in fact, he can break symmetry after any of White's 5th moves. Some simple examples out of many are 5 e3 e5, 5 e3 ttJf6, 5 a3 e6 and 5 a3 ttJf6 (see below). Nevertheless, this perceived difficulty has contributed to the popularity of 5 ttJf3, which, as we shall see, can't be effectively imitated in the main lines without penalty. On the other hand, 5 ttJf3 offers Black a range of dynamic possibilities based upon the fact that, as in some variations with 1 c4 e5, developing his knight to e7 keeps his bishop trained on d4, and can give him opportunities which White lacks; for ex- ample, the move .. .f5. Having said all that, let's move on to some actual variations and examples. Romanishin - Beliavsky USSR Ch, Leningrad 1974

[diagram]
b3!? This move is slow, and not especially dan- gerous, but it can lead into instructive posi- tions in which typical themes are thrown into relief. White has the simple idea of i.b2 and later moving his knight from c3 to exchange the important g7-bishop; then he may be able to exploit Black's resulting dark-square vul- nerabilities on the kingside. Often the move f4 will be used to reinforce pressure along the al-h8 diagonal. Naturally, it's not so easy, and Black has a number of common-sense rejoin- ders. Another modest move is 5 d3. White is waiting to see what Black plays, and will usu- ally respond by transposing into another sys- tem via e3, e4 or ttJf3. A unique plan is 5 ... e6 6 i.xc6!? (D), as in Larsen-Markeluk, Buenos Aires 1991.

Regardless of Black's recapture, the point is to immobilize Black's centre pawns (thus keep- ing the bishop on c8 inactive) and then exploit Black's dark-square weaknesses to prove that the knight-pair is superior to Black's bishops. Thus the battle revolves about a successful ... e5: a) Black can capture towards the centre with 6 ... bxc6, when 7 ttJf3 e5! is the structure that Black is after. Notice that in that case, White doesn't even get the d5-square for a knight, as he often does versus a ... c5/ ... d6/ ... e5 formation. So White has reason to play 7 f4!?, restraining Black's centre and targeting dark squares; for example, 7 ... ttJe7 8 ttJf3 O-O 9 O-O d6, when White's most ambitious plan begins with 10 e4, trying for a timely e5, or even d4. b) The game continued 6 ... dxc6 7 f4! (again, 7 ttJf3 e5! lets Black's bishop escape) 7 ... ttJe7 8 ttJf3 ttJf5 9 e4!? ttJd4 10 e5 O-O 11 ttJe4 f6 12 exf6 ttJxf3+ 13'ilVxf3 i.xf6 14 ttJxf6+ 'ilVxf6 15 'iVe2 (White tries to prevent ... e5, but it's not so easy) 15 .. Jld8 16 i.e3 b6 17 O-O-O (it might seem as though 17 i.f2 followed by 18 O-O-O was better, with an apparent bind on e5; how- ever, 17 ... e5! 18 fxe5 'ilVg5 keeps affairs bal- anced) 17 ... e5!. This frees Black's bishop and equalizes. Both sides have weaknesses, and in spite of the opposite-coloured bishops, neither player has the firepower to conduct a winning attack against proper defence. We now return to 5 b3 (D): 5 . ttJf6 The moves 5 ... d6 and 5 ... e5 are fully play- able, and even 5 ... i.xc3!? 6 dxc3 d6 has been played, for which you might compare Larsen- Markeluk from the last note; then White does well to continue by e4 and ttJge2. The most

176 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

interesting alternative is S ... e6, when White's strategy is illustrated by 6 iLb2 0,ge7 7 Wic1!? (7 h4 h6 8 ~1!? d6 9 0,e4 eS 10 'iWd3!?) 7 ... d6 8 0,dS !?, but Black can simply play 8 ... eS! 9 d3 O-O with no real problems. 6 iLb2 O-O 7 0,h3!? White would like to play 0,f4 and control the crucial dS-square, clamping down on dS. By contrast, 7 0,f3 dS! equalizes; for example, af- ter 8 0,xdS 0,xdS 9 iLxg7 ~xg7 10 cxdS ~xdS, Black has more space and prevents d4. This standard sequence arises on both sides of the board in an array of variations. 7 . e5 Black in tum prevents 0,f4. Actually, 7 ... dS! (D) can be played to good effect because it takes advantage of the knight's position on h3. This is a common theme in the Symmetrical English (and in the Reversed Sicilian, for that matter; see the 1 c4 eS 2 0,c3 d6 3 d4lines). w There can follow 8 0,xdS (8 cxdS 0,xdS 9 O-O iLg4) 8 ... 0,xdS 9 iLxg7 r:j;xg7 10 cxdS iLxh3! 11 iLxh3 'iixdS 120-0 %:.ad8 13 d3 b6 with a nice space advantage and central pres- sure to counter White's bishop-versus-knight edge.

8 O-O d6 9 f4!?

White tries to open the f-file while putting pressure on eS; nevertheless, this is fairly loos- ening. 9 ...iLd7 10 e3 iLxh3!? An exchange which prepares central expan- sion at the cost of the bishop-pair. Less commit- tal would be 1O ... iLg4 or 1O ... l1e8. 11 iLxh3 exf4 12 gxf4!? The move most consistent with White's em- phasis on piece-play would be 12 l1xf4, al- though Black seems to come out all right after 12 ... dS!; for example, 13 iLg2 d4 14 0,a4!? dxe3 IS dxe3 'iie7 16 'iif3 0,hS. 12 ... d5! 13 iLg2 (D)

13 ... dxc4!? Black might be better off advancing his pawn by 13 ... d4, when 14 0,dS dxe3 IS dxe3 0,xdS 16 cxdS iLxb2 17 dxc6 bxc6! is balanced. 14 bxc4 'iWd7 15 l1bll1ad8 16 0,d5 0,xd5 17 cxd5 0,e7 18 iLxg7 ~xg7 19 e4 White has two unopposed central pawns that need to be challenged quickly. 19 ... h6 Versus the natural 19 .. .fS 20 d3 b6, 21 'iib3 has the idea a4-aS; Black would be tied down by having to prevent eS. 20 l:!.b3!? c4 21l:r.c3 f5 22 d3! b5! 22 ... cxd3? is met by 23 eS with the idea 23 ... 0,xdS? 24l:txd3. 23 dxc4 fxe4 24 iLxe4 bxc4 25l1xc4l1f6 26 'iVd4 ~f7 (D)

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 177

w 27 l:1c5? White can use his powerful d-pawn by means of 27 ~eS! with the idea 27 ... ~d6 28 l:1c7 l:td7 29 l:1xd7 ~xd7 30 ~hl intending lkl. 27  ~d6 28 l:1c3 l:1d7 29 l:1d3lL'lf5 Now Black's outpost and his eventual play against White's isolated pawns counterbalance White's passed d-pawn and his prospects of queenside penetration. The game was eventu- ally drawn. The Traditional 5 e3

[diagram]
(D)

This was originally the most popular version of the Pure Symmetrical variation. White's im- mediate intentions seem obvious: he wants to play d4, usually in conjunction with lL'lge2, es- tablishing control over more territory. The strat- egy of a3 and b4 arises from time to time, but less often than in other Symmetrical English lines because of White's emphasis on the d4 break. Sometimes, S e3 is used as an introduc- tion to systems with d3/e3, particularly if Black plays an early ... eS. Black can pursue differing strategies, so I'll try to describe his plans in the games and notes. Overall, even though S e3 can yield an unbal- anced game, it tends to be dryer than other vari- ations of the English Opening. The temptation for an author is to skip over such lines and con- centrate upon more exciting material, of which indeed there is plenty in this book. However, you should get an understanding of the Sym- metrical variations that develop more slowly, in order to decide whether this method of play ap- peals to you with either colour. 5 . e6 (D) w Benko - Geller Wijk aan Zee 1969 This symmetrical move limits Black's op- portunities to cause trouble for his opponent, but in turn offers less leeway for White to pull off surprises. In fact, S ... e6 is one of the main reasons that White hesitates to play S e3, espe- cially against a lower-rated player, because he feels that it runs the danger of wasting a game in which he has the advantage of the white pieces. But this fear is overrated, and White can still pose his opponent numerous difficulties. In addition, Black can break symmetry when he finds it attractive to do so. This variation is helpful to examine because it gives insight into the technical play that the English Opening can

178 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lead to, and how careful we should be before we proclaim certain positions 'drawn'. 6 tLIge2 tLIge7 (D) w 70-0 a) A common way to try to keep some pieces on is 7tL1f4. Then Black can imitate by 7 ... tLIfS or play 7 ... O-O and meet 8 M!? by 8 ... h6. A clever try to mix things up was 7 ... a6 8 lIbl bS! of M.Gurevich-Kasimdzhanov, Baturni (rapid) 2001, when Kosten justifies the gambit with his analysis 9 cxbS axbS 10 tLIxbS O-O! 11 tLIc3 .Ba6 12 d3 dS. b) White can play around with move-orders and transpositions by 7 d4 cxd4 8 tLIxd4 dS (8 ... tLIxd4 9 exd4 dS 10 cxdStLlxdS 11 0-00-0 12 'it'b3 is seen in the next game) 9 cxdStLlxdS (9 ... exdS 100-00-0 11 ~b3 transposes to our main game) 10 tLIxdS tLIxd4 11 tLIc3!? tLIc6 12 'iixd8+ tLIxd8 13 .Bd2. By not castling, White has managed to gain just a little time for devel- opment, which may not mean too much but makes Black play accurately. The game An- dersson-Miles, Tilburg 1981 continued 13 ... O-O (or 13 ... .Bd7 first) 14l::!.c1 .Bd7 IS O-O .Bc6 16 l:tc2 .Bxg2 17 ~xg2tL1c6 18tL1e4l:tfd8 19 .Bc3 l:tac8 (19 ... l:tdS!) 20 .Bxg7 Rxg7 21l::!.fc1 with a slight advantage that ought to be manageable for Black after, say, 21...l:tc7 22tL1cS '!J.e7. Not everyone will want to play this way, with either colour! 7  O-O 8 d4 cxd4 9tL1xd4 9 exd4 is passive, and can lead to equality in several manners; e.g., 9 ... dS 10 cxdStLlxdS 11 tLIxdS exdS 12 .Be3 .Bg4 13 .:tel is dead equal, Botvinnik-Gligori6, Hastings 1961/2. 9 ... dS This is often considered more accurate than 9 ... tLIxd4, which we'll see in the next game. 10 cxdS exdS!? Freeing Black's c8-bishop by means of this recapture was originally considered to grant easy equality, but it may be somewhat inferior to the two alternatives. In the next game we'll look at, by transposition, the positions after 1O ... tLIxd4 11 exd4 tLIxdS and 1O ... tLIxdS 11 tLIxdS. 11 'iib3! (D)

Nothing much seems to be going on here, but in fact, White is trying to unbalance the posi- tion in a way that causes Black some problems, potentially even tactical ones. Obviously, White wants to capture on dS, and he has cleared dl for his rook. On the downside, his own d-pawn hangs after an exchange on that square. 11 . tLIxd4 After 1l....Bxd4!? 12 exd4 tLIxd4, 13 'it'dl recovers the pawn and gains the bishop-pair. In that case White has a modest advantage. 12 exd4 tLIfS 12 ... tLIc6 13 .Be3! tLIxd4 14 .Bxd4 .Bxd4 IS tLIxdS is better for White, whose rooks rush to the open files. And 12 ... .Bxd4 has a few good answers, such as 13 .igS, but the most direct one is 13 .l:r.dl 'iib6 14 'it'xb6 .Bxb6 IS .igS!, when Black must choose between some awk- ward options; for example, IS ... f6 16 .Bh6l:te8 17 tLIxdS with great pressure. Simple positions are not always simple to play! 13 ~xdS ~xdS 14 tLIxdS tLIxd4 15 .igS!

(D)

It may seem odd that in a symmetrical posi- tion with the centre totally liquidated, White

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 179

can have a significant advantage. Here, remark- ably, it is close to a winning one. He is taking over the dark squares and has a slight lead in development that creates tactical threats. 15 ... i.h3 This is a good idea in principle, to get rid of the monster bishop on g2. Imitating White's play by 15 ... i.g4? fails to 16lbf6+ i.xf6 17 i.xf6, and if 17 ... lbf3+?, simply 18 Whl. 16l:tad1 16 i.xh3?! lbf3+ 17 Rg2 lbxg5 18 .l:.ac1 lbxh3 19 Rxh3 may look promising for a mo- ment, but White doesn't have anything after 19 ... l:tfd8 20 l:tfd1 Rf8. 16  i.xg217 Rxg2lbe6 In view of what happens, Geller suggested 17 ... lbc6, but then White maintains the more aggressive posture after 18l:tfe1 or 18 b4!, both of which create serious defensive problems for Black. 18 i.e7 (D)

18 . l:tfc8 After 18 ... l:tfe8?! 19 lbf6+ i.xf6 20 i.xf6, White's bishop is a huge piece, and will easily outweigh the knight, both at the moment and in any minor-piece ending with pawns on both sides of the board. 19lbf6+ Rh8 20 l:td7 b6 (D) The remarkable thing is how, throughout this whole game, Black is never able to work his way out of these seemingly inconsequential difficulties. Here 20 ... lbc5 would solve every- thing if the tactic 21 i.xc5l:txc5 22lbe4 didn't gain material or otherwise win. For example, 22 ... l:tc2 23 l:txb7 (or 23 l:txf7 l:txb2 24l:tdl! l:tf8 25 l:Ie7 and White's rooks double on the 7th rank) 23 ... .l:.xb2 24l:txf7 l:txa2 25l:td1l:te8 26l:tdd7! h5 27 l:txg7 l:txe4 28l:txg6. w 21 l:tfd1l:tc2 22 l:t1d2l:txd2 23l:txd2 lbf8 To prevent l:td7. At first, 23 ... l:tc8 24 l:td7 .l:.c7 (D) may look better. w But as Benko says, "it allows White to dem- onstrate one major flaw of the black position:

180 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the second player is, in effect, a king down! Thus, White's monarch would decisively pene- trate into the enemy position after 25 .l:txc7 ttJxc7 26 ~f3 ttJe6 27 ~e4."

24 b3 l:f.c8 25 l:f.d6! h5 26 a4 ttJh7 27 ttJd5

.Be5 28l:f.d7 .l:lc2 29 ttJe3 l:f.a2 29 ... l:f.c3 30 ttJc4 traps the bishop in the middle of the board, leaving only 30 ... .Bf6 31 .Bxf6+ ttJxf6 32 ~xf7 ttJe4 33 nxa7 :txb3 34 h4 .l:b4 35 ttJe5, etc. 30 .l:lxa7 .Bd4 31 Rf3 i::.b2 32 b4 White won easily. Andersson - Gheorghiu Moscow 1981

[diagram]
e6 For the record, 5 ... .Bxc3 is playable, mainly because White's pawn on e3 gets in his way. If you're interested, compare my comments on 5 d3 e6 6 .Bxc6 in the first game of this chapter. 6 ttJge2 ttJge7 7 O-O O-O 8 d4 cxd4 9 ttJxd4 ttJxd4 We saw 9 ... d5 in the previous game. Theory prefers this knight swap. 10 exd4 d511 cxd5 ttJxd5 (D) w 12 'iVb3!? Most masters have considered this the best way to play for a win, but it's definitely not the onlyone. In Ivanchuk-Kramnik, Amber Rapid, Monte Carlo 1995, Ivanchuk posed a few apparently in- significant positional problems when he played simply 12 ~el!. It's a tribute to the game of chess that such a reserved move can cause real trouble! Indeed, White has the kind of position from which Kramnik himself squeezes out wins, although not without small mistakes by the op- ponent. The game went 12 ... iVb6! (nothing else seems very good: 12 ... ttJe7 13 .Bg5 h6 14 .Bf4! 'iixd4 15 'iixd4 .Bxd4 16 .Bxh6l:f.d8 17l:f.adl is awkward for Black; and 12 ... h6?! 13 'iib3! is a clear improvement over the main game's posi- tion with 12 iVb3) 13 ttJxd5 exd5 14 .Bxd5 .Bxd4 15 .Be3 .Bxe3 16l:f.xe3, and Black had reached equality, although he fell into an infe- rior position after inaccuracies. Nevertheless, White has every reason to feel optimistic if, instead ofIvanchuk's 13 ttJxdS, he continues 13 .Bxd5!, forcing 13 ... exd5 14 ttJxdS 'i!Vxd4 15 'i!Vxd4 .Bxd416 ttJc7l:f.b8 17 ttJb5 (D).

All forced. Black suffers under the sort of ir- ritating defensive task that characterizes this line. He's probably not objectively lost, yet has to play very accurately just to stay afloat. Here's some analysis: 17 ... .Bb6 ! (a cute merry-go- round line results from 17 ... .Bg7 18 .Bf4 l:f.a8 19 ttJc7 l:f.b8 20 ttJe8! l:f.a8 21 .Bd6! .Bxb2 22 .Bxf8 .ixal 23 .Bb4! .Bf5 24 ttJc7l:f.c8 25 ttJd5 followed by .l:lxal or ttJe7+) 18 .Bh6 l:f.d8 19 .Bg5!? f6! (the point of Black's tricky defence begun by 17 ... .Bb6) 20 .Bxf6 (20 .Bf4 na8 21 .Bc7 is also noteworthy, as in Petrosian-Geller, USSR Team Ch, Moscow 1966) 20 ... l:f.d2 21 l:.e8+ Rf7 22 .Bc3! .Bxf2+ (22 ... l:f.xf2?? 23 ttJd6#) 23 ~g2 ~xe8 24 .Bxd2 .Bb6! (just in time) 25 .Bf4 (or 25 l:f.e 1+ ~d7 26 a4!?) 25 ... J:Ia8 26 i::.el + Rd7 27 b4!? and Black still has prob- lems to solve. Whatever else, there's no ques- tion as to White's ability to stir up chances in this 'drawing line'.

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 181

... .Bxd4!? This should lead to an even game, but the passive-looking retreat 12 ... tt:Je7! provides an easier route, for the simple reason that the d- pawn is attacked, and ... tt:Jf5 or ... tt:Jc6 will re- inforce that attack. White's most obvious re- sponse is 13 1:.dl (13 .Bg5!? h6!? 14 .Bxe7 "fIxe7 15 d5 could be tried, if only to keep things alive), but after 13. .. tt:Jc6 (or 13 ... tt:Jf5) 14 i.e3 (14 d5 tt:Jd4) 14 ... tt:Jxd4 15 .Bxd4 .Bxd4 16 tt:Je2 e5 17 tt:Jxd4 exd4, White's edge is in danger of vanishing completely: 18 "fIb4 (18 "fIc4 .Be6! is easier for Black) 18 ... a5! 19 ~xd4 "fIxd4 20 1:.xd4 .Be6 21 b3 1:.ab8 with a nearly level game. 13 tt:Jxd5 The move that drew broad attention to 12 ~b3 was 13 .Bh6!? (D).

After 13 ... 1:.e8?, 141:.ad1 is terrifically strong: 14 ... .Bxc3 (14 .. .'iWb6?? allows the fork 15 ~a4) 15 bxc3 "fIb6 16 "fIc4 "fIc6 17 'iUe2!, and White wins! There is no defence to both 'iUe5 and c4, although in Cardoso-Torre, Manila 1973 Black continued 17 ... b5, and White missed 18 'iUe5 f6 19 'iUxf6 tt:Jxf6 20 .Bxc6, winning. But I think that 13 ... tt:Jxc3! spoils White's fun; for example, 14 .Bxf8 (14 bxc3 .Bg7 and White will have to work for full compensation) 14 ... tt:Je2+ 15 ~h1 'ilVxf8 161:.ae1 tt:Jxg3+ 17 fxg3 ~g7. Black's two pawns for the exchange, along with his bishop-pair, should at least make up for White's temporary activity. 13. exd5 14 .Bh6 .Bg7 Not 14 ... 1:.e8? due to 151:.ad1 with the idea 15 ... 'ilVb6?? 16 'ilVa4. 15 .Bxg7 ~xg7 (D) w

16.Bxd5

16 .l:.fd1! is probably best, with the idea 16 ... ~b6 17 ~xb6 axb6 181:.xd5! .Be6 191:.b5 .Bxa2 20 Itxb6 .Be6 211:.xa81:.xa8 22 h4. How- ever, Black is better off playing 16 ... d4, when 17 "fIa4 a5! 18 nxd4 ~b6! 19 b3 .Be6 201:.ad1 should be drawn with care on Black's part, as- suming that he stays away from 20 ... 1:.ad8? 21 .Bxb7!. 16  a5! 17 .l:.ac1 a4 18 "fIc3+ 'ilkf6 19 'ilVxf6+ 'it>xf6 20 l':tc71:.a5! 21 Itdl.l:.b5 22 b3 axb3 23 .Bxb3 .Be6! 24 .Bxe6 ~xe6 251:.d3 .:tb2 26 a3 Black has achieved full equality. Gheorghiu suggests 26 ... ~f6, but the game's 26 ... h5 27 .l:.f3 would also be level after 27 ... f5 28 1:.e3+ 'it>f6 29l:Ice7 .:tb6. Black faces surprising pitfalls in this varia- tion. Objectively, 121:.e1 offers White the best opportunity to emerge with the advantage. Kosten - Bujisho French Team Ch, Belfort 2004

[diagram]
tt:Jf6 Black chooses to unbalance the play. He de- velops quickly and doesn't mind if White gets d4 in. 6 tt:Jge2 d6 7 O-O O-O 8 d4 (D) Sometimes 8 b3 is played first, but if Black wants to, he can play 8 ... .Bf5; for example, 9 d3 "fId7 10 .Bb2 .Bh3, when 11 .Bxh3 'ilVxh3 12 tt:Jf4 ~d7 13 'iie2 e6 covers d5 and gives Black approximate equality. 8  .Bd7 8 ... .Bf5 is another legitimate move. 9 b3l:Ib8 10 .Bb2 a6

182 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

B

Although this is played frequently and is very logical, Black comes up a tempo short in executing his plan. 1O ... 'iVaS is better. defensive task is very difficult; for example, IS ... ttJxdS? 16 ~xg7 rJ;xg7 17 ~xdS ~g4 18 'iVxcs ~xe2 19 .t:i.el and White wins a pawn. Better but still in White's favour is IS ... ~e6 16 ttJxf6+ ~xf6 17 ~xf6 exf6 18 ttJc3. The game Sarno-Belotti, Mantova 1996 continued IS ... ~g4, but now 16 .t:i.ac1! ttJxdS 17 ~xg7 .t:i.d8! 18 ~b2! would have been strong, with the idea 18 ... ttJf4 19 ttJxf4!. 15 ttJf4 ~g4 (D) The tactics all work for White in the line IS ... l:!.fd8!? 16 ttJcdS! 'fia6 17 ~xf6 exf6 18 'tWc3! ~g4 19 'fixcS! ~xd 1 20 ~xc6! 'iVxc6 21 ttJe7+ rJ;f8 22 ttJxc6. 11 ~d2 b5?! 12 cxb5!? W White can also get an advantage by 12 dxcS! dxcS (12 ... bxc4 loses material following 13 cxd6 cxb3 14 axb3) 13 .:tad 1 ! (for 13 J::!.fdl 'tWc8 14 cxbS axbS see the next note) 13 ... 'iVb6 (13 .. :~Vc8 14 ttJxbS! axbS IS cxbS l:f.xbS 16 ~xf6 ~xf6 17 'iVxd7; this doesn't work with White's king's rook on dl) 14 ttJf4 .l:tfd8 IS ttJcdS ttJxdS 16 ttJxdS 'tWa7 17 ~xg7 <3dxg7 18 'tWc3+ followed by J::!.d2 with the upper hand. 12 ... axb5 13 dxc5 dxc514 .l:tfdl (D)

This position mirrors a famous game Petro- sian-Fischer below with reversed colours (stem- ming from S ttJf3 e6); here White has an extra tempo. Black's hanging pawns are weak, espe- cially the one on cS facing White's open file. 14 ... 'tWb6?! 14 .. .'iVc8 improves, but White should still come out on top after IS ttJdS!. Then Black's 16 ttJcd5 ttJxd5 17 ttJxd5 ~a7 18 ~xg7 <3dxg7 19 .t:i.dc1! w Threatening 20 'tWc3+ and 21 'iVxcS. 19 ... b4 20 'iVb2+ f6 (D) Notice how White not only attacks the back- ward pawn on cS, but controls both long diago- nals.

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 183

21lbxf6!? Cashing in, but White can also play for a killing break by a3 if he stops for 21 h3!. Then

21.. .. Bd7 22 a3! leaves Black's queen nowhere

to go, and the retreat 21.. ..Bc8 is also dismal following 22 a3 bxa3 23 I:txa3 ~d7 241hcS. That leaves 21.. .. Be6, when the simplest con- tinuation is 22lbf4! .Bd7 (22 ... lbd8 23 I:tdl!) 23 .Bxc6 .Bxc6 24lbe6+, etc. 21 .. exf6 22 .Bxc6 I:tbc8 23 .Bg2 White has some difficulties to face, but he should eventually convert this position to a win. As a whole, the opening appears to be clearly in White's favour. Lein - Polugaevsky USSR Ch, Tbilisi 196617

[diagram]
e5 (D) w Black sets up the Botvinnik structure with ... eS and ... d6, and will use ... lbge7 and ... O-O to complete his development. Then he has poten- tial breaks with ... bS and ... dS, and the move .. .fS may become relevant. We discussed these ideas and associated themes in the Closed Eng- lish chapter where White played S e4, and they will appear again when White stares down the Symmetrical by means of e4. 6lbge2 d6 The alternative move-order is 6 ... lbge7 7 O-O O-O, which intends to counter White's set-up 8 a3 a6 9 I:tbl!? with 9 ... bS 1, as in Godfrey- Barbero, Thessaloniki Olympiad 1988: 10 b4?! (but 10 cxbS axbS 11 lbxbS dS! is very promis- ing for Black, as is 10 lbxbS axbS 11 cxbS I:tb8! 12 bxc6 dxc6 13 ~a4 ~6; probably 10 d3! is best) 1O ... cxb4 11 axb4 (or 11 cxbS axbS 12 axb4 dS!) ll...bxc4 12lbdS nb8. Black stands clearly better. 7b3 White aims for a solid build-up, which can have a little more bite than it may at first appear. He can also play more aggressively to get b4 in:

7 O-O lbge7 8 a3 O-O 9 d3. Black stands per-

fectly well, however, and a normal game should result; for example, 9 ... l:Ib8 10 nbl as (or 1O ... a6 11 b4 cxb4 12 axb4 bS) 11 .Bd2 .Be6. Black has levelled the play because 12 ... dS is in the air, and 12lbdS bS 13 cxbS ~xbS 14lbec3 l:.b8 results in a situation where Black's open b-file and improved control of the centre com- pensate for his weak a-pawn. 7  lbge7 8 O-O These first moves can be played in many or- ders, but note that after 8 .Bb2!? .Be6, 9lbdS?! .ixdS 10 cxdS lbb4 is not desirable for White. He should consider whether he wants to play 9 O-O!?, allowing 9 ... dS. This is unexplored terri- tory. Then 10 lba4!? (D) is inviting.

After 1O .. :~d6, 11 lbf4! wins the bishop- pair, but ll...b6 (or more precisely, 1O ... b6! 11 lbf4! 1\Vd7!) 12 lbxe6 ~xe6 13 cxdS lbxdS is hard to assess.

8 . O-O

Now 8 ... .Be6 9 lbdS .ixdS 10 cxdS lbb4 11 lbc3 lbd3 12 .Ba3!? can become bizarre after 12 ... ~a5 13 1\Vbl! iVxa3 (13 ... O-O 14 .ixcS! lbxcs IS b4) 14lbbS! ~4 Islbxd6+ ~d7 16 a3 ~g4 17lbxb7 ~ab8 18 ~xd3l:hb7 19 d6!. There's more excitement in this variation than you might think!

184 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

9 .tb2l:tb810 d3 a611 'ifd2 bS (D) Quite a few games have arrived at this posi- tion. White's intentions are to develop and then play a combination of liJdS, followed by d4 and/or f4 as the opportunity presents itself. Black, having more space, would ideally like to achieve ... dS or be able to lure White's knight on dS and exchange it to his advantage. 12l:i.ad1 12l:tfdl might be better, keeping the a-pawn under protection. 12  'ifaS 13 h3 .lte614 .lta1?! White needs to time this move better. ... fS?! (D) Often Black should wait on this move if White can prevent .. .f4. Apart from 14 ... l:tfdS, Black has the active 14 ... liJb4!, intending ... dS and exploiting White's inability to expel the knight by a3. Trying to backtrack by IS .tb2 would be too late after IS ... bxc4! 16 dxc4 (16 bxc4? liJxd3) 16 ... lIfdS 17 'iVcl dS and Black stands well. IS f4 ~h8 16 Wic1 White's play is logical, but here 16 liJdS! was more accurate. I'll skip over the details. In the game, Black plays inaccurately and gives White the upper hand: 16. liJb4 17 l:td2 .tg8 18 ~h2 l:I.bd8 19 l':r.fd1 h6 20 a3liJbc6 21liJdS! liJxdS?! 22 cxdS Now instead of 22 ... liJbS? 23 fxeS dxeS 24 'ifxcS! l:tcS 2S Wid6 l:I.cdS 26 Wixg6, which is complicated but ultimately winning for White, Black should have settled for 22 ... liJe7 23 fxeS dxeS 24 e4, leaving his opponent with a small advantage. This examination of S e3 should give you an insight into how apparently harmless moves can lead to mixed outcomes in the Symmetrical English Opening. Sometimes the play peters out to a dull equality; that won't happen, how- ever, unless both sides cooperate. In this last game with S. .. eS (and in the notes), you find the lack of direct engagement between opposing forces in the early part of the game; this ex- presses itself in the Pure Symmetrical English more so than in any other variation. Again, that doesn't preclude an imbalanced struggle if the players are so inclined. Flank Attack with 5 a3

1 c4 cS 2liJc3liJc6 3 g3 g6 4 .tg2 .tg7 S a3!?

(D)

Oddly enough, the little nudge is actually one of the most popular and effective continua- tions in the position. That may seem absurd, but

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 185

when you consider that White's strategy in the Pure Symmetrical lines almost always involves b4, it makes sense to playa move that you're going to include in your plans anyway. On top of that, there are several 'accidental' benefits to 5 a3. For instance, both 5 ... e5 and 5 ... e6, two mainstay defences versus almost any other of White's 5th moves, offer White the immediate chance to enter into surprisingly active gambit lines which are much more lively than, say, 5 e3 e6 or 5 e3 e5. Speaking more generally, we can say that any of White's other 5th moves such as 5 e3, 5liJf3 and 5 e4 tip his hand, so that Black can react accordingly. The move 5 a3 tries to reverse the situation: now it's Black who must respond. If you examine modem chess openings, you will find many cases where these 'little waiting moves' (especially a3 and ... a6) have become increasingly popular. How this works out can only be shown by examples: Kasparov - Karpov World Ch match (game 8), Seville 1987

[diagram]
e5 In fact, this game featured a completely dif- ferent move-order (1 c4 e5 2 liJc3 d6 3 g3 c5 4 ~g2 liJc6 5 a3 g6 6 b4 ~g7), but it soon merged with the standard one that I've pre- sented here. I can't cover all the details behind 5 a3, but we'll address 5 ... e6 in the next game, along with a brief look at 5 ... a6. Here are a few lines whose ideas cross over into other variations: a) 5 ... a5 stops b4, but grants White's knight access to b5. This is an important distinction. Then 6 liJf3 is an improved version of 5 liJf3 below. You should compare the lines directly, but a few ideas are that after 6 ... e6, the pawn sacrifice 7 d4! is stronger than after 5 liJf3 e6, and that 6 ... liJf6 7 d4 cxd4 8liJxd4 is much im- proved for White over the main line below with 5 liJf3 liJf6 because he has access to b5 and Black lacks his usual counterplay via ... a6. b) 5 ... d6 is a perfectly good move that opens up a large number of transpositional possibili- ties; for example, 6 .l:tbl a5 7 liJf3 e5 8 O-O liJge7 will enter into 5 liJf3 e5 territory, and an early e4 will be related to 5 e4 below. An independent line is 6 e3!?, and if 6 ... e5, then 7 b4, which is arguably more fun than 5 e3 e5. Apart from other 6th moves, Black could answer 6 e3 with 6 ... ~xc3!?, for which com- pare 5 d3 e6 6 ~xc6!? at the beginning ofthis chapter. Having the move a3 in does not signifi- cantly benefit White, if it does so at all (perhaps there are a couple of lines in which bringing a rook via l:ta2 to d2 or e2 or f2 might help, but that's reaching). In most lines, Black should play ... f5 in order to discourage e4. c) A difficulty with the move ... liJh6 in many English positions is that White's h-pawn ad- vance can't be blocked, and that applies here: 5 ... liJh6 6 M! liJf5 (the usual ... h5 or ... h6 isn't at Black's disposal) 7 h5 b6 8 d3 ~b7 9 h6! (D). Out of a calm beginning we are about to get a torrent of activity. Hodgson-Arkell, Isle of Man 1996 continued 9 ... ~f8 (Hodgson analyses 9 ... ~e5 10 g4! liJfd4 11 f4 ~c7 12 e3liJe6 13 liJd5 to a large advantage; still more convincing here is 13 g5) 10 b4!? (or 10 ~f4) 1O .. :~c8 11 liJe4!? cxM 12 axb4 liJxM 13 ~b2 f6?! (the best defence was 13 ... l:tg8! 14 'iNd2!? a5 with the idea 15 g4 d5!) 14 g4! liJxh615 g5 (White just keeps pounding away!) 15 ... liJg8 (15 ... liJg4 16 l:th4!), and here White should plunge into the line 16 'iVd2! a5 17liJf3! ~xe4 18 dxe4, offer- ing yet another pawn: 18 .. :~xc4 19 l:!.cl 'iff7 20 e5!, when the attack is crashing through. d) 5 ... b6 furnishes a good answer to 5 a3, because it goes about the business of challeng- ing White's bishop on g2 while shoring up c5. M.Gurevich-Anand, Bastia (rapid) 2006 went 6 b4 (6 :bl ~b7 7 M cxM 8 axb4 'iVc8! prepares ... liJe5 or ... liJd4 and indirectly attacks c4; for

186 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

example, 9 4:Jd5?! 4:Jd4!; on the other hand, 6 d3 i.b7 7 e4 would keep things double-edged) 6 ... i.b7 7 bxc5 (7 i.b2 ~c8; 7 b5 4:Ja5 8 i.xb7 4:Jxb7 9 i.b2 looks about equal; White will have difficulty preventing ... d5) 7 ... bxc5 8.:tbl 'iWc8!? (or 8 ... .:tb8, intending 9 4:Ja4 4:Ja5) 9 4:Je4!? 4:Jd8! 10 i.f3, and apart from 1O ... i.c6!?, 1O ... .:tb8 is still a solid move. In any case, the game is just beginning. Thus, 5 ... b6100ks like a good solution to 5 a3, and one which will very likely lead to a middle game full of content. 6 b4! (D)

This sacrifice characterizes many lines of the Symmetrical English. The idea is to break down Black's grip on the centre by inducing ... cxb4. Failing that, White gains space and retains the options of bxc5 and b5 for a while. 6 . d6 Black really shouldn't accept the pawn: 6 ... cxb47 axb4 4:Jxb4? 8 i.a3 i.f8 (8 ... 4:Jc6 9 4:Jb5 i.f8 10 i.d6! i.xd6 11 4:Jxd6+ 'it>f8 12 i.d5 4:Jh6 13 c5 with a huge bind) 9 ~a4. Then Black has dark-square weaknesses and no de- velopment to speak of: 9 ... a5 (9 ... 4:Jc6 10 4:Jb5 i.xa3 11 ~xa3) 10 4:Jf3 f6 11 0-04:Jh6 12 d4! and Black's position is collapsing. With the text-move, we have now transposed into the actual course of the Kasparov-Karpov game.

7.l:tbl

7 bxc5 dxc5 8 i.xc6+!? bxc6 9 l::tbl has ideas of d3, 4:Jf3 and i.e3, etc., attacking the weak c-pawns. Black would need to activate his bishops and work on White's abandoned light squares by, for example, 9 ... 4:Jf6 10 d3 O-O 11 4:Jf3 'ie7! (intending ... e4) 12 i.g5 i.h3 13 4:Je4 .:tab8! with a complex, challenging game ahead. 7 ... 4:Jge7 It's simplistic to say that ... 4:Jf6 never goes with a ... c5/. .. d6/. .. e5 pawn-structure, but in this case 7 ... 4:Jf6?! allows White to exchange his queen's bishop for a knight after 8 d3 O-O 9 i.g5! (D).

To appreciate this, you should compare the main lines, which we shall see in a later section under 5 4:Jf3 e5. There Black has a knight on e7 and can answer i.g5 with .. .f6, to avoid an ex- change on e7. With the knight on f6, Kosten- Pira, Montpellier 1996 continued 9 ... h6 10 i.xf6 i.xf6114:Jf3 b6 12 4:Jd2! cxb413 axb4 i.b7 14 O-O ~d7 15 'iVa4! :tfc8 16 4:Jd5 with total con- trol of the light squares. Black's bad bishop is no match for a knight here. This is a particularly instructive example. 8e3!? Alternatively, White can work with the for- mation 8 d3 O-O 9 4:Jf3 (9 e3 would transpose to our main game).

[diagram]
We've arrived at a scene from the 5 e3 line, except that there Black prevented b4 by playing ... a5. The trade-off favours White, whose posi- tion is already somewhat preferable. 9 ... .l:!.b8 10 4:Jge2 i.e6 11 b5 4:Ja5 12 i.d2 b6 The logical 12 ... d5 leads to the forcing line 13 cxd5 4:Jxd5 14 4:Jxd5 i.xd5 15 i.xd5 'iUxd5 160-0, and now 16 ... 'iWd8100ks best, with some advantage to White because of the out-of-play knight on a5, rather than 16 ... b6?! 17 i.xa5! bxa5 18 4:Jc3, when the knight is clearly better

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 187

than Black's bishop, which is stuck behind its own pawns.

13 O-O tLlb7

Now Black is ready for ... dS. Rather than place his knight on dS, White decides to make the pawn-structure symmetrical and count upon his space. This is hardly inspiring, yet forces Black to find a few good ideas. 14 e4!? 'iii>h8 14 ... h6! was suggested, feinting on the king- side and preventing White's i.gS. Alternatively, 14 .. :~'d7 would prepare to bring the b7-knight back into the game via d8. 15 "i!kc1 f5!? Perhaps a slight misjudgement by Black. Again, lS ... ~d7 keeps ... f6 in reserve and chal- lenges White to make progress. 16 i.g5 ~e8 17 i.xe7! ~xe7 18 exf5 (D)

... i.xf5! This gives White control of e4 in addition to dS, but Black is staying active and trying to keep away from the standard structure that we have talked about after 18 ... gxfS 19 tLldS (19 f4 e4! would be interesting, freeing the bishops) 19 ... ~f7 (maybe 19 ... i.xdS!? 20 i.xdS tLld8 isn't so bad) 20 f4, when Black's bishops are re- stricted. 19 tLld5 ~d7 20 ~d2 tLla5?! It's strange that Black doesn't want to recen- tralize and perhaps exchange this piece. Thus 20 ... tLld8! 21 a4 tLlf7 22 as i.h6 was suggested, with the idea of ... tLlgS, hitting the light squares. Here 21...tLle6 is also acceptable. 21 tLlec3 l:tbe8 22 tLle4 White has developed an advantage, and even- tually broke through on the kingside. M. Domingo - Alekseev Berlin 2006

[diagram]
e6 This simple move is probably the most im- portant response to S a3. Black prepares ... tLlge7 and ... dS. I'm not going to go too deeply into S ... a6, which has loads of theory behind it, except to point to what I think are the main lines: 6 ~b1 .l:!.b8 7 b4 (7 ~a4 was long ago solved by 7 ... tLld4! with the idea ... bS, and the gambit 7 ... d6!? gives fair compensation) 7 ... cxb4 8 axb4 bS 9 cxbS (9 cS?! as is already awkward for White) 9 ... axbS 10 tLlf3 (D) (l0"tLlh3 eS! cuts off the knight from f4).

Quite a bit of recent analysis applies to this position. Here are some guideposts: a) 1O ... eS is an important line, when the analysis is only starting after 11 d4!? exd4 12 tLldS tLlf6 13 i.gS h6 14 tLlxf6+ i.xf6 IS i.f4 d6 16 i.xh6 i.fS 17 .l:!.c1 tLlxb4 18 tLlxd4 tLld3+ 19 exd3 i.xd4, which is absolutely unclear. Of course, there are numerous alternatives along the way, including 14 i.xf6. b) Not surprisingly, 10 ... tLlf6 is also play- able. Time put into studying these lines will pay off directly in practice. c) 1O ... dS 11 d4 e6 (imitation by 11...tLlf6 is also adequate after 12 i.f4 l:tb6, but it's complicated) 12 e4!? (12 i.f4 is just as impor- tant) 12 ... dxe4!? 13 tLlxe4 tLlf6 14 i.gS h6 (or 14 ... O-O, or 14 ... i.b7) IS tLlxf6+ (IS i.xf6! i.xf6 16 d5! tLle5!) 15 ... i.xf6 16 i.xf6 'iWxf6 170-00-018 "i!kc1 i.b7 19 d5 tLle7! 20 "i!kxh6

188 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

i.xdS with equality, Hickl-Hulak, Pula Zonal 2000. As I say, that's only a skeleton that you can B fill in by research and serious analysis. Sadly, a lot of the play after S. .. a6 6 l':.bl 1:.b8 depends much more upon specifics than understanding. We now return to S. .. e6 (D): w 6 b4!? This rich and dynamic pawn sacrifice is the most popular move, in part because S a3 doesn't have enough effect on the game otherwise. This is not to say that White can't arrive at a normal game by 6 l'!bI, when after 6 ... aS, 7 e4 is a Botvinnik System, while he can also choose 7 tiJh3 or 7 h4!? 6 ... tiJge7!? can also be tried, when 7 b4 cxb4 8 axb4 dS looks logical. Black counters a flank attack with a central attack, al- though that's not always a trustworthy rule. There might follow 9 bS tiJaS 10 cxdS exdS 11 i.a3, which is unbalanced in an interesting way; for example, ll...d4 12 tiJe4 O-O 13 "iVa4. 6  tiJxb4!? This pseudo-sacrifice actually ends up win- ning material. If Black grabs the b-pawn di- rectly, we see a type of position that applies to numerous lines of the Symmetrical English: 6 ... cxb4 7 axb4 tiJxb4 8 i.a3 (D). Now what? a) If Black simply retreats by 8. .. tiJc6?, White goes all-out on the dark squares by 9 tiJbS!, threatening 10 tiJd6+ followed by 11 tiJxb7+ (winning the queen), or 10 i.d6. Black has to play 9 ... i.f8, when White's simplest course is to gain a very large lead in active development by 10 tiJf3 i.xa3 11 .l:.xa3, perhaps piling up on the dark squares next by means of~al and cS; even h4-hS is an idea. This sort of thing tends to be disastrous for Black. b) 8 ... i.f8 saves the pawn, although any number of moves by White are good enough to compensate for it and then some; for example, 9 tiJf3 tiJf6 10 "iYb3 as 110-0 i.e7 12 e40-0 13 eS tiJhS 14 d4. 7 axb4 cxb4 8 d4! bxc3 9 e3 (D)

It's worth talking about some general fea- tures here. Black is two pawns ahead, soon to be one if the c3-pawn falls. His development matches White's and his weaknesses are fairly well covered. What is White's compensation? First, he will have a powerful bishop along the a3-f8 diago- nal, which either prevents or discourages cas- tling, and he possesses two open queenside files. The configuration of open a- and b-files versus the opponent's a- and b-pawns (with Black's c-pawn gone) is a common one in a breadth of openings. Such a configuration, as- suming that White can place rooks on the files,

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 189

generally favours him, even when both the a- and b-pawns are passed. A signal case would be the main-line ~bl Exchange Grtinfeld, in which pawns have been exchanged on d4 and Black has grabbed White's a-pawn by .. :~aS+ and .. :~xa2 (see Volume 2). In the position before us, Black's a- and b- pawns are flanked by White's c-pawn, making them difficult to advance. Another problem faces Black: his c8-bishop and a8-rook can be hard to activate. A similar situation arises, for example, in a typical Benko Gambit (disregard- ing move-order issues): 1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 cS 3 dS bS 4 cxbS a6 S bxa6 g6 6 ttJc3 ~xa6 7 ttJf3 ~g7

[diagram]
llbl .l:!.fb8 (D). w Ignoring concrete variations, Black's piece set-up is designed to prevent White's a- and b- pawns from advancing without creating weak- nesses, and to tie White's pieces to the defence of the pawns. The strategy is time-tested, so much so that in the Benko Gambit, Black often has compensation for a whole pawn. The same type of gambit structure arises in several varia- tions of the King's Indian Defence and the Eng- lish Opening, among others. But our English Opening position in the main game, in which Black has no pawn on d4 (as White does in the Benko Gambit, for example), is not as compel- ling as the gambiteer might like it to be. For ex- ample, the same 'c-pawn versus a- and b-pawn' structure arises in the French Wing Gambit via

[diagram]
~xa3 and in the Sicilian Wing Gambit via 1 e4 cS 2 b4 cxb4 3 a3 bxa3 4 ~xa3. Neither of these variations is terribly impressive on a theoretical level. Fortunately for White, the position in our game (after 9 e3, pictured in the diagram) also contains positive features related to White's mobile centre. Perhaps it all adds up to dynamic equality. 9  ttJe7 9 ... ttJf6 10 ttJe2 O-O gets the king to safety, but reveals Black's difficulties on the dark squares; for example, 11 ~a3 d6 12 ttJxc3 a6 (versus ttJbS) 13 ~b3 l::tb8 14 O-O .l:te8 IS l::tfbl and White's bishops are impressively supported by his other pieces. 10 ttJe2 (D)

10 ... d5 Or 10 ... O-O 11 ttJxc3, and now we have these instructive examples: a) The counterthrust 11...dS is an attempt to reach rather dull equality, not necessarily achievable after 12 cxdS ttJxdS 13 ttJxdS exdS 14 ~b3, winning his pawn back. Now: al) Black can play the typical and ambitious 14 ... aS, to make space for his pieces and get his pawns moving. Then IS ~xdS?! has tactical problems after IS ... a4 followed by 16 ... 11aS with tempo, and then 17 ... ~e6!' A better move is IS 'iVxdS, when White's extra centre pawns are stronger in principle than Black's passed ones. Finally, White can leave things be and de- velop by IS O-O!, when Black is slightly at a loss for good moves. a2) Ptacnikova-S.Kasparov, Olomouc 2003 continued 14 ... ~e6 IS 'iVxb7 as 16 O-O ~e8 17 ~a3 .:!.b8 18 'ilia711a8 19 'ilib7 .:!.b8 20 'iVa6 with the idea of retreating to e2. Black's a-pawn is rel- atively weak, especially as he has to keep tabs on his d-pawn, so White stands somewhat better.

190 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

b) l1...d6 (going for the blocking method) 12 .1a3 (the nice thing for White is that he has a modest central preponderance to put on his list of minor advantages; whether this adds up to more than a pawn's worth isn't certain, but his play is free and easy; after 12 O-O instead, 12 ... eS! is worth thinking about) 12 .. :ii'c7 13 'lib3 (Kosten gives 13 lbbS 'ilVxc4 14 lbxd6 'lic3+ IS '.te2lbdS 16 'lic1!, when an endgame is promising for White in spite of his pawn mi- nus) 13 ... a6 14 O-O ~bS IS ~abl eS?, Thiede- Filippov, European Clubs Cup, Rethymnon 2003, and here White can achieve a substantial advantage with 16lbe4! in view of 16 ... .l:!.dS 17 'ilVb6! 'ili'xb6 IS ~xb6, when material begins to drop off. 11 cxdS I1lbxc3 !? has also been tried, and may even be more accurate. The following line is wide open to interpretation: 11...dxc4 12 O-O!? (12 'ilVa4+ .1d7 13 'ili'xc4 eS!? is one idea) 12 ... O-O 13 .1a3 ~eS 14 'iWe2 (14 lbbS lbfS) 14 ... eS, when Black seems to be freeing his game, but of course there are many options. 11 . lbxdS12 .1a3 (D)

[diagram]
A good move, getting the bishop out before it becomes stuck on the back rank. Two others are critical: a) Black usually tries to get his king to safety by 12 ... .1fS 13 .1xfS '.txfS 14 'i!Vb3!, when I won't go into the details following 14 ... '.tg7 IS O-O?! (IS lbxc3! improves) IS ... .td7; suffice it to say that the game is unclear. b) 12 ... aS!? is a provocative winning try, in- tending ... bS-b4. Then both sides have to be careful; for example, 13 O-O!? (13 'lid3 b6! 14 lbxc3 .ta6) 13 ... bS 14 .1cs ..tb7 (14 ... b4? IS .txb4!) IS e4lbe7 16lbxc3 b4 17lbbS O-O IS lbd6 with definite but unclear compensation for the extra (currently blockaded) pawn. Let's return to 12 ... .td7! (D): w

13 O-O?!

Domingo mentions that 13 'ii'b3, as in Del- chev-Tukmakov, Croatian Team Ch, Pula 2001, allows Black to play 13 ... 'ii'b6!, which might well give him the better game. Perhaps White should try to keep the initiative by 13 ..txdS exdS 14 lbxc3; for example, 14 ... .tc6 IS O-O 'iWd7 (1S ... .tfS?! 16 e4!) 16 ~c1 (the goal is e4, and if ... dxe4, dS) 16 .. .fS 17 f3 as IS e4! dxe4 19 dS .txc3 20 dxc6 with quite a mess!

13. .. .tbS!?

Thiede-Heinemann, Bundesliga 2002/3 went 13 ... .tc6 14 e4 lbe7 IS 'ii'b3?! (better is IS .i:tc1! .tbS 16 ~xc3 O-O! 17 'ii'd2!), and here IS ... 'iIi'd7! is best, with the idea 16 ~fdl? i.a4. 14 ~el ~c8 (D) w

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 191

15 ~b3? Now the effects of the opening manoeuvre ... .td7-bS will become apparent. IS 'iic2 is B better, because e4 and dS are on the cards. Nev- ertheless, my overall impression is that Black stands better. 15 . ~d7 16 e4 .te4 17 'iie2 0,e7 18 d5 A last try before Black's pawns get moving, but it falls short. 18  O-O 19 .th3 b5 20 0,f4 fVb7 The absurd-looking 20 ... aS! seems to win more convincingly due to the pretty line 21 0,xe6 b4! 22 ~g2 fxe6! 23 .txe6+ ~xe6 24 dxe6 b3 (D). w Black's passed pawns and bishop-pair out- weigh his material deficit; e.g., 2S fVbl b2 26 .txe7 c2! 27 'iixc2 .tfl + 28 ~xfl lIxc2. 21 .tb4 exd5! 22 exd5 0,xd5 23 0,xd5 .ioxd5 24 lIe7 lIe7 25 lIael lIxe7 26 lIxe7 ~e6 27 .iofl lIe8 28 'iie2 lIxe7 29 'iixe7 h5 30 .td3 e20-1 The last straw is 31 .txc2 .thl! 32 f3 (32 'It>fl 'iixc2) 32 .. :iVxf3. Whether or not S a3 e6 6 b4 produces a theo- retical advantage (which is unlikely), it leads to a fascinating variation that players of both sides are willing to contest. Symmetrical Botvinnik: 5 e4 Kosten - Bijaoui Montpellier 2006

[diagram]
(D)

White chooses the Botvinnik System, popu- lar among experienced players. The ideas are very similar to those in the Botvinnik System of the Closed English, which we saw in Chapter 6 (1 c4 eS 2 0,c3 0,c6 3 g3 g6 4 .tg2 .tg7 S e4). White cedes an outpost on d4 in order to pre- vent ... dS and 'work around' his own weakness by playing f4 or b4, in some cases preparing d4 by d3, 0,ge2 and .te3. For all his nefarious intentions, White's set- up is usually considered less dangerous versus the Symmetrical English than the Closed Eng- lish, and still less so than against certain varia- tions of the King's Indian (see Chapter 12). Primarily (although not entirely), that's because the idea off4-fS isn't very scary for Black when his pawn is on e7 and not eS. In the latter case, Black's position is vulnerable to the idea f4-fS followed by g4-gS and f6. 5  0,f6 I'll concentrate upon this reply for its the- matic value and because of its relevance to S 0,f3 eS. But Black has numerous options: a) S. .. e6 isn't really that different from the lines already covered with colours reversed via S e3 eS; Black sets up with ... 0,ge7, ... O-O, ... d6 and possibly ... b6, achieving equality. b) Alternatively, Black can play for an early ... bS by some combination of ... a6, ... lIb8 and, if needed, ... 0,d4. Even the immediate S. .. a6 6 0,ge2 bS!? is played; 6 a4 is a simple way to prevent this, but it's unclear which move, ... a6 or a4, is the more important concession! c) A particularly irritating line that Black can use is S ... eS (or S ... d6 6 0,ge2 eS), when White has to try to exploit his extra tempo to en- gineer a properly-timed f4 or b4. That's not so

192 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

easy, but fortunately for both sides, not many players of Black will want to limit their pros- pects in this way. d) Finally, direct expansion on the kingside by S. .. d6 6liJge2 hS has little theory behind it, and yet a few master games have seen 7 h3 (7 h4) 7 ... eS !? (other moves are 7 ... liJh6 and 7 ... a6)

8 d3 i.e6 (the 'point': Black doesn't commit

his king's knight; at the very least this creates a certain asymmetry) 9 a3 ~d7, following the stem game Botvinnik-Szabo, European Team Ch, Oberhausen 1961, which went 10 1:1bl!:!'c8!

11 b4 b6. White has only a slight edge, if that.

6 liJge2 O-O 7 O-O d6 In the next game, Black plays 7 ... liJe8.1'1l be discussing other move-orders there, and in par- ticular 6 ... d6 (delaying ... O-O), which has its own special advantages. S d3 (D) S. . a6 This flexible move gives away Black's inten- tions to play ... bS, but also ensures that White's liJbS won't be an issue. Black's most famous strategy involves the expedition ... liJe8-c7-e6, which we shall discuss in the next game. There are two other worthwhile tries: a) An oddly neglected move is 8 ... i.g4. Black emulates White's strategy in the position stemming from S liJf3 eS. If 9 h3, 9 ... i.xe2 looks good. In the reversed variation, when White plays i.gS, Black avoids the exchange by ... f6, which in this case would translate into 9 f3, when Black can reply 9 ... i.d7, or the more interesting 9 ... i.e6!? (versus d4) 10 b3liJd7 11 i.e3 liJd4 12 Itc1 ~aS and Black hasn't any worries, since he threatens to win a pawn by ... liJxe2+, and 13 1:1f2 is well met by 13 ... liJeS!, with both the ideas ... liJxe2+ and ... liJec6 with total control over d4. b) 8 ... i.d7 has intentions similar to 8 ... a6 and will sometimes transpose to the game. But White should be warned about the line 9 h3 l:Ib8 10 i.e3 a6, which sets a trap that many players have fallen into: 11 d4?! (the thematic move 11 a4! stops ... bS, when Black may want to play 11.. :i*'aS) 11.. .cxd4 12 liJxd4 'iVc8!

w Attacking the pawn on h3 and, indirectly, the one on c4. A possible line is 13 liJa4!? (13 liJdS might be answered by the risky-looking 13 ... i.xh3!; for example, 14liJb6 'iVc7 IS i.xh3 ~xb6 16liJe6 ~xb2 17 liJxf8 ~xf8, with two pawns and a clear positional superiority for the exchange) 13 ... bS 14 cxbS axbS ISliJxc6 i.xc6 16liJb6 'iYb7 with an attack. 9 h3l:IbSlO a4 (D) ... liJeS

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 193

This move is too slow now, for reasons we'll see. 10 ... i.d7 11 i.e3 gives Black two perfectly reasonable replies: a) 11... 'iNa5!? covers some important dark squares. Black's first point is 12 d4? cxd4 13 lLlxd4 'iWb4. Of course White doesn't have to pitch a pawn, but it's not clear what a positive strategy would be; perhaps a well-timed 'iVd2 and i.h6. Black has the same quandary; one idea for him is the somewhat risky ... :tfcS fol- lowed by ... lLleS and ... lLld4. b) ll...eS!? is also playable, with the idea 12 f4lLld4, and if 13 g4, then 13 ... exf4 14lLlxf4 bS. 11 i.e3! lLld412 .l:!.bl! (D)

White is already threatening b4, which will open the b-file to his considerable advantage. In fact, this standard plan has also succeeded for Black in the reversed position (as we shall see in the section on S lLlf3 eS). It turns out that White's extra tempo accentuates his queenside advantage. ...lLlc7 13 b4lLlce6 14 bxcSlLlxe2+ 14 ... dxcS secures d4 more tightly. Then White can either play ISlLldSlLlxe2+ 16 'iWxe2 (for example, 16 ... lLld4 17 'iVa2! e6 IS i.f4! eS 19 i.e3), or IS f4 lLlxe2+ (1S ... fS 16 eS) 16 lLlxe2 'iNaS 17 eS!, when the combination of more active bishops and space grants him the superior game. ISlLlxe2 dxcS 16 f4! lLld4 17 eS! f6!? This seems a little radical, but 17 ... lLlxe2+ IS 'iWxe2 'iNc7 19 .l:!.b3! and .l:!.fbl is no fun. 18 lLlxd4 cxd4 19 exf6! i.xf6 Or 19 ... exf6? 20 i.dS+ 'iithS 21 i.xd4 iLxh3 22 nf2!, threatening i.a7 and g4. 20 i.d2 i.fS 21 'iVb3 hS 22 .l:!.fel Now White has a solid positional advantage and went on to win. Laylo - de Firmian Minneapolis 2005

[diagram]
lLlf6 6 lLlge2 O-O The slight change of move-order with 6 ... d6 makes a difference if White plays 7 O-O. In fact, castling might even be considered an in- accuracy! It gives Black an attractive resource, which if nothing else deserves attention be- cause we shall see White play the same idea in the reverse position via SlLlf3 eS. Specifically, Black can embark upon the line 7 ... lLld7!? S d3 lLlfS! (D). w The knight gets to its desired spot just in time after 9 i.e3 lLle6, controlling the d4-square and having in mind its occupation. In the main game, Black plays ... lLlf6-eS-c7-e6, and here ... lLlf6-d7-fS-e6. Where did he get the extra tempo? Simply by not castling. So it would seem that, instead of 7 O-O, White should simply play 7 d3 (or S d3lLlf6 6 e4), pre- cisely to avoid the ... lLld7-fS-e6 manoeuvre. In that case 7 ... lLld7?! S i.e3 lLlfS 9 d4 is another matter, because White takes charge of the centre. But 7 d3 has its own drawbacks, for one thing because it forfeits the chance to play d4 in one step and also opens up possibilities such as 7 ... i.d7 S O-O!? hS! with a flank attack. For ex- ample, play might continue 9 h4 :LbS 10 f3 (ver- sus ... lLlg4) 10 ... O-O 11 i.e3 a6 12 d4?! (12 a4 ~a5 is unclear) 12 ... cxd4 13lLlxd4lLleS! 14 b3

194 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

b5 with an ideal counterattack. In fact, it's hard for White to make progress in this line without weakening himself or allowing ... b5.

[diagram]
If White wishes to neutralize the manoeuvre that follows, he should play 7 d3 with the idea 7 ... ttJe8 (7 ... a6 is an alternative) 8 .i.e3 ttJc7 9 d4.

7 . ttJeS In the previous game, we saw Black play a combination of ... d6, ... a6 and ... .i.d7. Here he intends ... ttJc7-e6, to head off White's d4 push and perhaps occupy the d4-square himself. Instead, 7 ... d6 8 d3 ttJe8?! is poorly-timed, because in that case 9 .i.e3 ttJc7 (9 ... ttJd4 10 lIbl! with the idea of b4 gives White a strong queenside attack; compare the main game) 10 d4! cxd4 11 ttJxd4 takes over the centre. Then ll...ttJe6 can be met by 12 ttJde2! (D).

With this knight retreat, we've arrived at a position that has arisen scores of times and crops up in various forms in related variations such as 5 ttJf3 e5 below. White has a definite advantage, because Black has lost his grip on the centre and will find it very difficult to shake White's bind. Sd3 White could try to stop ... ttJc7-e6 by playing

8 f4 d6 (8 ... ttJc7 9 f5) 9 d3 ttJc7 10 f5. But this

gives up the e5-square, and 10 ... nb8 with the idea ... a6 and ... b5, and/or ... ttJe5 and ... .i.d7, should maintain the balance. S. .. ttJc7 9 .i.e3 ttJe6 10 f4 Since White can't play d4, he expands on the kingside. This is weakening, however, and perhaps now was the time to start thinking about equality; for example, 10 nbl d6 11 a3 a5 12 ttJb5 ttJcd4 13 a4.

10. .. d6 nlWd2 ttJed4 12 nabl

Trying to resolve the queens ide situation looks correct in lieu of other reasonable strate- gies.

12. . J:tbS 13 b3

Since this has no role in terms of queenside play, White may as well try to neutralize that sector by 13 a3lWa5 14 nf2 a6 15 ttJd5. 13 ... a6 14 h3 b5 15 'it>h2 b4! 16 ttJdl ttJxe2 17 ~xe2 ttJd41S .i.xd4!? .i.xd4 (D) As well as having this outpost to play with, Black can always play ... f5 if needed, and has ... a5-a4 as a positive idea. 19 ttJe3

19 f5 e6! ruins White's kingside plans.

19. .. a5!? 20 ttJc2 .i.c3 21 lWe3! "iVb6

Here, instead of22 f5?! a4, White should play 22l:tbdl! a4 23 d4. Still, Black has the better mi- nor piece and will control the open a-file.

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 195

Pure Symmetrical with 5 ltJf3: Introduction

[diagram]
(D)

Many of the leading players have always played the tLlf3 lines of the Pure Symmetrical Variation. I phrase it that way because this in- cludes not only those who arrive at the posi- tion by means of 1 c4 c5 2 tLlc3 tLlc6 3 g3 g6 4 i.g2 i.g7 5 tLlf3, but also the sizeable number who come to it by other means. The possible move-orders are too numerous to list, since both players can make the basic moves in al- most any sequence; but you can work out how easy it is for the relevant positions to arise from 1 ttJf3, 1 c4 c5 2 tLlf3 (or here 1...tLlf6 or

1...g6), 1 c4 c5 2 tLlc3 tLlc6 3 tLlf3, or any sys-

tem in which the moves g3 and i.g2 are played at an early stage. The benefit of playing tLlf3 before or by move 5 is that White can castle quickly and prepare to play d4. Black has to address that possibility so as not to lose ground in the centre. Let's first see what happens if he tries to maintain symmetry. Traditional Main Line with S. .. ltJfS

[diagram]
tLlf6 6 O-O Already we have an important juncture. As- suming that you're playing White and heading for the main lines with d4, I'd recommend 6 d4(!)(D).

This can, and usually does, enter the main line when Black plays 6 ... cxd4 7 tLlxd4 O-O 8 O-O (which is equivalent to 6 O-O O-O 7 d4 cxd4 8 tLlxd4). But this move-order is important, in my opinion, because it circumvents 6 O-O d5, a respectable equalizing variation which we shall see in the next note. Looking at the alternatives, we see that White benefits from 6 d4 in some other respects, whereas Black can exercise some new options: a) 6 ... d6 is shaky. By committing to ... d6 be- fore castling, Black gives White a chance to play 7 dxc5 (7 d5 tLla5 8 tLld2 transposes to a King's Indian Defence; see below; furthermore, 70-0 can return to our main line after 7 ... cxd4 8 tLlxd4 tLlxd4 9 ~xd4 O-O; if Black passes on 8 ... tLlxd4 and plays 8 ... i.d7 a good response is 9 tLlc2!, avoiding exchanges; then a number of games over the years have been played with 9 ... O-O 10 b3 ~a5 11 i.b2, when White gener- ally gets some advantage) 7 ... dxc5 8 Wixd8+

By exchanging queens at this point, White gets a superior version of the variation 6 O-O O-O

7 d4 d6 8 dxc5 dxc5. He seems to stand better;

for example, 8 ... tLlxd8 (8 ... <.t>xd8 9 i.f4 and 10 O-O-O+ wins too much time) 9 i.e3 tLle6 10 tLlg5 1? tLlxg5 (1O ... tLld4 110-O-O tLlg4 12 tLld5) 11 i.xg5 and Black has some troubles in the face of i.e3 followed by tLld5. b) Another way for Black to deviate (after 6 d4) is by 6 ... cxd4 7 tLlxd4 d5!? (7 ... O-O 8 O-O is the main line), but 8 O-O O-O 9 cxd5 tLlxd5 10 tLlxd5 tLlxd4 11 i.g5! is very uncomfortable for

196 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

him because of the threat 12 tDxe7+. The best response is 11...tDc6, when 12 'ilVa4!, intending .l:.fdl, gives White a strong initiative. c) Finally, 6 ... 'ilVaS!? (D) has some intrigu- ing nuances. w A surprisingly respectable line is 7 dS tDe4!? 8 dxc6 tDxc3 9 'ilVd2 'ilVb4! 10 O-O tDe4 11 'ilVd3 tDd6 12 .i.f4 dxc6 13 .i.xd6 exd6 14 ~xd6 'ilVxb2! IS l':!.adl 'iVf6 16 'ilVxcs 'ilVe7 17 :d6!, Akopian-Shulman, European Ch, Ohrid 200l. White manages to equalize just in time because of 17 ... O-O 181hc6!. White may do best to gambit a pawn by 7 O-O cxd4 8 tDxd4, allowing 8 ... 'ilVcS. This is Black's point: he forces White's knight to commit and simultaneously pesters the c4-pawn. On the other hand, he fails to develop. In the game Boger-Kumar/Samraoui, correspondence game 2002, White plunged ahead by 9 tDdbS! O-O (D) (9 ... 'it>d8 10 .i.f4!). Now he should have continued 10 tDc7! l:i.b8 11 tD7dS 'ilVxc4 (ll...tDxdS 12 cxdS tDd4 13 w .Be3) 12 .i.f4 l:.a8 (a nice trick is 12 ... eS? 13 .i.xeS! tDxeS 14 tDxf6+ .i.xf6 IS 'iV d6 !, forking rook and bishop) 13 b3 'iVcs 14 M! ~c4 IS bS!, and in most lines tDxe7+ will badly damage Black's pawn-structure.

6 ... O-O

Taking the initiative in the centre makes sense, before White does. Therefore Black should strongly consider 6 ... dS 7 cxdS (7 ~a4!? is an idea that might be worth a look) 7 ... tDxdS

This is an important position, both in this move-order and in other lines which may trans- pose (say, 1 c4 tDf6 2 tDc3 g6 3 tDf3 dS 4 cxdS tDxdS S g3 .i.g7 with ... cS soon to follow). I'm not going to cover this line in detail, but it's thought to be equal based upon long expe- rience. Black's light squares are a little weak on the hl-a8 diagonal, but White can only achieve so much by trying to exploit them. The best-known line goes 8 tDxdS (8 d3!? hopes to get more than enough compensation following

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 197

8 ... ltJxc3 9 bxc3 .lixc3 10 l:!.b1, but Black can simply decline the pawn by 8 ... O-O) 8 .. :~xdS 9 d3 (with this modest advance, White wants to take advantage of his opponent's queen being in the g2-bishop's line of fire; while stationed in the centre, however, Black's queen exerts influence over both d4 and White's queenside, and this seems to hold the balance) 9 ... O-O 10 .lie3 (D).

1O ... .lid7! (according to theory, 1O ... .lixb2 11 !lb1 .lif6 is risky but also satisfactory) 11 ltJd4 ~d6 12 ltJxc6 .lixc6 13 .lixc6 'ii'xc6 14 l:!.c1 'iVe6 IS !lxcS 'iVxa2 16l:!.bS (the best try, which originally won several games, but Black seems to have solved his problems) 16 ... b6 17 ~a1 ~e6! (l7 .. :~xa1?! 18 !lxa1 .llfb8?! 19 l:ta6! is instructive; Black's queenside pawns are frozen, and Karpov-Ribli, Amsterdam 1980 went 19 ... Rf8 20 !lb4! .lieS 21 !lba4! bS 22 l:!.a2 .llb7 23 b3 .lib8 24 .lics 'lite8 2S d4!; White's central majority adds insult to injury) 18 'iVa4 (18 'iVa6 ~d7 19l:!.a1 'ii'g4! 20 f3 'ii'e6 21 'iii>f2 'iVh3 draws) 18 .. .l:tfc8 19 .:tal (l91:tb4 'iVdS!) 19 ... hS 20 'iVe4 'iVxe4 21 dxe4l:tc2 and things are about to be liquidated, I.Ivanov-Ben- jamin, St Martin 1992. This line provides White an incentive to play

6 d4 rather than 6 O-O. Not surprisingly, there

are multiple options for both sides at every juncture from moves 10 to IS, so you may want to do your own investigation. 7 d4cxd4 Two points here: a) Trying to maintain symmetry with 7 ... dS (almost never played) leads to the better game for White after 8 dxcS (or 8 cxdS cxd4!? 9 ltJxd4ltJxdS 10 ltJxdSltJxd4 11 .ligS!) 8 ... dxc4 9 'iYa4. b) Since the main line with 7 ... cxd4 isn't easy for Black to play, he may want to look into 7 ... d6 (D), which is a Fianchetto Variation of the King's Indian Defence. w White can play ambitiously by entering the fascinating main line 8 dS ltJaS 9 ltJd2 (which requires study for both sides) or simplify by 8 dxcS dxcS and then 9 .lie3 or 9 .lif4. The 8 dxcS line has generally been considered satisfactory for Black, although his winning chances are se- riously reduced in some variations. White may also be discontent, because his abstract advan- tage will often dissipate within a few moves. You'll have to refer to King's Indian theory to sort this out. SltJxd4 (D)

We've reached what used to be considered the main line of the entire Symmetrical Eng- lish. Because White seems to retain a nagging

198 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

edge with best play, it no longer has that ele- vated a status. Still, new ideas appear on a regu- lar basis, and grandmasters haven't abandoned the variation as Black. I'll discuss the basic ideas in the following games. Metal - Hogye Correspondence game 1994

[diagram]
liJf3liJf6 6 O-O O-O 7 d4 cxd4 8 liJxd4liJg4!? Black has various minor alternatives to 8 ... liJxd4 (see the next game) and 8 ... liJg4, but none are held to equalize; for example, 8 ... a6?! allows White to play 9 c5!, attacking b6 and discouraging ... d6. Quite a few contests have featured the gam- bit 8 ... d6 9 liJxc6 bxc6 10 Ji.xc6, but Black probably lacks enough compensation: 1O ... l::i.b8 (White stands better after 1O ... Ji.h3 11 Ji.xa8 "iVxa8 12 f3 Ji.xfl 13 'it>xfl 1:tc8 14 ~d3) 11 Ji.g2 "iVa5 12 ~c2. Skipping over most of the theory, one example is Lukov-Y.lvanov, Varna 1995: 12 ... Ji.f5 (12 ... Ji.e6?! 13 Ji.d2 with the idea 13 ... Ji.xc4 14liJd5) 13 e4 Ji.e6 14 b3! (or

14 Ji.d2) 14 ... liJxe4 15liJxe4 Ji.xal 16 Ji.g5 f6?

(Cummings suggests 16 ... Ji.f6 17 liJxf6+ exf6

18 Ji.xf6 "iVf5, although White has the bishop-

pair, a pawn, and an attack for the exchange af- ter 19 't!Vc3!) 17 Ji.e3! ~e5 18 f4 't!Vb2 19 't!Vbl!, winning a piece. So we now return to 8 ... liJg4!? (D): w This popular non-developing move is an at- tempt to transform the pawn-structure, which currently favours White due to his greater con- trol of the centre. Black attacks d4, forcing White to make a decision. But why put the knight on this odd square? First and non-trivi- ally, it discourages White from the useful move

9 Ji.e3. In addition, since it turns out that 9 e3 is

White's best move (refusing to lose time by re- treating), Black aims for a specific idea: he in- tends to play a combination of ... liJxd4 and ... liJh6-f5, working on White's dark squares, in particular attacking the pawn on d4. Of course, 8 ... liJg4 doesn't do anything for Black's queen- side development and completely cedes control of e4 and d5 to the white knight. Therefore White has some time to reorganize, as best ex- plained by example.

9 e3 (D)

The critical move. White supports his centre, attacks the knight on g4, and prepares for slow expansion after developing by b3 and Ji.b2. In addition, the move liJd5 can be useful. Instead, 9 liJc2 Ji.xc3! 10 bxc3 ~a5 is at least equal for Black; even his knight on g4 can contribute to the queenside attack via ... liJe5.

9 . liJxd4 This exchange is considered somewhat inac- curate, but it leads to an extremely instructive game containing most of the main themes of the variation. Black usually waits another move by 9 ... d6 10 b3 (10 liJxc6 bxc6 11 Ji.xc6 nb8 compares well for Black with the similar sacri- fice with 8 ... d6 above, because the knight on g4 will come to e5 and put pressure on c4; 10 liJde2 is logical and has usually yielded some advantage - White intends to build up slowly, usually by b3 and Ji.b2, and later placing a knight on d5), when Black's normal continua- tion is 1O ... liJxd4 11 exd4liJh6 (D).

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 199

w Then 12 .tb2 is of course playable, but gives Black what he wants after 12 ... liJfS. White has two more interesting approaches: a) 12 .txh6!? (this popular capture directly eliminates ... liJfS and gives White time to se- cure his centre while attacking down the e-file; in addition, Black's bishop on h6 will be mis- placed and will generally waste a tempo retreat- ing to g7) 12 ... .txh6 13 ~e2 .tg7 14 ~fd1. Here White takes advantage of the fact that Black's c8-bishop can't abandon his b7-pawn. While Black is getting organized, White intends to advance his pawns and create a favourable pawn-structure: 14 ... l::te8 IS lIac1 lIb8 16 cS! i.d7 17 b4, Mikhalchishin-Sale, Nova Gorica

1999. White's majority is on the march; Hansen

gives 17 ... aS 18 a3 eS!? 19 dS e4, but the pawns are so dominant that even 20 liJxe4 with the idea 20 .. .f5? 21 c6 is good; or, if Black plays 20 ... .ta4, the sacrifice 21 'iVc4! .txdl 22.l:txdl leaves White in command. b) The simple 12 .td2, as in the main game, also has its appeal; for example, 12 ... .iIb8 13 d5 a6 14 a4liJg4!? 15 h3liJf6 16 l::tell:!.e8 17 as! b6 18 axb6 ~xb6 19 na3liJd7 20 liJe4! liJe5 21 i.a5 ~a7 22 .tc3 .tf5 23 'Val! with pressure all over the board, Antonenko-Bazhenov, e- mail (ICCF) 2004. 10 exd4liJh611.td2! (D) By defending the c3-knight, White prepares d5 without permitting Black an effective at- tack along the al-h8 diagonal (compare 11 b3 liJf5). 1l. . liJfS 12 dS d6 13 .iIel This simple set-up is appealing, because White controls more space and it's not easy for Black to undertake anything.

13  JIbS 14 .l:tc1 .td7 IS b3!? a6 16 liJe4! b617.tc3 White has a more-or-Iess ideal position for this variation. 17 .. I:.eS IS .txg7 liJxg7 19 'iVd2 .tfS 20 'Vh6 .txe4 21l:txe4liJfS 22 'iVd2 eSt? Black doesn't want to wait around for moves like lIcel, .th3 and/or h4-h5. 23 dxe6 lIxe6 24 .iIcel .iIxe4 2S .txe4 liJe7

26.iIdl

White has a dominant position. Markowski - Gdanski Polish Ch, Brzeg Dolny 1996

1 c4 cS 2 liJc3 liJc6 3 g3 g6 4 .tg2 .tg7 S

liJf3liJf6 6 O-O O-O 7 d4 cxd4 SliJxd4liJxd4 9 'Vxd4 d6 (D) w Black's set-up looks like a Sicilian Dragon, but notice that White's light-squared bishop, so often passively placed in the Sicilian Defence on e2 or d3, has wonderful scope here. Black's

200 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

strategy will be to break down White's grip on the centre, which means directly attacking the c4-pawn and/or chipping away at it with the move ... b5. 10 "iWd3 The queen retreats from any potential at- tacks along the al-h8 diagonal, but stays in touch with the centre and keeps the c-pawn de- fended. Two alternatives are instructive, and show what Black is up to: a) 10 b3 isn't vulnerable to any discovered attacks, nor even to 1O ... .Bf5 11 .Bb2 ttJe4 12 'iVe3, but 1O ... d5! exploits the open diagonal and equalizes: 11 cxd5 ttJxd5 (even 1l....Be6!? 12 'ilke3 ttJxd5 13 .Bxd5 .Bxd5 14 l:ldl e6 is OK) 12 'iUxd5 .Bxc3 13 .Bh6 'iUxd5 14.Bxd5 l:ld8 15 :adl .Bh3 16 .Bg2 .Bxg2 17 ~xg2 1/2-1/2 Spas sky-Tal, Moscow 1967. b) 10 l:f.dl.Be6! 11 .Bxb7 ttJg4!? attacks the queen (Black can also play Il..J;Ib8 first): 12 "iWf4 %;Ib8 13 .Bg2 'iUc8! ? (or 13 ... .Bh6, probably leading to a repetition of moves) 14 ttJd5 .l:.e8 15 h3?! ttJe5 16 "iWh4 'iUxc4 17 ttJxe7+ ~h8, and Black will win his pawn back, Larsen-Tal, Candidates match (game 9), Bled 1965. After the text-move, 10 'iVd3 (D), we see that White has more space and greater control of the central squares.

Notice that with this structure, Black has a more active king's bishop than he does in the Hedgehog Variation (see Chapter 10), where he has the structure ... d6/ ... e6 and the bishop is on e7. But the cost is a dear one: Black's other bishop on c8 has trouble developing and no ideal square to go to. In the meantime, the de- sirable central move ... e6, preventing a knight from coming to d5, would seriously weaken Black's d-pawn. Black's counterplay will cus- tomarily involve ... a6 and ... b5 (usually sup- ported by ... :b8 and sometimes by ... 'ii'a5). Or he can directly attack White's c-pawn by moves such as ... .Be6 and ... ttJd7-e5; if needed, the move ... b5 might come later, with additional force. Because of the influence of the g2-bishop, Black will sometimes try to compel White to adopt a Maroczy Bind structure (e4/c4) by playing ... .Bf5 and provoking e4 in return. This happens in the next note, although probably prematurely. In terms of specifics, White may not always object to ... b5 because it can loosen Black's queenside and give White play down the c-file with his rooks; the worth of ... b5 has to be as- sessed by both parties on a case-by-case basis. In many positions, White will play ttJd5, chang- ing the pawn-structure in his favour if Black has to capture. He also has the simple development l:ldl (as above) which might prepare pawn- breaks with c5 or e5; the move .Be3 can have a similar function. 10 ... a6 For many years, this flexible pawn advance has been the main line. Black reasons that he will probably play ... a6 anyway, and he wants to prepare for an eventual ... b5 advance without committing his other pieces and pawns. The most interesting alternative is probably 1O ... .Bf5 (D), which tempts White to play e4 and close off the diagonal of his g2-bishop. w But it costs a tempo, and Black got in trouble quickly in the nice example Smyslov-Timman, Moscow 1981: 11 e4.Be6 12 b3 (12 .Bd2 can

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 201

also be effective; for example, l2 ... a6 13 b3 ttJd7 14 ~e2 ttJc5 15 lIac1 Ji.d7 16l:tfdll:tc8

17 Ji.e3! ~e8 18 ttJd5, Hort-Unzicker, Lugano

Olympiad 1968) 12 ... a6 13 Ji.b2 ttJd7 14 "iVd2 ttJc5 15 f4! lIc8? (Smyslov suggests 15 ... f5 16 exf5 Ji.xf5, which improves, but Black has two immobile pawns facing White's open files, so this must favour White after 17 lIadl or 17 ttJd5) 16 f5 Ji.d7 17 f6! (D).

17 ... exf6 (17 ... Ji.xf6?? 18 .l:!.xf6! exf619 ttJd5 and Black can resign, in view of 19 .. .f5 20 Ji.f6!) 18 ttJd5 f5 19 exf5 Ji.xf5 20 Ji.xg7 ~xg7 21 ~d4+ f6 22 g4! Ji.e6 (the bishop falls after 22 ... ttJe6 23 ~dl) 23 ttJxf6 .u.xf6 24 g5 and White wins. Now we return to the position after 1O ... a6

11 Ji.d2!?

There are several other possibilities here, in- cluding the old main line with 11 Ji.e3 ttJg4 12 .Bd4 ttJe5 13 ~d1. I think a particularly promising continuation is 11 lIdl, directly exploiting the d-file. White's immediate idea is 12 c5. This is not so easy to meet; for example: a) 11...Ji.f5?! 12 'it'f3! (threatening both 'iWxb7 and c5). Now in Gay-Campbell, corre- spondence game 1985, Black played the clever 12 .. .'tlfc7 13 ~xb7 lIa7! 14 ~xc7 lIxc7 15 e4 Ji.e6, and it looks as though the c-pawn is about to fall; nevertheless, 16 e5! dxe5 17 b3 leaves White with two active bishops and a passed c- pawn. After the more natural 12 .. J:tb8, White plays 13 c5! and gains the upper hand, because the black d-pawn is about to become fatally weak. Teboul-Mason, e-mail (IECG) 2002 con- tinued dynamically with 13 ... b5!, but Black still got a losing position after 14 a3! ttJg4 15 Ji.g5 ttJe5 16 "iVf4 ttJc4 17 cxd6 f6 18 dxe7 ~xe7 19 ttJd5 'iWa7 20 Ji.h6 ttJxb2 21 Ji.xg7 r:Jitxg7 22 l:tdcl. b) Black does better with 1l...'it'a5!. How- ever, 12 Ji.e3 centralizes all of White's pieces; for example, 12 ... Ji.f5 13 ~d2 (attacking b7, and considering ttJd5) 13. .. ~b4 14 l:tac1 lHc8

15 b3 .l:!.ab8 16 h3! h5?! (but otherwise g4 was a

major problem) 17 i.a7! .u.a8 18 Ji.d4 I!ab8 19 Ji.xf6! Ji.xf6 20 ttJd5 'iWxd2 21 ttJxf6+ exf6 22 .l:!.xd2 with a clear advantage. 11  .l:Ib8 (D) w

12.l:Iacl

12 c5!? has its own theory, centred around 12 ... Ji.f5 13 e4 dxc5!? 14 ~xd8l:!bxd8 15 i.e3. White is supposed to stand better after 12 ... dxc5 13 ~xd8l:!xd8 14 i.f4 ILa8 15 ttJa4, although Kosten points out that 15 ... Ji.g4 might be ade- quate anyway.

202 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

12 ... ..te6 The bold sacrifice 12 ... bS!? has been tried in a few games: 13 cxbS axbS 14lbxbS (14 b4!?) 14 ... ..tfS (or 14 ... ..ta6 IS a4lbd7 16 b4!) IS e4 lbxe4 16 ..txe4 ..txe4 17 ~xe4 .l:.xbS 18 b4 dS 19 ~d3 (D).

A funny position: mobile centre pawns are usually more powerful than connected passed queenside pawns, but White's control of the c- file changes matters: 19 ... ~d7 (19 ... .l:.b7 20 a4 eS, Damljanovic-Macieja, European Team Ch, Plovdiv 2003, and now 21 bS! e4 22 ~b3 d4 23 as is strong) 20 a4 l:i.bb8 21 bS eS 22 :!.c6, Ki.Georgiev-Gufeld, Calcutta 1992. With the cooperation of his rooks, White's advanced queenside pawns are difficult to cope with. 13 b3lbd714 e4 (D)

White has achieved a firm grip on the centre. In this sort of Maroczy Bind structure, Black needs to get in either ... dS or ... bS. There's not a lot of choice here. 14 ... bS! 14 ... lbcs IS ~e2 leaves Black without a plan. White can play lbdS, launch an attack by f4-fS, or build up with .l:.fdl, preparing b4 and possibly cS. IS cxbS axbSl6lbdS! lbcs 17 ~e2 (D)

Now White's extra territory is supplemented by his very useful open c-file. From the stand- point of opening theory, White has won the bat- tle. 17 .. :iid7 17 ... ..td7? allowed 18 eS! .l:.e8 (or 18 ... ..txeS 19 ':xcS) 19 ..te3 in Uhlmann-H.Griinberg, East German Ch, Stralsund 1975. Uhlmann sug- gested 17 ... ..txdS!? 18 exdS b4, when 19 .l:.c2 leaves White with a positional advantage. For example, .l:.fc 1 and llc4 might follow, and in these positions, h4-hS is always irritating. 18 b4! ..txdS 19 exdS lba4 20 .l:.c6! (D) Black's pieces are well-enough stationed, but between White's control of the c-file and

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 203

his potentially strong bishop-pair, he stands better. 20  J~b7 B Here simply 21 ~fc1! would have exerted great pressure on Black's position; for example,

21.. ..

~Jb2 (heading for c4, which looks a more promising outpost than a4) 22 j.c3! j.xc3 23 It 1xc3 lZ'lc4?! 24 a4!. Symmetrical with S. .. eS

[diagram]
e5 (D) The Botvinnik structure again, but this time Black is employing it. This defence is very im- portant, not only because those who play slZ'lf3 will often have to play against it, but because it can arise by many different move-orders that involve an early ... cS and ... eS. A common one, for example, is 1 c4 cS 2 lZ'lf3 lZ'lc6 3 lZ'lc3 eS 4 g3 g6 S j.g2 j.g7, and anyone playing 1 c4 cS 2 lZ'lc3 g6 3 lZ'lf3 j.g7 who doesn't want to ven- ture into 4 d4 cxd4 S lZ'lxd4 lZ'lc6 will probably accede to 4 g3 eS. You should definitely compare S e4 lZ'lf6 in the 'Symmetrical Botvinnik: S e4' section to see an explanation of the themes and ideas that follow. Here I'll try to expand upon those con- cepts on a case-to-case basis. 60-0 Unfortunately, it's not feasible to cover the multitude of possible move-orders. Here's a couple of deviations that might be enlightening: a) A fascinating sideline goes 6 d3 lZ'lge7 7 lZ'ld2!? (D) with the idea lZ'lfl-e3. As explained in the reversed position (after the moves S e4 lZ'lf6 6 lZ'lge2 d6 7 O-O lZ'ld7! ?), White is planning three knight moves to get to e3 (lZ'ld2-fl-e3), just as the knight moves three times following O-O and then lZ'le1-c2-e3. The difference is that he has saved the move 6 O-O, and is thus able to stop Black from playing ... dS in the critical line 7 ... d6 8 lZ'lfl j.e6 (8 ... lZ'lfS 9 lZ'le3 lZ'lxe3 10 j.xe3 j.e6 appears slightly better for White; 8 ... a6 with the idea ... bS is another op- tion) 9lZ'le3 iVd7 10 lZ'ledS. White has gained his dS outpost without suffering any punishment. Compare the next game, where he doesn't do so well. After 10 lZ'ledS, a plausible continuation is 10 ... O-O (after 1O .. J::tb8?, 11 j.gS! attacking f6 was very awkward for Black in L.B.Hansen- J.Polgar, Abenra (rapid) 1989) 11 j.gS (also in- teresting is 11 h4!? hS 12 ~a4, or just 11 i:tb1 with the idea a3 and b4) 11 .. .f6 12 j.d2 j.f7 13 O-O lZ'lxdS 14 lZ'lxdS lZ'le7 IS lZ'lxe7+ 'WIxe7 16 i:tb1 with a small but annoying advantage. b) 6 a3lZ'lge7 7 b4!? intends 7 ... cxb4 8 axb4 lZ'lxb4 9 j.a3 with more than enough compensa- tion because of Black's weak d6-square. How- ever, 7 ... dS! is a well-established solution that seems satisfactory for Black: 8 cxdS (the win of a pawn by 8 bxcS O-O 9 cxdS lZ'lxdS is only tem- porary) 8 ... lZ'lxdS 9lZ'lxdS 'WIxdS 10 j.b2 O-O 11 O-O e4! 12 j.xg7 ~xg7 13lZ'lel cxb4 14 d3 j.fS IS lZ'lc2, Beliavsky-Oral, European Team Ch, Leon 2001. Black stands better in any case, but IS ... aS! I6lZ'le3 iVe6 would leave White look- ing for compensation. 6 .. lZ'lge7 (D) 7 d3 7 lZ'lei is the other standard move for White, similar to the last note. He wants to bring the

204 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w knight to c2 (from where it might support the move b4) and in some cases on to e3 in order to control dS: 7 ... O-O (another set-up that we saw with reversed colours is 7 ... a6!? 8 4:Jc2 l:tb8 {with the idea ... bS} 9 a40-0 10 d3 d6; this is a known but unresolved variation in which Black usually plays ... 4:Jb4 to contest White's control of dS) 8 4:Jc2 d6 9 d3 .l:i.b8 10 a3 (the knight on c2 actually supports b4, so there are some rea- sons to delay 4:Je3, especially since that move limits White's options for the c1-bishop). Now: a) Black can play 1O ... i.e6 and allow 11 b4, but then 11...e4?! looks too greedy after 12 4:Jxe4 i.xal 13 4:Jxal, a standard exchange sac- rifice. The verdict can vary from position to po- sition, but here the ability to put a bishop on b2 is a good sign; for example, 13 ... cxb4 14 axb4 dS IS 4:Jf6+! r:t;g7 16 i.b2 d4 17 4:Je4! with the idea of 4:Jc2 (or 4:Jb3) and e3, removing the d- pawn and breaking down Black's defences. b) So Black generally responds with 10 ... as, when one example is 11 i.gS f6 12 i.d2 i.e6 13 4:Je3 4:Jd4!? 14 4:JedS 4:JxdS IS 4:JxdS, Kos- ten-Chabanon, French Team Ch, Cannes 2004. White's outpost is unchallenged and he has a pleasant advantage.

7 ... O-O

Black, too, can try to save time by not cas- tling. A line that has arisen by varying move- orders is 7 ... d6 8 a3 as 9 4:Jel i.e6 10 4:Jc2 dS 11 cxdS 4:JxdS 12 4:Je3 4:Jde7! 13 4:Jc4 (D). White's knights look good, but Black has more space: 13 ... O-O 14 i.gS! f6 IS i.e3 b6 16 ~a4 "VJfjc7, Kaidanov-Ilinsky, Gausdal 1991. At this point, White might try to break down Black's centre by 17 f4!. Since 17 ... exf4? 18 i.xf4 gives White too many squares and tactical

opportunities, Black could play 17 .. J:tab8, when after 18 fxeS 4:JxeS 19 4:JxeS fxeS, 20 g4!? is a clever move designed to prevent Black's most active plan of ... 4:JfS-d4. Then Black's poor pawn-structure (with the isolated e-pawn) lets him in for a lasting disadvantage, but he proba- bly shouldn't lose with accurate defence.

8 a3 d6 9 .ilbl a5 (D)

w We've arrived at one of the basic positions for this variation. Barczay - Uhlmann Sarajevo 1969

[diagram]
4:Jf3 e5 6 O-O 4:Jge7 7 d3 O-O 8 a3 d6 9 .ilbl a5 104:Jel An older line is 10 i.d2 .ilb8!. Black makes a useful move that anticipates playing ... b5 if White plays 4:JdS: 11 4:Jel i.e6 12 4:Jc2 (12 'ia4!? looks a better try) 12 ... d5 13 cxd5 4:JxdS 14 4:JxdS (14 4:Je3 4:Jde7!) 14 ... i.xd5 15 b4

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 205

i.xg2 16 'ittxg2 b5! 17 bxa5 ttJxa5, Evans- Karpov, San Antonio 1972. It's roughly equal, although Black has some extra space. 10 ... .i.e611 ttJdS J::tb8! 12 ttJc2 bS (D) w This pawn-break is the logical consequence of Black's strategy. He is gaining space and try- ing to loosen White's hold on d5. 13 ttJce3 Uhlmann queries 13 cxb5 on the grounds of 13 ... ttJxd5 14 bxc6 ttJc3, but after 15 .i.g5! ttJxe2+ 16 'i1'xe2 ~xg5 17 b4, White will hold onto his pawn on c6. The simple recapture 13 ... l1xb5! is better, intending 14 ttJce3 ttJxd5 15 ttJxd5 ~d7 and ... J::tfb8. 13 ~d714 cxbS J::txbS IS a4?! White gives himself a permanently back- ward b-pawn because he anticipates winning Black's a-pawn. IS  J::tbb816 ttJxe7+ ttJxe7 17 ttJc4 ttJc6 18 .i.d2 (D)

18 e4! For the cost of a pawn, Black's centre pawns are pressing forward, and he has activated both bishops. 19 ttJxaS 19 .i.f4 exd3 20 'iVxd3 ttJd4 doesn't help White because 21 ttJxd6?? meets with 21...g5. 19  ttJxaS 20 .i.xaS At this point, instead of 20 ... exd3?, Uhlmann analyses 20 ... .i.b3! 21 'iVd2 .i.a2 22 .tf.bc1? (22 .Bxe4 .i.xbl 23 .l:!xbl d5 24 .i.f3 gives White a little counterplay, although Black keeps the pawn after 24 .. :iWxa4 25 .i.xd5 .i.xb2!) 22 .. Jhb2 23 :'c2 J::!.fb8 and Black is clearly in charge. Ever since 12 ... b5, things have looked good for him. White needs to improve, perhaps by delaying the move O-O, as we saw above. He can also em- ploy the plan shown in the next game. Minasian - lliushin European Ch, Antalya 2004

1 c4 cS 2 ttJc3 g6 3 g3 .i.g7 4 .i.g2 ttJc6 S

ttJf3 eS 5 ... a6 with the idea of an early ... l:tb8 and ... b5 is a legitimate plan that I won't be examin- ing here; it is often combined with ... e5. The sanle idea could result from 5 ... d6 6 d3 a6, but watch out in that case for 7 a3 e5?! 8 b4!, be- cause now 8 ... cxb4 9 axM e4?! (9 ... ttJxb4 runs into the usual problem of 10 ii.a3 ttJc6 11 ttJe4, which is good for White) falls for a trick that applies to several positions: 10 ttJxe4! .ixall1 ii.g5 (D).

11....i.f6 (11...f6 12 'iVxal) 12 ttJxf6+ ttJxf6

13 ~al ttJxb4 140-0 and Black is getting mas- sacred on the dark squares.

206 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

6 O-O 0,ge7 7 d3 O-O 8 a3 d6 9 .l:tbl as 10

.i.gS!? (D) In the last game White played 10 0,e1 with little success. With the text-move, White in- tends to provoke a weakness.

10  f6 Black is generally not advised to play 1O ... h6? due to 11 .i.xe7! 0,xe7 12 0,d2. It may seem strange for White to give up the bishop-pair, but look at the scope of White's remaining bishop and the pressure on Black's b-pawn that will follow the advance b4. Furthermore, Black doesn't want to get stuck with his bad bishop on g7 versus a strong white knight. These factors are not decisive but make Black's life difficult; for example, 12 ... 0,c6 (12 ... .l:tb8 is met by 13 'iYc2! .i.e6 14 b4, not 13 b4?! axb4 14 axb4 e4! with the point 15 0,cxe4? f5 ) 13 0,d5 .i.e6 14 0,e4.l::i.b8 15 0,ec3 f5 16 b4 with a promising queenside attack. ll.i.d2 l::tb8 This is the traditional move, but if Black can play 11.. .. i.e6! first, he should strongly con- sider it, in order to get ... d5 in as quickly as pos- sible. I'm not going to go into the details here, but in that case 12 'iVa4 is White's most promis- ing option. We saw this move with reversed colours after 5 e4 0,f6. 12 0,el has been played repeatedly over the years. Unfortunately, the benefit of inserting 10 .i.g5 doesn't necessarily show itself after 12 ... d5! 13 cxd5 0,xd5: a) In fact White's apparent purpose - to ex- ploit the a2-g8 diagonal by 14 ~b3?! - comes up short after 14 ... a4! with the idea 15 'iVxb7 0,a5 16 ~b5 ctJb3; for example, one game went 17 ~c6 ctJd4 18 "iVxc5?? .l:ta5. Instead, 17 .i.e3 0,xe3 18 fxe3 .l:tb8 19 ~xa4 0,d2 wins the ex- change for Black, Matamoros-Bellon, Havana 2001; White has two pawns for it, but Black has space and the bishop-pair. b) White's best continuation is 14 ctJc2! a4 15 ctJe3 ctJxe3 16 .i.xe3 'iVa5 17 .l:tc1, when he has achieved a kind of balance. If you want to play for or against 5 ... e5, you really should have a grip on these ideas. 12 0,el.i.e613 0,e2 dS14 exdS 0,xdS (D) w We've seen this type of position. Black has space and central control, so White needs to get queenside play or he will actually stand worse. 15 ctJe3 The conventional move. However, others are probably more effective: a) 15 b4! axb4 16 0,xd5 .i.xd5 17 axb4 has been suggested, when White might still hold a very slight edge after 17 ... .i.xg2 18 'it>xg2 'iVd5+ 19 f3!. b) Vasiliev-Emelin, Paide 1999 saw 15 ctJxd5 .i.xd5 16 .i.xd5+ 'iVxd5 17 b4 cxb4 18 axb4 b6! 19 0,e3 'iVe6 20 bxa5 bxa5 21 .l:txb8 ~xb8 22 ctJc41:ta8 23 .i.e3 f5 24 'iVa4 lh-1h. All very log- ical.

... ctJde7! This move works well because the white knights are ineffective now that they can't go to d5. Furthermore, Black threatens to place a knight on d4, attacking the squares b3 and e2. Having said that, 15 ... 0,xe3 16 .i.xe3 (16 fxe3! may well be better) 16 ... 0,d4 has a good reputa- tion; for example, 17 b4 cxb4 18 axb4 b5! 19 bxa5 b4 20 0,e4 'iVxa5, Zifroni-J.Polgar, Fond du Lac 1990. White stands a bit worse in the face of Black's passed pawn and queenside files.

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 207

After the text-move, White must act quickly to disturb Black's central bind: 16 ttJe4 b6 17 b4 axb4 18 axb4 cxb4 19 i.xb4 ttJxb4 20 .:txb4 h6! (D) w This prepares .. .f5 without permitting White to play ttJg5. Black's passed b-pawn can be slightly weak, but if he drives off White's 28. fxg3 29 hxg3 ttJxe2+ 30 l:!.xe2 lla1 31 ~xa1 i.xa1 32 ttJf1 32 ttJxb6?? loses to 32 ... ~d3. ... b5! 33 lld2 i.xd5 34 J::txd5 fila7 35 ttJe3 i.c3 36 J::tbxb5 i.e1! 37 'lith2 i.xf2 Black is materially ahead and White has weaknesses. This game is a fine example of a sustained initiative. Central Counterattack with S ... e6 Petrosian - Fischer USSR vs Rest of World, Belgrade 1970

[diagram]
ttJf3 e6 (D) knights and opens lines for his bishop-pair, W watch out! 21 ~b1 f5 22 ttJd2 e4! 23 .:td1 ttJc6 2411a4 White has to leave the b-file in view of 24 .:tb5? ttJd4. 24 .. ttJd4 (D) w Look at those bishops! To begin with, Black threatens 25 ... ttJxe2+ followed by 26 ... ttJc3. 25 .:tel ~d7 26 .:tb4 .:ta8! Eyeing al. 27 dxe4 f4! 28 ttJd5 After 28 gxf4 .:tal 29 ~xal ttJxe2+ 30 :xe2 i.xal Black will win, because f4 hangs and Black's pawn-structure is far superior. Over the years this has been Black's most popular defence to 5 ttJf3. With 5 ... e6, he endeavours to create an immediate imbalance by placing his king's knight on e7, in contrast to White's on f3. Furthermore, he will usually play ... d5, strongly influencing the centre, whereas White will apparently have to be content with the less formidable d3. Why would White agree to this? First, be- cause 5 ... e6 creates a few sore points on Black's dark squares d6 and f6; perhaps he can exploit those with the right strategy. In addition, White is able to bring his pieces out just a tad more quickly than Black; not dramatically so, but just enough to prepare expansion on the queenside via b4 before his opponent is fully ready to meet it.

208 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

In objective terms, Black should be able to gain approximate equality. However, he must be ready to handle both tactical and positional strategies from his opponent, who controls the fundamental direction of play. 60-0 If White wants to employ a set-up with d3, he probably does best to play it now, because 6 d3 0,ge7 allows for a quick and useful 7 .tg5!; we shall see why that is so in the next game. Here are two among several alternatives: a) You should note the fact that 6 e3 nor- mally transposes to the 5 e3 lines, because 6 ... 0,ge77 d4 cxd4 8 0,xd4 follows - see 5 e3 e6 above. b) 6 h4!? (D) is a thought-provoking move.

White hopes that after 6 ... h5, Black's weak- nesses may count for something. Then the reader might want to analyse 7 d4!? and com- pare it to 5 0,f3 e6 6 d4 below; it doesn't hurt that White can play 0,g5 without getting chased away by ... h6. Apart from 6 ... h5, Black some- times permits White to advance the h-pawn; for example, 6 ... 0,ge7 7 h5 or 6 ... d5 7 h5, both of which are double-edged. Finally, the most com- mon move, 6 ... h6, might be compared with 6 d3 0,ge7 7 .tg5 h6 8 .td2 of our next game; here, too, White will try to gain a tempo by 'fIVc 1 at the right moment. c) 6 a3 is fairly popular due to 6 ... 0,ge7 7 b4!? (D). But this has several reasonable replies: c1) 7 .. .lDxb4!? 8 axb4 cxb4 90,b5 (9 0,e4 .txal 10 d4 .tc3+ 11 <t>f1 O-O 12 .tg5 is a fan- tastically complex line) 9 ... iLxal 10 'fIVa4 .tf6 11 'ixb4. This position has been said to provide

White with enough compensation, but that as- sessment may be optimistic. c2) 7 ... cxb4 8 axb4 0,xb4 9 .ta3 offers White some compensation for a pawn, although 9 ... 0,ec6! with the idea 10 ~a4 a5 11 Itbl O-O! should be fine for Black; instead, 100-00-0 11 d4 could be tried. c3) The safe 7 ... b6 8 Itbl 0-090-0 has been played a few times, although then 9 ... d5?! may not be best, because 10 bxc5 bxc5 11 0,a4 gives White some pull. Another issue about this move-order with 6 a3 concerns 6 ... d5 (instead of 6 ... 0,ge7). Then

7 O-O 0,ge7 (7 ... dxc4 8 'iVa4) 8 d3 resembles

our main line. You could argue that the move a3 has been played rather early, although I see no obvious way for Black to exploit that. 6 ... 0,ge7 7 d3 O-O 8 .td2 The sort of position that Black would like to head for is illustrated by 8 a3 d5 9 cxd5!? (9 iLd2 transposes to a main line) 9 ... exd5 10 Itbl b6 11 .tf4 h6 12 ~cl d4! 13 0,a4 g5 14 .td2 .te6 15 b4 cxb4 16 axb4 Itc8 (D). w

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 209

This is Csom-Smejkal, Kiel1978. White has adequate play, but his position is difficult to handle. The d4-pawn is a troublesome intruder, whereas White's cxd5 has freed Black's queen's bishop. In fact, Black's bishop tends to stand better when nicely centralized on e6 than on b7. For the next few moves, the same consider- ations apply to the option of playing cxd5. 8  dS 9 a3 b6 10 1:[bl i.b7 11 b4 This game has influenced how White's set- up is viewed, in part because Fischer called Petrosian's move 11 b4 a mistake; and others append '?!' to it and speak of Petrosian's bad judgement. In fact, other moves are passive, and White has his share of the play. 11 ... cxb4 12 axb4 dxc4 13 dxc4 (D)

A fundamental imbalance has arisen that we see in some of the most important variations of 5liJf3 e6 (and 5 e3liJf6). White has a structure with hanging pawns, in which the one on c4 can be a target on the open c-file. However, he has the idea of creating a passed pawn by c5, which can highlight Black's weakness on d6 and work in conjunction with a rook on dl.

13. .. 1:[c8 14 cS! bxcS IS bxcS

Now White's rook on bl has gained scope and he threatens liJe4-d6. IS ... liJaS! 16liJa4 l6liJb5 has been played in this and similar positions; Black's best is 16 .. .l:hc5! 17 'iWa4, and now 17 ... liJec6 18 i.e3 l:!.c4 19 'iWa3 a6! 20 liJd6 1:[c3 21 liJxb7 1:[xa3 maintains equality, while 17 ... a6 18 i.xa5 ~e8 19 'iWa3 .i::f.xb5 20 1:[xb5 axb5 21 i.b4liJd5!? (21...i.f6?! 22l:!.dl ~g7 23liJe5 i.xg2 24liJd7!) 22 i.xf8 i.xf8 is unclear. ... i.c6! 17 ~c2 liJb7 Black's harmonious realignment has led to apparent pressure on c5.

18 J:lfc1 'iWd7 19liJel!?

19 liJg5 liJd5! 20 liJb2 i.b5 21 liJd3 i.xd3 22 'iWxd3 liJxc5 23 'iWb5 is rather unclear. 19 ... liJdS?! 20 liJb2! i.bS (D) w Annotators have assumed that Black has the upper hand here, based upon the weakness of the pawn on c5. But that pawn is also a passed pawn, and White has well-centralized forces. Furthermore, if he can play e4, Black's knights will be denied key squares. Thus White should have played 21 liJbd3!, planning the move e4 to drive Black's powerful knight off d5. Then

21...i.d4?, as in the game, fails to 22 liJf3!

i.xc5 (22 ... liJxc5? 23 liJde5 i.xe5 24 liJxe5 'iWb7 25 i.h61Ifd8 26liJg4) 23 liJxc5liJxc5 24 liJe5 'iYe8 25 i.h6 with too many threats on the dark squares. Instead, the game continued: 21liJed3?! i.d4! 22 ~b3?! 22 i.h6! l:!.fd8 23 'iVd2 again prepares e4, perhaps prefaced by e3. The c5-pawn is invul- nerable; for example, 23 ... liJxc5? 24 liJxc5 i.xc5 25l:txc5 ILxc5 26 WVd4. White may have a small edge, and in any case does not stand worse.

22. .. ltJxcS! 23 ltJxcslhcS 24 :XcS i.xcS 2S

liJd3 i.xd3! 26 'iYxd3 White stays a pawn down, although he has the bishop-pair and Black's weaknesses (the a- pawn, for one) to give him some compensation. To sum up, the opening was adequate for Black, but only just so, and in fact he had to play more accurately than White to avoid disadvantage. Compare the following game.

210 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Jobava - Alekseev Aeroflot Open, Moscow 2006

1 c4 cS 2 liJc3 g6 3 g3 J.g7 4 J.g2 liJc6 S

liJf3 e6 6 d3 This modest positional move of the d-pawn couldn't contrast more with the tactical line 6 d4!?, which we'll look at in the next game. 6 . liJge7 7 J.gS! (D)

Of all the quiet methods for trying to counter Black's central expansion, this is the most inter- esting and has achieved the greatest success.

alternative 9 a3 with the idea .l:!.bl and b4 could easily transpose to the main game.

9 a3 O-O 10 O-O b6 11 .l:!.bl J.b7

The immediate 1l...d4 12liJa4 allows White to play b4 after which, because of the knight's attack on cS, Black is forced to exchange his pawn there; once freed, White's queenside pawns can cause all sorts of mischief. For ex- ample, look at a position such as that after 12 ... J.d7 13 b4 (D). White's simple idea is that Black will have to B kick the bishop out at some point by ... h6, which will lead to a small weakness. More sig- nificantly, the already desirable move ~c1 will come with a gain of tempo in the most impor- tant variations. 7 .. h6 Black can wait, for example by 7 ... O-O 8 O-O dS, but then 9 .l:!.bl will probably transpose any- way after a likely ... h6, and he also has to con- sider 9 ~cl, stopping ... h6, or 9 ~a4.1t doesn't seem worth it for Black to allow White extra possibilities. S J.d2 (D) S. .. dS This aggressive central advance has been al- most automatic with most masters who use S ... e6. Instead, Black can legitimately play more slowly, combining ... d6 with ... b6 and ... J.b7, or even try for ... a6 and ... bS. Of course, you can argue that he might then have been just as well off to play S ... d6 rather than S ... e6. It's also not clear whether 8 ... O-O makes any difference. 9 'iVc1 !? is a possible reply, and the White has achieved the b4 advance more rapidly than he might have, but the point is a general one. You should compare this type of position with a typical one from the Panno Vari- ation of the King's Indian Defence (see dia- gram on following page). Here White has defended c4 by liJf3-d2. In our English Opening position, Black's knight on e7 is three moves away from a square from which it could defend cS. That fact provides some of the motivation for b4 (and ... bS) in the Symmetrical English: once the move is achieved,

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 211

there is a good chance that it will compel the breakdown of the central support on cS (or c4). Finally, White will make the b4 pawn-break even if Black plays ... as; this results in pressure on Black's weak b6-pawn. 12 ~c1! A major point of 7 .i.gS!. Black's king will gain nothing by being on h7 rather than g8, so White has gained a full tempo over the previous game, which he uses to clear the d-file and sup- port his queenside advance. Instead, the ex- change 12 cxdS exdS 13 b4 cxb4 14 axb4 is (once again!) harmless due to 14 ... d4 IS lba4 lbdS. 12 ... ~h713 b4 Now the capture bxcS will fix a weakness on cS (assuming recapture with a pawn), so Black exchanges. 13 ... cxb414 axb4 (D)

14 ... dxc4 14 ... ~d7 allows White to achieve his desired advance by IS cS!, after which he threatens bS, and also controls d6. In Jobava-A.Kovacevic, European Team Ch, Leon 2001, White got the advantage by playing IS bS!? lbd8? (lS ... lbd4 is better) 16 cS! bxcS 17lba4 with a clear supe- riority, since the dark squares are collapsing: 17 ... c4 18 dxc4 dxc4 19 lbcs ~c7 20 ~xc4 .i.dS 21 ~4l:.c8? (but the game situation is al- ready desperate) 22l:.bc1 ~d6 23 e4l:.xcs 24 'iVxcs 'iVxcS 2S l:.xcs .i.xe4 26 lbgS+ hxgS 27 .i.xe4 1-0. IS dxc4 (D)

An interesting position, very much like Fischer-Petrosian above, and also like those lines that we saw above stemming from S e3 lbf6 6lbge2 d6, etc., with colours reversed. But in this case White has gained the extra move ~c1, which not only gives him time to create a passed pawn on the queenside by cS, having in mind lbbS-d6 or lbe4-d6, but clears the way for .l:tdl. Black is already hard-pressed for a solu- tion to this strategy. IS.  :ili'c8!? This has been the normal move, as in the re- versed position. Black's situation is more criti- cal than it may seem at first: a) The thematic and innocent-looking move IS ... .l':tc8? (the idea in Petrosian-Fischer) prac- tically loses right away after 16 .l:i.dl ~e8 (16 ... 1lVc7 17 cS threatens bS; then 17 ... bxcS 18 lbbS1lVb8 19 bxcS harasses Black's queen and prepares lbd6, .i.c3 andJodWa3) 17 cS lbd8!? (18 bS was threatened, as well as lbbS-d6, ~a3, and more) 18 ~a3 l:!.a8 and even better than 19 bS bxcS 20 lba4 (Tadic-Ninov, Bel- grade 2003) is 19 .i.f4!, when Black is com- pletely tied up.

212 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

b) 15 ... tDf5 is more aggressive and logical, and yet it doesn't really address White's posi- tional threat; moreover, putting a knight on d4 may not mean much for Black: 16 c5! bxc5 (af- ter 16 ... tDe5, White can grab a loose pawn by 17 tDxe5 .Bxg2 18 ~xg2 .Bxe5 19 e4 tDd4 20 .Bxh6) 17 bxc5 .Ba6! (17 ... l':tb8? 18 .Bf4 e5 19 tDxe5! tDxe5 20 .Bxb7 "Jiiie7 21 c6) 18 "Jiiia3 ~c8

w 19 g4! tDfe7, and instead of 20 .l:f.al?! (Job- ava-Mchedlishvili, Tbilisi 2000), 20 g5! would cause great trouble on the dark squares, based upon tDe4 and .Bc3. In the end, neither 15 .. ..l:k8 nor 15 ... tDf5 is fully satisfactory for Black. 16 tDe4 tDfS (D) w

17.Bc3!?

In Gritsak-Kononenko, Rivne 2005, White went right for the passed pawn and d6-square by 17 c5! tDcd4 18 tDxd4 tDxd4 19 l'te 1 .Bd5. Then he should have played the thematic 20 .Bc3!, with the deadly ideas of e3 and ~2. For example, 20 .. :~c7 21 e3 (or 21 ~2) 21...tDf5 (21...tDb5 22 .Bxg7 <i;;xg7 23 ~2+ f6 24 .l:f.bc1) 22 'iVb2, etc. The game went 20 tDd6!? ~a6, and White still could have obtained a substantial advan- tage by 21 e4!. The position after 17 c5!, how- ever, really throws into relief how much better White stands in this variation. 17 eS! Guarding f6 and aspiring to get a knight to d4. Black would like to play 17 ... tDcd4?!, but he can't maintain control after 18 tDxd4 .Bxd4

19 e3 .Bxc3 20 'iYxc3 .Bxe4 21 .Bxe4 .l:f.b8 22

.l:f.fdl with c5 next. 18 e3 Black's pieces are in good spots now, al- though it's still hard to cope with White's sim- ple idea of c5. After many vicissitudes, White went on to win. Ivanchuk - Krasenkow Spanish Team Ch, Olite 2006

1 c4 cS 2 g3 g6 3 .Bg2 .Bg7 4 tDc3 tDc6 S

tDf3 e6 6 d4 (D)

For many years this radical pawn offer was not taken seriously, partly because the expendi- ture of two tempi to place a bishop on g2 would not generally fit into a sacrificial scheme. So, what is going on? Above all, White is trying to exploit the weak dark squares created by the move 5 ... e6, in particular d6 and f6. In what fol- lows he will play either tDb5 or tDe4, attacking d6. In addition, 6 d4 frees his dark-squared bishop to rush into play by .Bf4 or i.g5, hitting

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 213

one of those weaknesses. Since Black's c-pawn will end up on d4 (or gone), the potential ma- noeuvre b3 and i.a3 will strike at the d6-square and sometimes prevent castling (even i.b2 at- tacks down the long diagonal), and the advance cS might add to White's grip on d6. Finally, the move e3 can be relevant, adding to the attack on d4 and potentially opening White's f-file (if ... dxe3 is answered by fxe3). So we can see the contours of what White is aiming for. That's all well and fine, but Black has his own set of advantages, not least of which is that he will win a pawn; in many cases, the time that White has to expend recov- ering it will give Black the chance to develop rapidly. Furthermore, he gains a central major- ity, which enables him to play either an ag- gressive ... dS, breaking up White's centre, or ... eS, securing the d4 point. The centre pawns are by themselves a barrier against White's plans to infiltrate into the dark squares. Further- more, although White is about to make a very useful move with his knight, it is his second move with the same piece, and a third will usu- ally come shortly. 6  tLJxd4 In the next game I address the alternative 6 ... cxd4. 7 tLJxd4 cxd4 (D) w 8 tLJe4 White sets up for cS, i.gS and/or tLJd6+. I'm not going to go into the intricacies of 8 tLJbS ~6, when 9 e3 tt:Je7 10 tLJxd4 is thought to be about equal, and 9 'iWa4 a6 intending 10 e3! d3! hasn't worked out well for White. As always, those conclusions lack the support of irrefutable evidence, but 8 tLJe4 definitely appears more promising.

[diagram]
Black protects d6 and activates his centre. Theory hasn't settled upon the best move in spite of extensive practical experience. I'm go- ing to present a few options to illustrate typical themes, but keep in mind that they represent only a fraction of the available material. If you're on either side of this line, research and personal analysis are strongly recommended. a) 8 ... tLJe7 9 tLJd6+ ~f8 10 'iWb3 (10 tLJxb7 "ilic7 is fine for Black) 1O ... tLJc6 11 O-O b6, S.Larsen-G.Horvath, Gyor 1990, and Kosten suggests 12 i.f4, having in mind 12 ... eS?! (12 ... h6 13 'iWa3 <;t>g8 14 b4!) 13 i.d2 'iWe7 14 ~a3, when White threatens simply i.dS and i.xf7. This looks horrible for Black. b) 8 ... d6 9 'iWa4+ <J;e7 (D) . w 10 i.d2 (this has the idea of i.b4; alternatives include 10 cS!? dS!? 11 tLJd6 and 10 'iWa3 fS 11 i.gS+ tLJf6 12 tLJxf6 i.xf6 13 i.xf6+ ~xf6 14 O-O-O eS! IS e3 ~c7! 16 exd4 i.e6 17 ~bl, which is hard to assess) 1O ... a5 (not 1O .. .fS?! 11 tLJxd6! <;t>xd6 12 i.a5 ~d7 13 cS+ ~e7 14 c6!) 11 "ilia3 (White might do well to establish him- self on the dark squares with 11 cS! dS 12 tLJd6) l1...fS! 12 i.gS+ (or 12 tLJgS h6 13 tLJf3) 12 ... tLJf6 13 i.xf6+ i.xf6 14 tLJxf6 <J;xf6 IS O-O (a more aggressive approach is IS O-O-O! eS 16 e3) IS ... ~b6 16 .l:tadl :t.d8 17 e3 dxe3 18 fxe3 ~b4 19 'iWd3, Schwartzman-Fedder, Copenha- gen 1990. Black's centre pawns would have provided a solid protective shield after 19 ... eS!. c) 8 .. :~IVc7?! 9 cS tLJe7 10 i.f4! 'iWa5+ (not 1O ... eS?? 11 tLJd6+ and then 1l...~f8 12 'iWb3

214 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

leads to mate or win of the queen, but 11.. :it>d8 12 ttJxf7+ ~e8 13 ttJd6+ <;t>d8 14 i.gS! WIIaS+ IS 'ilVd2! ~xd2+ 16 i.xd2 <;t>c7 17 i.aS+ <;t>b8 18 ttJbS! will also win material) 11 i.d2 WIIc7 12 ttJd6+ <;t>f8 13 .l:tel ttJfS 14 ~b3 i.eS IS ttJc4 i.f6 16 O-O (Kosten suggests 16 i.aS WIIb8 17 ttJd6) 16 ... ~g7, Markowski-Genov, Euro- pean Team Ch, Plovdiv 2003, and here Kosten supplies the line 17 e4! dxe3 18 fxe3 with the idea of g4, and if 18 ... hS, 19 i.c3!. Black really should look elsewhere. 9 cxdS exdS 10 'ilVa4+ <;t>f8 After 1O .. :iVd7 11 ttJd6+ ~f8 12 'ilVxd7 i.xd7 13 ttJxb7 White regains the pawn with the better structure; for example, 13 ... ttJe7 14 i.f4 and Black has real problems. 11 ttJcS! (D) Now the game turns upon whether White's positional pluses can outweigh Black's extra pawn. That itself depends upon how quickly Black can bring his king to safety. Precise play will be at a premium. At any rate, White should stay away from 11 'ilVa3+?! "fIe7 12 ttJd6 d3! 13 O-O i.eS, as in Chernin-Macieja, Budapest 2000.

11 . i.f6!? Getting the king into safety is a difficult task. This method was found after experiences with l1...ttJe7 120-0 'ilVd6 13 ttJd3, when the knight sits on a classic blockading square. White's pieces are active, and he hopes to do something on the c-file and a3-f8 diagonal before Black's king escapes and he connects rooks. Sebenik- Djurkovic, Ptuj 200S continued 13 ... i.d7 14 WIIb3 (14 'ilVdl!) 14 ... i.c6?! (14 ... 'ilVb6!) IS i.f4 "fId8 16 l:!.ael h6, and here 17 'iHb4! ~g8 18 ttJeS would have secured the better game.

12 WIIb3! ttJe7 13 i.h6+ i.g714 i.d2! 'iib6

Perhaps 14 ... i.f6 (back again!) improves, with the idea IS ttJxb7 'ilVc7. IS i.b4?! Krasenkow proposes IS ttJa4!?, which seems best: IS ... ~d8 (IS ... 'iixb3 16 axb3 and ttJb6 follows) 160-0 with an edge. There are numer- ous alternatives for both sides, which makes this an attractive variation. IS  ~g8!? 16 ttJd3 i.fS 17 i.xe7 .l:te8 Now, instead of 18 ~a3 i.xd3 19 ~xd3 .l:txe7, which made White work a little for the draw, Krasenkow proposes 18 ~xb6 axb6 19 ttJf4l:txe7 20 ttJxdS .l:te6 21 <;t>d2, when there's little in it for either side. White's pawn sacrifice is a superb example of the use of threats and tactics to achieve posi- tional goals. Let's go back and look at capturing on d4 with the pawn instead of the knight: Sulava - Hauchard Gonfreville 1999

1 c4 cS 2 ttJc3 ttJc6 3 g3 g6 4 i.g2 i.g7 S

ttJf3 e6 6 d4!? cxd4 7 ttJbS (D)

This position bears comparison with the Si- cilian line 1 e4 cS 2 ttJc3 ttJc6 3 ttJf3 g6 4 iLc4 i.g7 S O-O e6 6 d4!? cxd4 7 ttJbS (D). The position of White's bishop on c4 varies from that of its English Opening counterpart on g2, but the goal of exploiting weaknesses on the dark squares d6 and f6 is the same. Instead of 6 ... cxd4, 6 ... ttJxd4 7 ttJxd4 cxd4 (7 ... i.xd4? 8 ttJbS i.eS 9 f4) 8 ttJbS is also similar our Eng- lish Opening line. In that case, White antici- pates 8 ... 'iHb6 9 c3! dxc3 10 bxc3 with the idea

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 215

of .Ba3. These themes appear in the variations below.

[diagram]
11...'i!Va6, to keep White's knight out of c4,

lets White play 12 M!, with the idea 13 bS. 12 lbc4 (D) 12 cxb7 .i.xb7 13 lbc4 ~M+ 14 .Bd2 ~xc4 IS .Bxb7 transposes.

216 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

12  'it'b4+ 13 i.d2'it'xc414 cxb7 i.xb7 With this move-order, 14 .. .1lb8 can be played, but it allows IS .l:tcl. In any case, playing 12 cxb7 first prevents this if White so desires. 15 i.xb7 nbS (D) w 16b3 What is happening in this position? White has regained his pawn, and can boast of the bishop-pair and queenside majority, whereas Black has a lead in development, two mobile centre pawns and b-file pressure. As we'll see, everything comes down to specifics. Before going on with the game, I'll address a neglected issue that has some practical im- pact. After IS ... .l:tb8, White is supposed to be able to force a draw with 16 .l:f.c1 'iVa2 17 l:!.a1 ~xb2 18l:!.b1, etc. But there's much more to it. First, Black is able to keep things alive with 18 ... 'it'xb7!? 19 ':xb7 ::'xb7. This seems ac- ceptable as a winning try, since Black needn't trade either of his rooks after 20 O-O O-O 21 'ic2 :tfb8. Going back to the position after 16l:!.c1 'it'a2, then, White can bypass the above ifhe in- terposes 17 i.a6, having in mind 18 i.bS+. Following 17 ... O-O 18 b4, White threatens 19 i.c4, trapping the queen. Then Black can still secure a likely draw by playing 18 ... 'it'a3 (threat- ening 19 ... lDdS to his apparent advantage), af- ter which 19 i.c4 allows Black to sacrifice the exchange productively by 19 ... .l:txb4! 20 i.xb4 'iVxb4+, so White presumably repeats by 19 l:!.a1'iVb2 20 l:tbl, etc. In this line, Black's only try for a win would be 18 ... 'it'dS!? 190-0 'iVd6, but if nothing else, White can play it safe with 20 i.c41DdS 21 i.xdS'it'xdS 22 .l:tc7 followed by 'it'c2 and .l:tfc 1. Finally, after 17 i.a6, Black can try to sacri- fice the exchange for two pawns by 17 ... 'it'xb2?! 18 i.bS+ .l:txbS 19 axbS 'it'xbS. In Stryjecki- Kokarev, World Under-18 Ch, Oropesa del Mar 1999, only White seemed to have winning chances: 20 l:tb1 ~c6 21 0-00-022 i.b4 .l:te8 23 i.xe7 .l:txe7 24 .l:tb8+ l:te8 2S'it'c1!? (or 2S ~b3) 2S ... 1i'd7 26 .l:txe8+ 'it'xe8 27'it'c7. Having covered all that, let's return to White's best winning try, 16 b3 (D):

This position has been contested many times. Given all of Black's activity, it would be sur- prising were he not able to equalize, yet he faces certain practical difficulties.

16.  'it'c5

The only other move is 16 ... 'it'c7, when White slowly took over in Markowski-Sriram, Calcutta 2001: 17 i.g2 O-O 18 O-O .l:tfd8 19.1:tc1 'iVd6!? (19 ... 'it'b6!) 20 i.aS l:tdc8 21'it'd3 hS 22 b4 lDdS 23 bS 'it'eS 24 i.xdS 'it'xdS 2S :tc2 l:!.xc2 (Black should play ... h4 hereabouts) 26 'iVxc2 eS?! (for example, 26 ... h4) 27 .l:tcl e428

PURE SYMMETRICAL VARIATION 217

'iIIc7 lIe8 29 'iIIc6 'iIIxc6 30 bxc6. White's c- pawn will tie Black down and cost him mate- rial. 17 lIc1 (D)

17 ... 'illb6 17 ... ~d6! gives Black more active play: 18 i.g2 tLJd5 19 O-O O-O 20 i.xdS ~xd5 21 b4 lIfc8. The position is hard to assess, and proba- bly about level. 18 i.e4 O-O Black also had 18 ... ~xb3 19 'iIIxb3 ~xb3. Then 20 lIc7 looks active, but 20 ... a6 21 .l::!a7 tLJd5 22 i.xd5 exd5 23 O-O O-O 24 ~xa6 gives White only the smallest of edges.

19 b4 lIfd8 20 O-O tLJd5 21 i.xd5 .l:Ixd5 22

b5 (D) 22 ... h5 This position has been good to White; the combination of c-file and queenside pawns out- weighs Black's centre pawns. Over the next few moves, Black would be well advised to play ... h4 and create counterplay. 23lIe6 Or 23 ~c2 i.e5 24 ~c6 'iIId8 25 :c5 ':'xc5 26 'ilYxc5, which favoured White in I.Graf- Titscher, Odessa 1990. 23 . :~Vd8 24 'iIIe2 i.e5 25 l:1el ~g7 26 ~e4 ':b7 27 lIe8 'iIIe7 (D) w White obviously has a lot of pressure here, and 28 l:.lc4! would demonstrate that most clearly, with ideas of f4 and i.b4 or i.a5, de- pending upon the situation.

[diagram]
Introduction to 2 ttJf3

1 c4 c5 2lZ'lf3 (D)

The move 2lZ'lf3 with the idea of an early d4 appeals to players who want to stake out space in classical fashion. It is particularly important because so many English Opening adherents prefer to start with the move 1 lZ'lf3 (preventing ... eS) and then 2 c4. Thousands of games have seen 1 lZ'lf3 cS 2 c4 and 1 lZ'lf3 lZ'lf6 2 c4 cS. In fact, many more top-level games are played in the lZ'lf3 lines than in the Pure Symmetrical variations of Chapter 7. I shall therefore be giv- ing a more detailed and theoretical look at the material in this chapter than in most others. The main lines are replete with examples of funda- mental themes, especially those relating to space and centre. 2 lZ'lf3 gives the game a fundamentally dif- ferent character than 2 lZ'lc3. White's knight covers the central dark squares, for the moment preventing ... eS. He prepares to play d4 on one of the next two or three moves, an advance that rarely happens so early in the lines stemming from 2lZ'lc3. As a consequence, White will rule over more territory, and his queen and queen's bishop will usually have open lines and influ- ence in the initial stages of the game. Again, with a few exceptions, we didn't see this in the Pure Symmetrical variations of Chapter 7. Of course, every move gives up something, and the most obvious consideration when look- ing at 2lZ'lf3 is that White won't be able to place a knight on e2 in conjunction with e3 or e4, as in the previous chapter. Also, in lines in which White plays d4 and Black replies ... cxd4, White's pieces are more exposed to attack than in variations with g3 and .i.g2. Finally, because White's set-ups are relatively limited, Black has more leeway than his opponent in choosing a pawn-structure and piece formation. You can view this as being advantageous, in that Black has the flexibility to react to circumstances; on the other hand, you might argue that White's control of space reduces Black to a defensive posture, regardless of what he does. Right away, the material divides into two main paths. Variations with 2 ... ttJc6

1 c4 c5 2lZ'lf3lZ'lc6 (D)

Black's main reply to 2lZ'lf3 has traditionally been 2 ... lZ'lf6. More and more often, however, leading players have turned to 2 ... lZ'lc6 in an MAIN LINES WITH 2 ttJj3 AND d4 219 attempt to guide the game into channels of their choosing. Black's general wish is to bypass certain cramped positions that he suffers in the main lines stemming from 2 l2Jf3 l2Jf6. One of the important thoughts behind 2 ... l2Jc6 is to play 3 ... e5, usually followed by ... g6 and ... i.g7, establishing the Botvinnik formation that we are familiar with from Chapters 6 and 7. If White plays 3 d4 to prevent that, Black can transpose to main lines after 3 ... cxd4 4 l2Jxd4 by 4 ... l2Jf6 or 4 ... e6, but he can also play inde- pendently with moves such as 4 ... ~b6. Alter- natively, White can commit to 3 g3 or shift the decision back to Black by 3 l2Jc3. Naturally, there are trade-offs in each situation, and both sides can play independently if they want to. With that in mind, let's tum to games and see if we can understand the subtleties from exam- ples and analysis. Because of the diversity of move-orders and independent strategies stem- ming from 2 ... l2Jc6, the notes will require some patience to sort out. Kramnik - Navara Wijk aan Zee 2007

[diagram]
I'm not going to focus heavily on the conse- quences of irregular second moves, because they are of such diffuse character at this point. Nevertheless, to get you started, here are some bare comments: a) 2 ... g6 is an elastic move that can go sev- eral directions including, crucially, 3 d4. Then upon the normal 3 ... cxd4 4 l2Jxd4, Black has difficulty preventing the move e4; for exam- ple, 4 ... i.g7 5 e4l2Jc6 6 i.e3 (or 6l2Jc2), when we have a version of a Sicilian Defence, Mar- oczy Bind variation. Of course, 5 e4 isn't nec- essary, but the alternative 5 g3 l2Jc6 6 l2Jc2 agrees to 6 .. :iVa5+ 7 i.d2 'iVc5 or 7 .. :~'b6, both described under the move-order 2 l2Jf3 l2Jc6 3 g3 below. Returning to 2 ... g6 3 d4 cxd4 4 l2Jxd4, the only normal-looking, non-transpositional op- tion from Black's point of view is 4 ... l2Jf6 5 l2Jc3 d5?! (else 6 e4), when 6 i.g5 dxc4 7 e3 has a good reputation, but 6 i.f4! with the idea l2Jdb5 is even more awkward to counter. Finally, 2 ... g6 can be answered by 3 l2Jc3, when an independent line is 3 ... i.g7 4 e3. Then the conventional response is 4 ... l2Jf6 5 d4 cxd4 6 exd4 d5, which is actually a line of the Caro- Kann Defence, Panov Attack (1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 exd5 cxd5 4 c4 l2Jf6 5 l2Jc3 g6 6 l2Jf3 i.g7). Black might also consider 4 ... i.xc3!?, with a philosophy similar to that in the 1 c4 e5 lines in- volving ... i.b4 and ... i.xc3. Remember that those positions are always easier to play if White has committed to the move e3, which ob- structs his bishop on c 1. b) With the other fianchetto, 2 ... b6, Black hopes to enter some sort of Hedgehog position following 3 g3 i.b7 4 i.g2. This is rather com- mittal, however, because White can play 3 l2Jc3 (or even 3 e3) 3 ... i.b7 (the similar 3 ... e6 4 e3! l2Jf6 5 d4 is examined via the sequence 2 l2Jf3 l2Jf6 3l2Jc3 b6 4 e3 in the next chapter; it has the same ideas) 4 e3! (D).

Now Black must give ground in order to prevent White's d4-d5 advance: 4 ... l2Jf6 5 d4 cxd4 6 exd4 dS? (6 ... e6 is better, though 7 i.d3 preserves a nice spatial plus) 7 cxdS l2JxdS 8 l2JeS! l2Jxc3 9 bxc3 a6 (versus 10 i.bS+), and a surprisingly powerful move is 10 .l:i.bl!, when it's hard to prevent 11 ~a4+; for example, 10 ... bS? l1.l:i.xbS!, or 1O ... e611 'iVa4+l2Jd712 ':xb6!. 3l2Jc3 I'll use this move to illustrate some unique lines that Black uses as alternatives to main-line Four Knights theory. We shall see 3 d4 in the next game. The alternative 3 g3 (D) is important and complex. It requires an understanding of move- orders and the resulting transpositions. Rather than memorize what follows, you can use it as a

220 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

reference while becoming comfortable with playing the 2 tLlf3 tLlc6 lines.

White's fianchetto can be answered with an assortment of moves, but it is played with par- ticular regard for Black's attempts to play an early ... tLlf6 and ... dS. There can follow: a) 3 ... eS 4 tLlc3 g6 (4 ... tLlf6 S i.g2 dS? falls for the familiar trick 6 cxdS tLlxdS 7 tLlxeS! tLlxc3 8 tLlxc6 tLlxd 1 9 tLlxd8 tLlxf2 10 tLlxf7 tLld3+ - the only chance - 11 exd3 r:J;;xf7 12 O-O+ 'lite8 13 b3!, and Black is thoroughly bound up) S i.g2 i.g7 and we have arrived at a reversed Botvinnik System of the Pure Sym- metrical Variation - see Chapter 7; whether someone wants to contest either side of this po- sition is a matter of taste. b) 3 ... g64 i.g2 i.g7 S O-O (or S tLlc3) will usually bring us back to a Pure Symmetrical Variation; for example, if Black plays S. .. eS, S. .. e6 or S. .. tLlf6, then 6 tLlc3 transposes to Chapter 7. Instead, 4 d4 cxd4 S tLlxd4 i.g7 (D) is one of the least inspiring times for White to play into a d4 system. For example, 6 tLlc2 (6 tLlxc6 dxc6!? 7 ~xd8+ 'it>xd8 already gives Black a favourable pawn-structure, since the c6-pawn limits the g2-bishop, while White's move c4 makes the bishop on g7 more effective - only because White is ahead on time can we evaluate this po- sition as level; furthermore, 6 tLlb3 as! with ... a4 to follow wins time for Black, because 7 a4?! would weaken b4 too seriously) 6 ... ~a5+!? (6 ... d6 is less dramatic, but certainly playable, with the idea 7 i.g2 i.e6) 7 i.d2!? (7 tLld2 dS! establishes Black in the centre) 7 ... ~b6 (after 7 .. :Wics, 8 tLlc3! tLlf6! 9 tLle3 is unclear, as is 8 w i.c3 tLlf6, which is safer than grabbing a pawn by 8 ... i.xc3+ 9 tLlxc3 'ilVxc4) 8 tLlc3 ~xb2!? 9 tLldS (9l:tbl?? 'ilVxc3) 9 ... 'litd8 10 i.g2 e6. Here Black seems to escape in reasonably good shape. In return for serious pressure from the white forces, Black is a pawn to the good, and his central majority helps greatly in the de- fence. Of course, his king will remain in the centre for a while and this may not appeal to ev- eryone. This whole line is unexplored and up in the air. c) 3 ... tLlf6 (D) is highly transpositional, but can also produce distinct lines: w c1) 4 i.g2 dS S cxdS tLlxdSleads to standard 'Asymmetrical' variations of Chapter 9 follow- ing 6 tLlc3 tLlc7 or here 6 ... e6. Instead of 6 tLlc3,

6 d4 isn't too dangerous if Black knows what

he's doing. Black has at least three reasonable moves. Play often goes 6 ... cxd4!? 7 tLlxd4 tLldM 8 tLlxc6 'iVxdl + 9 'it>xdl tLlxc6. While this should probably be equal, White can create an imbalance by 10 i.xc6+!? bxc6 11 i.e3,

MAIN LINES WITH 2 0,13 AND d4 221

when ROder-Gupta, Sort 2006 went 11...g6 12 lbd2 il.g7 13lbc4 0-014 ttc1 il.e6 and Black's bishops compensated for his weak c-pawn. This type of position is thought-provoking enough to reward some study and practice. White can also play simply 10 lbc3, when the best-known ex- ample is Kramnik-Kasparov, Frankfurt (rapid) 2000: 1O ... il.d7!? 11 il.e3 O-O-012 WeI eS 13 l:!.c 1 'iitb8 14 f4 with a little pull. Instead of all this, Black can get a perfectly good game by an- swering 6 d4 with either 6 ... il.fS!, intending 7 O-O lbdb4, or 6 ... lbb6 7 dxcS 'iVxdl + 8 'iitxdl lba4 9lbc3lbxc3+! 10 bxc3 il.fS 11 il.e3 il.e4, Andersson-Timman, Tilburg 1991. c2) After 4lbc3 dS, the ordinary-looking S cxdS lbxdS 6 il.g2 g6 7 O-O il.g7 is a Pure Sym- metrical Variation from Chapter 7. However, S d4 transposes directly to our main game Kram- nik-Navara (for which I've used the more com- mon move-order 2 ... lbc6 3 lbc3 lbf6 4 g3 dS S d4). This is one of the primary motivations for White to play 3 g3. c3) Finally, we might see 4 d4 cxd4 Slbxd4

Unless Black wants to go for a Pure Sym- metrical Variation by S. .. g6 6 il.g2 il.g7, etc., he will usually play S. .. e6. Then 6lbc3 is the main Four Knights line. However, the unique move 6 il.g2 opens the door to many deviations from the norm. Among these are 6 ... ~b6, 6 ... il.b4+ and 6 .. :iVaS+, the last often leading to 7 il.d2 'iVb6 8 lbb3, when 8 ... d6, 8 ... aS and even 8 ... hS!? are options! Lastly, Black can play 6 ... "iic7; for example, 7 O-O a6. Unfortu- nately, the English Opening has hundreds of these lesser-played alternatives throughout, so I'll opt out and leave it up to readers to investi- gate any in which they have an interest. After that lengthy digression about 3 g3, let's return to 3 lbc3 (D) and our main game Kramnik-Navara: 3 .. lbf6 In the next game but one we'll see the impor- tant move 3 ... eS. a) Black also has the rather bizarre-looking 3 ... lbd4, a popular move which tries to prevent an effective d4 on White's part. Black justifies moving a knight twice by the threat of ... lbxf3+. I'll have to forego an analysis of the broader theory here, but will comment on two varia- tions: al) I like White better than most analysts seem to in the line 4 g3 lbxf3+ S exf3 lbf6 6 d4! cxd4 7 ~xd4 g6 8 il.g2 il.g7 9 O-O O-O 10 f4

White has two open central files and control of every central square other than d4. Of course,

222 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the doubled f-pawns are immobile and Black's pieces have good scope. Vander Sterren-Tim- man, Rotterdam 1998 continued 1O ... d6 11 B ..td2!? a6!? 12 l:lac1 l:lb8, and Timman sug- gests that White only equalizes with 13 ~d3, but this may well favour White because of his extra space; for example, 13 ... ..tfS 14 ~e2 ..tg4 IS 'iWe3 ~d7 16 b3 bS?! 17 tZJdS!. a2) A more significant variation, and what is currently the main line, goes 4 e3 tZJxf3+ S 'iVxf3 g6 6 b3 ..tg7 7 ..tb2 d6 8 g4!? (D).

This is a fun move to play, and I think a good one. White grabs space, prepares ..tg2, and wants to cramp Black's game with gS and/or h4-hS. The most popular solution has been 8 ... l:lb8 (after 8 ... tZJf6, 9 gS!? tZJd7!? 10 h4 tZJeS 11 'iVg2 ..tg4 12 ..te2 ..txe2 13 ~xe2 with the idea hS and/or f4 was very comfortable for White in Van Wely-Akopian, Enghien-les- Bains 2001; 9 h3 is a solid alternative) 9..tg2 ..td7 (with the idea ... ..tc6) 10 'iWe2 a6 (after 1O ... tZJf6 11..tf3!? ..tc6, 120-O-O prepares d4- don't forget the centre! The logical alternative 1O ... 'iVc8 11 gS ..tc6 is proposed by Krasenkow, but similarly, 12 ..txc6+ 'ili'xc6 13 O-O-O with the idea 14 d4 gives White the advantage, as does 12 f4 h6 13 O-O-O!) 11 gS bS 12 d3 'ili'aS 13 l:lcl!? (D) (13 ~d2 is a good alternative). This fascinating position has been reached a few times. In A.Petrosian-Skripchenko, Dort- mund 2000, White stood better after 13 ... h6 14 h4 hxgS IS hxgS l:lxhl + 16 ..txhl eS 17 ~d2 tZJe7 18 tZJe4!? 'ili'b6 19 f4. Instead of this, Palliser approves of 13 .. .fS, as played in Pigu- sov-Alekseev, Russian Team Ch, Tomsk 2001. That game continued 14 ~fl?! ~f7 IS h4 hS! with equality. The king is oddly placed on fl, however; White should prefer 14 h4 hS IS O-O!, with what seems a traditional English Opening advantage. He has strong bishops, central pros- pects and the safer king. For example, IS ... ~f7 (IS ... e6? 16 tZJe4!; IS ... eS 16 tZJdS; IS ... b4? 16 tZJdS'iWxa2 17l:lc2) 16 d4!? (or 16 tZJdS!, with the point 16 ... ~xa2 17 l:lc2 ~xb3 18 ..txg7 ~xg7 19l:lb2 ~a4 20 l:lfbl! ~aS 21l:la2, etc.) 16 ... cxd4 17 exd4 bxc4 18 tZJdS! e6 19 tZJf4! with the idea 19 ... cxb3? 20 ..tc6! ..tc8 21 ..tdS! exdS 22 l:!.xc8, etc. That's only analysis, of course, but I think Black must seriously im- prove upon his basic set-up here. b) A fairly common alternative is 3 ... g6. It can lead to 4 g3 ..tg7, with a Pure Symmetrical variation, or to these: bI) 4 d4 cxd4 S tZJxd4 ..tg7 is generally re- garded as satisfactory for Black. One interest- ing variation is 6 tZJc2!? ..txc3+ 7 bxc3 ~aS. Oddly enough, this is a reversed position of the Rubinstein Variation of Chapter 9, but the tempi are the same! This comes from the fact that in the reversed position, White moves his queen twice to arrive at 1 c4 cS 2 tZJc3 lLlf6 3 g3 dS 4 cxdS lLlxdS S ..tg2 lLlc7 6 'iWb3!? lLlc6 7 ..txc6+ bxc6 8 'iVa4. See that chapter for de- tails. b2) 4 e3!? can be a little awkward for Black: 4 ... lLlf6 (4 ... ..tg7 S d4 has a poor reputation for Black; although S ... d6 is playable, with the idea of ... ..tg4 in some lines, he has to be willing to play against dS and e4 at some point; tradition- ally, White begins with 6 ..te2) S d4 cxd4 6 exd4 dS. Now we have a kind of reversed Tarrasch Queen's Gambit. White can develop normally by, for example, 7 ..te2 ..tg7 8 0-00-0 MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDf3 AND d4 223 9l:te 1 or try a unique line such as 7 .i.gS .i.e6!? Most dangerous for Black is 7 cxdS lLlxdS 8 'ilib3!, when one curious possibility is 8 ... lLlxc3 9 .i.c4!. Now: b21) 9 ... e6 10 bxc3 .i.g7!? (lO ... lLlaS? 11 .i.bS+ i.d7 12 'iia4 lLlc6 is met by 13 dS! exdS

14 O-O with an attack) 11 .i.a3 .i.f8 was Bot-

vinnik-Petrosian, World Ch match (game 8), Moscow 1963. Botvinnik played 12 .i.c1 .i.g7 13 .i.bS, but Tal later demonstrated 12 O-O! i.xa3 13 'iixa3 'iie7 14 ~c I! with a nice edge. b22) Black's other defence is 9 ... lLldS!? 10 .i.xdS e6 11 .i.xc6+ bxc6, when theory favours White's prospects, but the position isn't clear. If you're interested in lines that are slightly off the beaten track, these might be for you. 4g3 The actual move-order used in this game, by the way, was 1 lLlf3 lLlf6 2 c4 cS 3 g3 lLlc6 4 lLlc3. I have chosen to begin with 1 c4 in order to show other lines from the English Opening along the way. 4 ... d5 (D)

This position can also arise from 2 lLlf3 lLlf6 3 lLlc3 lLlc6 4 g3 dS. 5 d4!? A surprise. Black was probably aiming to get to a conventional variation stemming from S cxdS lLlxdS 6 .i.g2; for example, 6 ... eS (or 6 ... lLlc7) 7 O-O lLlc7, with a Rubinstein Varia- tion (see Chapter 9); or 6 ... g6 7 O-O .i.g7, which we've looked at via the Pure Symmetri- cal with S lLlf3 lLlf6 6 O-O dS 7 cxdS lLlxdS. 5 ... cxd4 The ubiquitous Tarrasch Queen's Gambit pops up again after S ... e6 6 cxdS exdS. Here 6 ... lLlxdS is the Keres-Parma Variation (Chap- ter 9), and should be considered for someone who wants a more active game than he gets here. The alternatives are quite complex: a) S ... .i.g4(D) .

This resembles White's play in the Griinfeld and might be profitably compared with it: al) 6 cxdS lLlxdS (6 ... .i.xf3?! 7 exf3 lLlxdS 8 ~b3 lLlxc3 9 bxc3 cxd4 10 .i.c4! e6 11 'iNxb7 with the idea 1l...'iic8? 12 .i.a6!) 7 .i.g2 cxd4!? 8 lLlxd4 lLldM! with approximate equality, in- tending 9 a3 eS!. This ... lLldM manoeuvre crops up repeatedly in the Symmetrical English. a2) 6 .i.g2 .i.xf3 7 .i.xf3 seems to offer White only a very small advantage, if that. Black probably won't equalize after 7 ... dxc4 8 dS! lLld4 9 .i.g2 lli'aS 10 .i.d2 O-O-O 11 e3 lLlfS 120-0 lli'a6 13 b3! with queenside attacking chances. However, Black has two better meth- ods. First, 7 ... lLlxd4 8 .i.g2! (8 .i.xdS lLlxdS 9 cxdS g6 10 O-O .i.g7 is fine for Black) 8 ... dxc4 9 .i.xb7 J:i.b8 10 .i.g2 lli'd7 11 O-O e6 confers only a modest edge on White. In addition, the modest 7 ... e6!? is surprisingly tough. White's bishops don't seem to mean a lot; for example, 8 cxdS lLlxd4 9 .i.g2 lLlxdS 10 lLlxdS exdS 11 O-O .i.e7 12 e3 lLlc6 13 .i.xdS O-O. This proba- bly favours White, but not by much, since Black's queenside majority (barring .i.xc6, which is fairly harmless) counts for as much as White's own majority in the centrelkingside, because White has difficulty mobilizing his pawns. b) After the natural S ... dxc4!?, White can reply with the equally obvious 6 dS!, although this entails a sacrifice. Then Black has two

224 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

serious replies, both involving entertaining tac- tical play: bl) Tal-Timman, Match (game S), Hilver- sum 1988 saw 6 ... tbaS 7 e4! bS 8 tbxbS tbxe4 9 tbeS! (with the idea 10 ~a4) 9 ... i.d7 10 tbxd7 ~xd7 11 ~a4! l:tb8 12 tbc7+ <;;t>d8 13 tbe6+! fxe6 14 ~xaS+ WIIc7 IS WIIxc7+ ~xc7 16 i.f4+ tbd6 17 O-O-O g6!? 18 i.eS :g8 19 dxe6 i.g7

20 f4 gS!, and now 21 :dS! would have estab-

lished a definite superiority. b2) Ftacnik-Lesiege, Montreal 2002 tested the highly tacticaI6 ... tbb4: 7 e4! i.g4 8 i.xc4! (falling in with Black's materialistic wishes) 8 ... i.xf3 9 ~xf3 tbc2+ 10 <;;t>f1! (D).

1O ... a6! (this prevents i.bS+ and tbbS; upon 10 ... tbxal, 11 eS! storms through - if the knight retreats by 11...tbd7, 12 e6 wins because of i.bS+, so in Wojtkiewicz-Yudasin, New York 1991, Black tried ll...a6 12 exf6 tbc2, losing to 13 d6! e6 14 ~xb7 ~b8 IS ~c6+ <;;t>d8 16 i.xe6!, with the point 16 ... fxe6? 17 i.gS) 11 eS! tbd4 12 ~dl bS (l2 ... tbd7 13 f4! with a dominant pawn-mass) 13 exf6 bxc4 14 .i.e3 gxf6 IS i.xd4 cxd4 16 ~xd4l:tc8 17 ~g2 .i.g7 18 l:thel O-O 19 'iVg4 .tIc7 20 l:.adl. White's beautifully centralized pieces combine with Black's weaknesses to grant White a comfort- able advantage. Finally we return to Kramnik-Navara: 6 tbxd4 dxc4 Since White now gets an edge in a dry posi- tion, I'll claim author's indulgence to specu- late that the more dynamic reversed Grtinfeld Defence position initiated by 6 ... eS 7 tbxc6 bxc6 (D) is playable, and close to equal for Black. w This is another one of those paradoxical po- sitions in which an extra white move, in this case tbc3, can be a liability as well as an asset, because it exposes White to a timely ... d4. Com- pare the Grtinfeld Proper main line with 1 d4 tbf6 2 c4 g6 3 tbc3 dS 4 cxdS tbxdS S e4 tbxc3 6 bxc3 i.g7 7 tbf3 cS 8 i.e2 tbc6?! (8 ... O-O! is the usual move, steering clear of dS). Now White can play 9 dS! i.xc3+ 10 i.d2 .i.xal 11 'iVxal tbd4 12 tbxd4 cxd4 13 ~xd4 with a strong attack. In our English Opening version, from the dia- gram after 7 ... bxc6, 8 i.gS d4 isn't what White wants, and he doesn't get anything meaningful by exchanging: 8 cxdS cxdS 9 i.g2 i.e6 10 O-O (10 i.gS d4!) 1O ... l:tc8. Now Black wants to play ... d4. White's natural response would be 11 ~a4+ (D).

11..:~'d7 (ll....i.d7?! 12 'Wixa7 d4 13 tbe4

tbxe4 14 i.xe4 i.cs IS ~a6! limits Black's compensation) 12 "iVxd7+ <;;t>xd7 13 IIdl .i.cS! 14 tbxdS tbxdS IS .i.xdS (or IS e4 i.d4!) MAIN LINES WITH 2 ti:Jf3 AND d4 225 IS ... i.xdS 16 .l:txdS+ 'it'e6 gives Black enough compensation for the pawn after 17 l:td2 (17 e4 i.d4! ties White to defence, and 17 l:td3 l:.hd8 18 l:txd8 l:txd8 leaves Black at least equal) 17 ... i.b4! (or even 17 ... l:thd8 18 'it'g2 i.b6) 18 l:tdll:tc2 19 a3 i.aS, etc. So the critical variation would seem to be 8 i.g2. The only book I've found that addresses 6 ... eS gives 8 ... i.e6 9 i.gS! here, when Black is already in poor shape. But knowing the reversed position, you can guess that Black should play 8 ... d4! (D).

Then White's only try for an advantage is 9 i.xc6+ i.d7 10 i.xa8 (10 i.xd7+ 'iYxd7 11 ttJbl 'iYc6) 1O ... 'iYxa8 11 ttJdS ttJxdS 12 cxdS 'iYxdS. Black's f8-bishop is undeveloped, while it would be on e2 in the reversed line. That is a pure tempo-loss, and not some trade-off of time for information. Nevertheless, it doesn't seem serious enough to deny him counterplay: 13 f3 (130-0 i.h3 14 'iYa4+ 'it'e7 ISli'xa7+ 'it'e6 16 f3 i.xfl 17 'it'xfl i.d6 18 li'a6 fS is fine for Black) 13 ... i.d6 (or 13 ... i.cS 141i'b3 'iYd6) 14 '*lVb3 'iVc6 (or 14 .. :iVa8), intending some com- bination of ... O-O, ... l:tb8, .. :iVdS and ... i.bS. Of course there are plenty of other options. In any event, you could do worse than to study this variation, both for fun and in order to improve your understanding. The situation in- volving the bishop-pair as compensation for the exchange is ubiquitous in modem chess, and the English Opening player will always benefit from thinking about reversed positions. 7 ttJxc6 'iYxd1 + Black gets to simplify and force one of White's pieces back. Weaker is 7 ... bxc6 8 'iYa4 i.d7 9 i.g2 with O-O and '*lVxc4 to follow, be- cause White's queen is an annoyance.

8 ttJxdl! This knight will be excellently placed on e3. 8 ... bxc6 9 i.g2 (D) The queen exchange has resulted in a tech- nical position that may not rivet the average player's attention. White's strategy is to squeeze a win out of his pressure against Black's pawns on the open c-file. After one of those pawns falls, White hopes that the remaining isolated pawn will prove a weakness; remember that the squares in front of it can be safely occupied by a piece. One factor in Black's favour is that he will develop quickly and be in a better position to neutralize that advantage. After many years of experience, I think it's fair to say that the po- sition is objectively drawn, but that in practice, White will periodically eke out a win, espe- cially against someone who is not well pre- pared. What follows is not high theory, but hopefully represents the main ideas. 9 ... ttJdS! After 9 ... i.d7, 10 ..td2 l:tb8 11 .l:!.c1 and l:txc4 maintains the upper hand. 10 ttJe3 (D) 10. e6 A more active and perhaps satisfactory alter- native is 1O ... ..ta6 11 ttJxdS cxdS 12 i.xdS ':'c8; for example, 13 i.d2 e6 14 i.f3 i.cs IS i.c3 f6! (it's important to keep the king centralized)

16 e3 'it'e7 170-O-O i.bS 18 J::td2, and although

18 ... a6 was fine in Komev-Pokazaniev, St Pe- tersburg 2006 (one idea of the move is to secure the bishop versus a combination of ..te2 and b3), 18 .. J:thd8 19 l:!hdl ftxd2 20 J::txd2 i.c6!

226 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

seems to equalize, intending 21 iLe2 iLd5. Con- sidering the elite players who use this line as White, however, it's probably not so easy. 11 lLlxe4 iLa6 (D) w 12lLla5 This move was given a firm '!' and enthusi- astic approval when it replaced years of prac- tice with 12 b3 and won a series of nice games for Kramnik, among others. Now some players, including Kramnik himself, are returning to 12 b3. The situation described above applies after that move as well: with careful play, Black's position is considered adequate to draw, but he has to work a bit. White had a slight but hardly decisive advantage after 12 ... iLb4+ 13 iLd2 iLxd2+ 14lLlxd2lLlb4 151it>dl O-O-O 16 a3lLld5 17 ~el ~b7 18 ~el e5 19 e3 in Kramnik- Leko, Misko1c 2007, and at this point Black can consider 19 ... lLle7, clearing d3 or 19 ... :the8 with the idea 20 iLfl?! iLxfl 21 ':!'xfl e4. Instead of all this, 12 ... l:i.c8! is a safe and constructive move, which both guards c6 and prepares the useful advance ... c5; for example, 13 iLd2 iLe7 14 iLaS 0-015 l::td1 iLd8 16 iLxd8 l::tfxd8 17 l::tel c5 (getting this move in usually solves most of Black's problems) 18 iLe4 iLxc4 19 bxc4lLlf6 20 iLd3 l::tb8 21 l::tc3 l::tb2 22 l::ta3 e5 23 f3 e4 24 fxe4 lLlg4 25 l::txa7 lLle5 26 O-O f6. Black has an immovable knight outpost ver- sus White's tragically placed bishop, Sebenik- Kreisl, Szeged 2007. Were Black to recover his pawn, however, it would free White's game, so equality seems a fair verdict. ...l ::te8 13 iLd2 iLe7 14 l::tel e5 15 b3 O-O

16 O-O l::tfd8 17 iLf3 ~f8

Also possible is 17 .. .i Lf6!, since the c-pawn is safe.

18.l:i.fdl

At this point, the game went 18 ... ~e8 19 iLel .l:i.d7 20 e3 iLf6 21lLlc4 ~e7 22 iLa5!, stopping both ... lLlb6 and a future ... l::td8; White has a nagging edge, although the game was rightly drawn after excellent defence. Since Black's centrally-oriented minor pieces are his strong suit, he reinforced that with the active 18 ... iLf6! in Kopylov-Berelovich, Hamburg 2006: 19 e4 (19 lLlc4 iLxc4 20 bxc4 lLlc3!) 19 ... lLlb4 (or 19 ... lLlb6) 20 l::txc5! l::txc5 21 iLxb4 l::txdl+ 22 iLxdl iLe7 23 iLxc5 iLxc5 24 iLc2 e5 25 a4 f6 26lLlc6 iLb7 27lLlaS iLa6 28lLlc6 iLb7 29lLlaS iLa6 30 lLlc6 112-112. Arencibia - P. Toth Rio de Janeiro 2003

[diagram]
With this advance, White sidesteps the 'Bot- vinnik' line 3 ... e5, but Black's knight on c6 opens up some interesting possibilities. 3  exd4 4lLlxd4 (D) 4 ... WVb6 This is one of Black's most important ways to bypass the main Four Knights lines which would follow the 'normal' continuation 4 ... lLlf6 5 lLlc3. If Black can get an acceptable game from the position after 4 .. :iVb6, it allows him to use 2 ... lLlc6 to avoid a few of the tougher lines that can arise if he plays 2 ... lLlf6, as described in the next section. One positive feature is that 4 .. :iVb6 forces an immediate response. I'm not going to cover this move in great detail but will show some general contours of the play. As always, Black has alternatives: MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDf3 AND d4 227

a) 4 ... e6 tends to transpose to other lines, but can produce unique play, such as after S ttJc3 ~b4!? (S ... ttJf6 is the Four Knights) or S g3 ~b4+!? 6 ttJc3 ~aS. Neither of these lines is a frequent choice of masters yet. A third an- swer to 4 ... e6 is S ttJbS; for example, S. .. d6 (or S ... ttJf6 6 ~f4 eS 7 ~gS 'iVaS+) 6 ~f4 (6 e4 transposes to the Taimanov Sicilian with S ttJbS d6 6 c4 - see Volume 1) 6 ... eS 7 ~g3lLlf6 8 ~h4!? (that's three moves for this one piece) 8 ... a6!? 9lLlSc3 (and four moves with this one! Surely Black cannot stand worse) 9 ... ~e7 10 e3, Bu Xiangzhi-Alekseev, China-Russia match, Nizhny Novgorod 2007. Here Bu Xiangzhi suggests 1O ... ~b6! 11 ~xf6 ~xf6 12 lLldS ~xb2 13lLlbc3 ~g4 14 ~bl ~xbl + IS .l:!.xbl

O-O-O.

b) 4 ... g6 is seldom an independent continu- ation, and it permits White to play S e4, which is a Maroczy Bind Variation of the Sicilian and not to the taste of every defender. SlLlb3 a) S lLlc2 e6 6 g3 is slow. In cases where White's knight is on c2 instead of b3, the cus- tomary move is 6 ... ~cS !, with the idea of forc- ing light-square weaknesses upon White. Black will answer 7 e3 with 7 ... dS 8 cxdS exdS 9 ~g2 lLlf6. b) SlLlbS!? (D) expresses the idea that put- ting a knight on c3 will truly control dS and make the queen look a little funny out there on b6. bI) Now S. .. a6 6lLlSc3 e6 7 g3!? ~cS de- velops logically. Then 8 e3 ~c7 9 ~g2lLlf6 10 O-O O-O 11 b3 is strategically correct, but slow. For example, 11....l:!.d8 12 ~b2 dS! 13 cxdS exdS threatens ... d4, and if White sacrifices the

exchange for a pawn by 14 lLlxdS lLlxdS IS ~xdS ~h3 16 ~S!? ~xfl 17 ~e4 h6 18 ~xcS, simply 18 ... ~h3 survives in good shape. Therefore White might want to look into 8lLle4 lLlf6 9lLlxcs ~xcS instead, although he'll have to sacrifice a pawn, perhaps along the lines of 10 lLlc3 'iVxc4 11 ~g2. Then White has an at- tack based upon his bishop-pair and dark- square prospects, but Black has an impressive centre and, of course, an extra pawn. b2) Black usually chooses S ... lLlf6. One ex- ample went 6 g3!? a6 7lLlSc3lLleS 8 b3 ~c6 9 l:t.gl e6 10 ~g2 'Wic7 11 ~b2. In return for losing the castling privilege, White has developed ac- tively and controls space and the centre. The po- sition is still unclear (after all, White's king has nowhere to go), but this 1:!.gl idea (supporting g4-gS) has been a successful technique in simi- lar variations. In Gulko-Mekhitarian, Cali 2007, Black consolidated very sensibly: 11...~e7 12 lLld20-0 13l:t.c1 d6 14 h3 1:i.b8 IS f4!? lLlg6 16 e3 b6 17 ~e2 ~b7 with balanced play. S  e6 6 lLlc3 lLlf6 (D)

228 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is an extremely significant juncture. I apologize in advance for the following explana- tion, which is obscure-sounding but important to understand. In the position after 6 ... ltJf6, 7 g3 transposes to the Four Knights main line which goes 2ltJf3 ltJf6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ltJxd4ltJc6 5 ltJc3 e6 6 g3 'iWb6 7 ltJb3. If White chooses 7 a3 in- stead, that transposes to the other Four Knights variation with the same first five moves and then 6 a3 'ti'b6 7 ltJb3. With such options for White, it makes you wonder how 4 ... ~b6 could be an improvement over 4 ... ltJf6 5 ltJc3 e6 at all. The answer to that largely lies with your at- titude towards the independent and important option that White has in the main-line Four Knights that goes 2 ltJf3 ltJf6 3 ltJc3 ltJc6 4 d4 cxd4 5 ltJxd4 e6 6 g3 'iWb6, namely, 7 ltJdb5; see that section for the details. If you're happy meeting that move as Black, then you have less incentive to go with the 2 ... ltJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ltJxd4 'iWb6 move-order (which avoids it). This all sounds complicated until you put it on a board and see how easy the transpositions really are. Finally, after 4 ... ~b6 5 ltJb3 e6 6ltJc3 ltJf6, White also has the independent line played in this game: 7 e4!? .Bb4 8 .Be3!? There are plenty of options. 8  .Bxc3+! 9 bxc3 'ti'c710 f3 d6 (D) w We shall see this structure in the main Four Knights lines. Black can target White's weak doubled c-pawns, as in the Nimzo-Indian De- fence and other openings. He has the right pieces to do it: a knight can go to e5, a bishop to a6, a rook to c8, and so forth. White, on the other hand, has the bishop-pair, space, and two potential structural ideas: c5, which activates his pieces, and g4-g5. llltJd4!? a6 Versus 12ltJb5, but now Black no longer has the idea of ... b6 with ... .Ba6.

12.l:.bl

12 ltJxc6 bxc6 13 .i:Ibl c5! blocks the posi- tion, at least for the moment. 12 .. ltJe5 13 'iWa4+!? .ltd7 14 'iWb4 O-O! 15 'iWxb7 (D) Now, in the game, 15 ... 'iVxb7?! 16 .i:Ixb7 Itfb8 17 .l:tb3! left White with a small advan- tage, so it was better to play 15 ... 'iVa5!, which gives Black a counterattack. There might fol- low 16 'It>f2 'iYxc3 17 'iWb3 'iWa5 18 .lte2 d5!, opening the position, when White would do well to bailout by 19 exd5 exd5 20 c5! 'iVxc5 21 ltJf5 'iWa5 22 .Bb6 'iWd2 23 .lte3 'iVa5 24 .ltb6, etc. The whole variation with 4 ... 'iWb6 is thought- provoking, to say the least! We'll get a fuller un- derstanding of what's going on when we get to the main Four Knights lines. Shiriaev - Shinkevich Ufa2004

[diagram]
Black seeks to set up a reversed Botvinnik structure, one of the main points of 2 ... ltJc6.

4 e3 (D)

This modest nudge of a pawn is the most se- rious independent challenge White can put to 3 ... e5, and it's the preference of many grand- masters. The fact that White hasn't played g3 MAIN LINES WITH 2 lDf3 AND d4 229 makes e3 followed by d4 a realistic plan. In- stead, 4 g3 g6 S .i.g2 .i.g7 would transpose to the normal Pure Symmetrical English variation B wi th S lL'lf3 eS.

4  lL'lf6 This is the most effective way in which Black can contest the centre. a) 4 ... g6? S d4 cxd4 6 exd4 exd4 7lL'lxd4 al- ready puts Black in trouble due to his isolated d-pawn and weakness on d6. He can hardly play 7 ... .i.g7? because of 8lL'ldbS, but 7 ... lL'lf6 8 lL'ldbS .i.b4 9 'iVe2+ 'i?o>f8 10 .i.h6+ 'it>g8 11 O-O-O is also horrible. b) 4 .. .fS risks the consequences of a delay in Black's development; for example, S d4 cxd4 (5 ... e4 also has multiple answers, but 6 dS! is the easiest; after 6 ... exf3 7 dxc6 fxg2 8 cxd7+ 'iVxd7 9 .i.xg2 'iVxd 1+ 10 ~xd 1 lL'lf6, as in Marin-Ardeleanu, Romanian Ch, Iasi 1999, Black is not only underdeveloped, but both of his bishops are cut off by the bishops' pawns; then 11 lL'ldS! would have guaranteed the ad- vantage) 6 exd4 e4 7 dS! exf3 8 dxc6 and either 8 ... dxc6 9 'iVxf3 or 8 .. .fxg2 9 cxd7+ ~xd7 10 .i.xg2! 'iVxd1+ 11 'i?o>xd1 (D) leaves Black in a positional mess. White has a development lead and terrific squares for his pieces while Black has multiple internal weaknesses caused by the early ad- vance .. .fS. 5 d4 Or: a) Sometimes S a3 is played, as a sort of semi-waiting move, when White anticipates S. .. dS (I should point out that S ... .i.e7 is play- able, especially if 6 d4 cxd4 7 exd4 exd4 8 lL'lxd4 can be answered by 8 ... dS!, a move which has been neglected but seems all right; for ex- ample, 9 cxdS lL'lxdS 10 i.bS lL'lxc3 11 bxc3 .i.d7) 6 cxdSlL'lxdS (D).

Then White has two main moves: a1) 7 ~c2 is another reversed Taimanov Si- cilian position: all) If nothing else it permits the modest 7 ... lL'lxc3. Then 8 bxc3 (8 dxc3 .i.d6 is solid) 8 ... i.d6 can't be too bad for Black, because the move a3 is a bit wasted. On the other hand, for- mal advantage or not, White has some interest- ing possibilities. Apart from constructing a d3/c4 set-up, he can have some fun with a combination of i.d3, c4, l:'Lbl and i.e4 as ap- propriate, while an attack against the black king by h4 is not unthinkable. a12) More ambitious is 7 ... .i.e6!? 8 i.bS (again, 8 i.d3!? is an intriguing idea) 8 ... lL'lxc3 9 'iVxc3 f6, when 10 d3 is apparently better than

10 d4 ~b6 11 .i.xc6+ "iVxc6 12 dxeS .i.dS! 13

exf6 gxf6, with an attack.

230 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a2) 7 SLb5 lbxc3 8 dxc3 li'xdl + 9 'it>xdl SLf5! keeps White's king from c2, when the greedy 10 SLxc6+ bxc6 11 lbxe5 SLd6 12 lbc4 W SLc7 is terribly risky for White, whose bishop is awful and light squares weak. b) Another useful, almost waiting, move is

5 SLe2, which was played in the big-time game

Ivanchuk-Anand, Wijk aan Zee 2006: 5 ... d5 6 d4! ? (D) (6 cxd5 lbxd5 is a Reversed Sicilian where SLe2 is rather passive and Black shouldn't have many difficulties). B The position after 6 ... e4 has been enormously 6 ... exd4 (after Ribli's 6 ... e4 7 lbe5 .td6 8 cxd5 lbxe5 9 dxe5 SLxe5 10 lbxe4 lbxe4 11 ~a4+ SLd7 12 ~xe4 Wile7 White should retreat by 13 ~c2, play f4 and castle) 7 exd4 (this posi- tion can also arise from the Sicilian and the Mikenas Attack - see page 322) 7 ... .te6! 8 .te3 dxc4 9 ~a4 cxd4!? (9 .. :~a5 is a sound move: 10 dxc5!? ~xa4 I1lbxa4lbd5 12 SLd2?! lbdb4!, watching over the light squares, Titov-Saltaev, Moscow 1983) 10 lbxd4 SLd7 11 ~xc4 I!c8 12 O-O! .td6? (better is 12 ... lbxd4 13 ~xd4 i.c5 14 'iWe5+ Wife7), and now White could have re- ally tortured his opponent by 13lbdb5!, intend- ing 13 ... SLe7 14 .l:i.adl or 13 ... SLb8 14 .tc5. 5 ... cxd4 5 ... e4 will usually transpose; for example, after 6lbg5 or 6lbe5, Black can play 6 ... cxd4. White's attempt to get more by 6 d5 accom- plishes nothing after 6 ... exf3 7 dxc6 fxg2 8 cxd7+ .txd7 9 SLxg2 Wilc7 with the ideas ... SLc6 and ... O-O-O, Suba-Wedberg, Dortmund 1983. Note the difference between 4 ... lbf6 and the non-developing 4 .. .f5 in lines where White plays this d5 advance versus ... e4. 6 exd4 e4 (D) popular and plays a major role in determining how 3 ... e5 should be assessed. 7lbg5 The other major test of this position is 7 lbe5

Then the main line goes 7 ... SLb4 (7 ... i.d6 may be playable; an interesting idea then is 8 c5, when 8 ... SLb8 9lbc4 O-O!? 10 d5lbe5 11 d6.l:.e8 is wild and messy, but better than 8 ... SLxe5? 9 dxe5lbxe5 10 Wifd6! Wife7 11 li'xe7+! <3;xe7 12 .tg5, when White is very much in charge) 8 .te2 'iWa5 (8 ... Wife7 9 SLf4! SLd6!? 10 lbb5! has the idea 1O ... SLb4+ 11 <3;f1!; in Scherbakov- Maksimenko, Yugoslav Team Ch, Niksi6 1996, 1O ... .tb8 11 c5! gave White the advantage) 9 lbxc6 dxc6 (after 9 ... SLxc3+ 10 bxc3 dxc6, 11 O-O!? Wifxc3 12 .u.bl O-O 13 .l:.b3 Wifa5 14.l:.g3 launched a serious attack in Bertholee-J.Polgar, Amsterdam 1990; 11 li'c2 is safer) 10 SLd2 (10 O-O SLxc3 is the pawn sacrifice in the last note; if Black declines by 10 ... O-O, White can look MAIN LINES WITH 2 0,f3 AND d4 231 for a move other than 11 i.d2, and in fact that may be a good place to investigate for new ideas in this line) 10 ... O-O 11 O-O l:Ie8 12 a3 i.xc3 13 i.xc3 ~g5 (D).

White has two bishops and Black has space. This position has been contested many times: a) 14 i.d2!? (White logically tries to move his bishop from c3, where it is blocked by the d4-pawn, to a diagonal upon which it can exert influence) 14 ... ~g6 15 i.f4 i.h3 (15 ... h5 is a good alternative) 16 i.g3 i.g4! 17 i.xg4ltJxg4 18 l:Iel l:Iad8 with approximate equality, Khar- lov-Yakovenko, Russian Team Ch, Sochi 2005. b) I won't go deeply into 14 ~c1 'ii'g6, but one theme to mention comes up after 15 'iVe3 (15 Wif4 h5 is standard) 15 ... i.g4 16l:tfe1 b5!? (D), played in Pachman-Ksieski, 2nd Bundes- liga 1994/5. This method of trying to eliminate White's c-pawn and win the d5-square is a recurring one in what I would call 'light-square' openings. For example, it happens in at least two varia- tions of the Slav Defence and in the main line (4 ... i.f5) of the Caro-Kann Defence, as well as in the Chigorin Defence to the Queen's Gam- bit, and lesser lines of the Queen's Gambit and the Nimzo-Indian Defence. In fact, most open- ings in which White plays d4 and c4 have at least one serious line in which Black's pawn advances to ... b5, especially if White has cas- tled queenside, in which case its effect is natu- rally multiplied. Although ... b5 is sometimes played as a pawn sacrifice (because possession of d5 is so important), here 17 cxb5 ltJd5 18 'iVd2 i.xe2 recovers the pawn with a great posi- tion in view of 19 'iVxe2ltJf4 20 'iVn cxb5. 7 ... i.h4 (D) This is precisely the position that arises from

[diagram]
6 cxd5 exd5 7 e5 ltJg4 8 i.b5, with colours re- versed but the same tempi. In fact, the analysis that follows will borrow from examples played with that move-order. Furthermore, it some- times arises from a Sicilian Defence: 1 e4 c5 2 ltJf3 e6 (or 2 ... ltJc6 3 c4, etc.) 3 c4ltJc6 4ltJc3 ltJf6 5 i.e2 d5, etc. These are sidelines, to be sure, but useful ones to be familiar with! Sd5 White almost has to play this, or be driven back by ... h6 and then lose the centre when Black plays ... d5. S  ltJe5 This variation as a whole is fascinating. 8 ... i.xc3+ 9 bxc3 ltJa5! is an important alter- native connected with some crazy and little- investigated tactics. White's natural response is 10 i.a3 (10 Wid4 has also been played), but

232 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

after 10 ... d6 (D), White needs to justify the slightly odd positions of his bishop on a3 and knight on g5. B w Black intends l1...h6 12 ttJh3 .i.xh3, or per- haps 11.. .e3!? followed by ... ttJg4. Therefore White needs to move quickly: 11 c5!? (with the idea 12 .i.b5+; 11 ~a4+?! .i.d7 12 'ii'b4 0-013 'iVxd6l::te8 gives Black more than enough play)

11...O-O! 12 cxd6 e3!? (12 ... .:te8 can lead to

crazy lines like 13 ~d4 e3! 14 fxe3 ttJg4 15 ttJe6! fxe6 16 'iVxg4 exd5 17 'iVd4! ttJc6! 18 ~xd5+ .i.e6, which I leave with you to ana- lyse!) and now: a) 13 .i.e2!? is Cummings's very sensible suggestion. His idea is 13 ... h6 14 d7!, which is utterly unclear after 14 ... .i.xd7 15 i.xf8 'iVxf8 16 ttJf3 exf2+ 17 ~xf2 ttJe4+ 18 ~f1 ttJxc3, or any other number of formidable lines! b) 13 d7! is a refinement: 13 ... exf2+ 14 ~xf2 .i.xd7 15 .i.xf8 and now 15 ... ~xf8 is met with 16 ~d4!, and 15 ... ttJg4+ 16 ~gl 'iVxg5 foiled by 17 .i.c5!. However, 15 ... ~xf8! 16 .i.e2!? h6 17 ttJf3 ttJe4+ is unclear. c) After 13 fxe3!? ttJg4, Cummings gives 14 ttJf3? ttJxe3, etc. It bears mentioning, however, that 14 h4! (D) muddies the waters. For example, 14 ... ttJxe3 (14 ... h6 15 .i.e2 ttJxe3 16 ~d3; 14 ... I!.e8 15 'iVbl- with the idea ~xh7+, of course, but also e4 - 15 .. Jhe3+ 16 .i.e2 looks messy but safe enough for White; .l:i.h3 might follow) 15 iVd3 .i.f5 16 iVxe3 Ite8 17 ttJe6 .i.xe6 (17 ... fxe6 18 O-O-O) 18 O-O-O!? (18 ~f2 .i.xd5 19 iVd4 is also unclear) 18 ... .i.g4 19 ~d4 .i.xdl 20 ~xdl ~d7, and because of his bishop-pair and Black's lack of kings ide de- fenders, White can venture a kingside attack by

21 h5 h6 22 g4 b5 23 g5!, which is still unclear

after 23 ... ~f5 (not 23 ... b4? 24 .i.d3!) 24 gxh6. This line with 8 ... .i.xc3+ 9 bxc3 ttJa5 should attract attacking types. As mentioned, it has special importance, since it also applies to other lines from the English, as well as to the Sicilian Defence. Let's return to the better-travelled paths of 8 ... ttJe5: 9 iVd4 (D)

9  Wlie7 9 ... d6 is a little-tested idea: 10 ttJxe4 ttJxe4! (1O ... .i.xc3+? should be answered by 11 ttJxc3!; for example, 11...'iVe7 12 .i.e2 .i.g4 13 O-O .i.xe2 14 ttJxe2 .llc8 15 .i.g5! O-O 16 b3, with the idea 16 ... ttJxc4? 17 .i.xf6 gxf6 18 ~g4+ ~h8 19 bxc4 and e2 is covered) 11 'iVxe40-0 . Black has some real compensation, with ideas of .. :iVf6 and ... .i.f5, or ... f5-f4. A key line would start with 12 .i.e2: 12 .. .f5!? (or 12 .. :~f6!?) 13 ~f4 (13 'iVc2 f4 is very strong, intending 140-0 f3!, when 15 .i.xf3? loses to 15 ... .l:!.xf3 16 gxf3 MAIN LINES WITH 2 0,f3 AND d4 233 tbxf3+ 17 ..t>g2 ~4) 13 ... tbg6 14 Vid2 f4! 15 O-O tbh4!, with complications that are at any rate acceptable to Black.

10.lte3

The tricky 10 d6!? would be well answered by 1O ... tbc6! 11 "iVe3 'iVe5. 10 .. tbeg4!? 11 O-O-O Now Black's e-pawn is well and truly hang- ing, and he lags in development, so he has to start capturing things. 11 ... tbxe3 12 "iVxe3 (D)

12 .. tbg4?! 14 tbxe4 Black escapes the most terrible fates: after 14 ... tbxhl? 15 d6 Vif8 16 c5! f617 .ltc4 Black's position is resignable. 14 ... tbxdl leads to the same result but by a more spectacular route: 15 d6 'iVf8 (15 ... .ltxd6 16 tbxd6+ 'it>f8 17 tbgxf7 'iVe3+ 18 'iVxe3 tbxe3 19 tbxh8) 16 c5! (mak- ing room for the bishop on c4) 16 ... h6 17 .ltc4! hxg5 18 tbxg5 and White is winning! 15 tbxe4 f5 16 'iVxf5 d6 Here instead of the game's 17 ~h5+? g6 18 ~f3, when 18 ... .i.f5 would have defended, 17 'iVf3! keeps the extra pawn and a large advan- tage: 17 .. ..l:i.f8 (17 ... .i.d7 18 .ltd3 O-O-019 'iVg3) 18 'iVe3 .ltg4 (18 ... .i.c5 19 'iVd2! intending :tel) 19 .i.e2 .ltxe2 20 ~xe2 :tf4 21 1::td4 with the idea 2l....ltc5? 22 tbf6+. When all is said and done, Black seems to have full-bodied play following 1 c4 c5 2 tbf3 tbc6 3 tbc3 e5 4 e3, and for that matter, after 2 ... tbc6 as a whole. 2 ... ltJf6 and the Symmetrical Four Knights Another swap with 12 ... .ltxc3 was called for. 1 c4 c5 2 tbf3 tbf6 (D) Then 13 ~xc3 d6 14 1::tel threatens f3, but this may not be so bad: 14 ... O-O 15 f3!? tbxd5! 16 ~d2 tbf6 17 tbxe4 tbxe4 18 ~xe4 .i.e6 with some sort of balance. W 13 'iVf4 tbxf2? Hoping for 14 d6 'iVf6, but falling for a tac- tic; instead, 13 ... .i.xc3 14 Vixg4 .lte5 15 tbxe4 d6 holds on, with some edge for White. 14 tbcxe4! (D)

Having seen the important move 2 ... tbc6 and associated variations, we'll tum our attention to one of the grand old lines of the Symmetrical English, the Four Knights Variation with

2. .. tbf6 and an early d4 on White's part. Black's

development of his king's knight implies a fun- damental change of philosophy from 2 ... tbc6. This time the light squares d5 and e4 are his

234 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

focus, and a wide array of the variations follow- ing 2 ... ttJf6 involve the move ... d5, as early as move 3. The move ... e5, so often associated with 2 ... ttJc6, becomes a rare occurrence. 3 ttJc3 If you're following the multitudinous trans- positions in these chapters, it won't surprise you that 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 can go various ways, including of course our main line with 4 ... ttJc6 5 ttJc3. I'll look at some independent alternatives in the Anti-Benoni section below. 3  ttJc6 After 3 ... b6 4 e3!?, 4 ... ii.b7 5 d4 transposes to note 'b' on page 219, and 4 ... e6 is line 'b' of this note; both are pleasant for White. Now let's take a look at some move-orders after the much more important 3 ... e6 (D): w The lines that follow are of particular signifi- cance, because the choices made at this point can determine the underlying nature of the opening and middlegame. Both players need to know how to steer the game into the fundamen- tal variations that they wish to play: a) 4 g3 ttJc6 (Black has a certain control over his own destiny; for example, 4 ... b6 5 ii.g2 Jtb7 is a Hedgehog Variation of Chapter 10; and 4 ... d5 5 cxd5 exd5 6 d4 is a Queen's Gam- bit Declined, Tarrasch Variation; in this last line, 5 ... ttJxd5 6 d4 or 6 ii.g2 ttJc6 will usually transpose into the Keres-Parma Variation in Chapter 9) 5 ii.g2 (5 d4 cxd4 6 ttJxd4 is the main Four Knights line again) 5 ... d5 6 d4!? (once again, 6 cxd5 exd5 7 d4 is a Tarrasch De- fence, and 6 ... ttJxd5 a Keres-Parma Variation) 6 ... dxc4 7 'iVa4 cxd4!? (or 7 ... ~b6!?) 8 ttJxd4 ~xd4 9 ii.xc6+ ii.d7 (D). w Compare the Griinfeld Defence variation 1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 g6 3 ttJc3 d5 4 ttJf3 ii.g7 5 e3 c5 6 dxc5 ~a5 7 cxd5 ttJxd5 8 ~xd5 ii.xc3+ 9 ii.d2. In our analogous situation (see the above dia- gram), Black's position is fine after 10 ii.xd7+ ~xd7 11 ~xc4 ':c8. O'Kelly de Galway-Mas- carifias, Jakarta 1978 continued 12 ~b3, and now 12 ... ii.e7 was adequate, but a more inter- esting continuation might be 12 .. . ii.c5!? 13 O-O O-O with the idea 14 ii.g5 ttJg4!? (or 14 ... ~c6 15 ii.xf6 gxf6 16 .:tacl ~b6 with equality) 15 lIadl ~c6 16 h3 h6!, preserving a lively imbal- ance. b) 4 e3 can be dull, but has a few subtleties. Usually the game goes 4 ... d5 5 d4 or 4 ... ttJc6 5 d4 d5, when we've arrived at the Symmetrical Tarrasch Queen's Gambit. To avoid this, Black sometimes risks 4 ... b6 5 d4 cxd4 (5 ... ii.b7?! 6 d5 blocks off the bishop on b7 and grabs space) 6 exd4 d5?! (D) (following the exchange on d4, 6 ... ii.b7 is now viable; although White still en- joys more space after a move like 7 ii.d3, he cannot easily execute the d5 advance). w MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDf3 AND d4 235 This can also come about by 1 c4 cS 2 liJf3 liJf6 3liJc3 b6 4 e3 e6 S d4 cxd4 6 exd4 dS. In conventional theory, it is 'officially' a Caro- Kann Defence, Panov Attack due to the order 1 e4 c6 2 d4 dS 3 exdS cxdS 4 c4liJf6 S liJc3 e6 6 liJf3 b6?!. However, it probably arises most of- ten from our move-order, and still more from a Queen's Gambit Semi-Tarrasch. So it's worth knowing that Black's position is terrible! A strong solution is 7liJeS! i.e7 (7 ... liJbd7 8 "iVa4 i.b7 9 cxdS exdS 10 i.d3 a6 11 O-O with a clearly superior game; 7 ... a6 8 cxdS liJxdS 9 "iVa4+ i.d7 10 liJxd7 liJxd7 11 liJxdS exdS 12 i.xa6!, Kharitonov-Ballo, Stockholm 1998, and Black can't exploit the bishop's position; for example, l2. . :iVc7 13 'ikbS! 'ika7 14 "iVe2+) 8 cxdS liJxdS (8 ... exdS 9 i.bS+ 'i2tf8 10 O-O i.e6 11 .l:tel a6 12 i.a4 bS 13 i.b3 b4 14 liJe2liJbd7 IS liJf4 with a dominant position, Timman- Giardelli, Buenos Aires Olympiad 1978) 9 i.bS+ i.d7 and instead of 10 "iVf3, as played in Dovgopolov-Koriakin, Vitebsk 2006, 10 liJxd7! liJxd7 11 liJxdS exdS 12 "iVg4! hits g7 and ties the king to d7. White is winning; for example, l2 ... g6 13 i.h6 fS 14 'ikf3, etc. c) You'll find transpositions arising from 4 d4 cxd4 S liJxd4 in this and other chapters. For a rundown on the possibilities, see the Anti- Benoni section below. d) After 4 e4 liJc6, the wimpy-looking S i.e2!? (D) is more important than it might at first seem;

First, it's worth noting that this is also a Sicil- ian Defence, as it can come from 1 e4 cS 2 liJf3 e6 (or 2 ... liJc6 3 c4, etc.) 3 c4liJc6 4liJc3liJf6 S i.e2. Perhaps that will interest 1 e4 players. In any event, White intends 6 d4 cxd4 7 liJxd4, when i.e2 becomes a normal and useful move. Here S ... liJd4 6 eS! is undesirable, and S ... ~b6 is an uninspiring, if perfectly respect- able, option. So the most popular and challeng- ing line has been S ... dS 6 cxdS (6 exdS exdS 7 d4 is Ivanchuk-Anand on page 230; after 6 eS, 6 ... liJg4 7 cxdS exdS will transpose, while 6 ... liJe4 can be met by 7 i.d3 fS!? or 7 O-O i.e7 8 ~c2!? liJgS! 9 liJxgS i.xgS 10 cxdS exdS 11 f4liJd4 12 'iVa4+ i.d7 13 ~dl with a messy po- sition) 6 ... exdS 7 eSliJg4 8 i.bS! (D). By an odd turn, we have reached the posi- tion from 2 liJf3 liJc6 3 liJc3 eS 4 e3 liJf6 S d4 cxd4 6 exd4 e4 7 liJgS i.b4, analysed in the last section! The colours are reversed but the position is the same due to White's tempo-loss with i.e2-bS. Refer to that move-order and analysis, with a special focus on the ambitious 8 dS i.xc3+!? 9 bxc3 liJaS. With our move- order, that's 8 ... d4 9 i.xc6+!? bxc6 10 liJa4.

4 d4 cxd4 SliJxd4 (D)

236 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Finally, we've arrived at the Four Knights Symmetrical Variation, the traditional main line arising from 2liJf3 with an early d4. A warning: the subject-matter of this chapter can be sophisticated in terms of theory and analysis at some points. When the material be- comes too dense, the less advanced reader may wish to follow the general ideas and enjoy the games rather than get tangled up in specifics. S. e6 (D) This is by far the most frequently chosen move. There are some irregular possibilities such as S .. :iVb6 which I won't give details about, but see the section above about 2 ... liJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4liJxd4 'iiVb6 for some possible transpo- sitions. Finally, I should mention that S. .. eS!? (which is very rarely played) could be a better option than thought, because 6liJdbS d6 7 .ligS transposes to S ... e6 6liJdbS d6 7 .lif4 eS 8.ligS below. Of course, White can look into other 7th moves, including 7 e4, which is a Kalashnikov Sicilian. In general, the Four Knights Variation embraces such disparate types of positions that the best way to describe it is by showing games. w Four Knights with 6 a3 Yakovenko - Moiseenko European Ch, Dresden 2007

1 c4 cS 2 liJf3liJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 liJxd4liJf6 S

liJc3 e6 6 a3 (D) This odd-looking move, which was essen- tially ignored for most of the rich history of this variation, has grown in importance. Much of this has to do with White's frustrations in the old main line after 6 g3 ~6 7 liJb3 .lib4, al- though it must be said that players are still will- ing to contest that position and it has its own unexplored paths, as we shall see below.

In modem chess, there has been an increased use of the 'little moves' a3 and ... a6 (as well as h3 and ... h6) in many contexts; a common theme is that they serve as 'useful' semi-waiting moves. The utility of 6 a3 is largely preventa- tive, in that 6 ... .lib4 is averted, but there are a few other ideas associated with it. For example, you will see that a standard pawn-structure for Black involves ... d6 and ... b6 (the 'hedgehog' formation), against which White will set up a large centre with c4 and e4. A standard theme in such positions, and in fact the primary way for White to make progress, is to advance on the queenside with b4, for which 6 a3 is useful. The good news from Black's point of view is that 6 a3 is a slow move that does nothing for White's development. Furthermore, it creates a hole on b3. In general, White's c-pawn, which tends to be an important target in the Four Knights, will be more easily attackable. That is certainly the case if White plays b4, leaving it with no pawn defenders. 6  liJxd4 6 ... dS!? 7 cxdS exdS 8 .ligS (D) gives White a nice isolated queen's pawn formation in which his knight blockades the d-pawn and he reaches the favourable set-up with .ligS and e3. The only problem is that a3 is almost a waste of a move here, so Black can play unusually ag- gressively by 8 ... .licS (a routine demonstration of White superiority was 8 ... .lie7 9 e3 O-O 10 MAIN LINES WITH 2 C{jf3 AND d4 237 ~bS! ttJeS 11 O-O a6 12 ~e2 ~e6 13 ~3 bS 14 l:;ladl with great piece coordination, Kra- senkow-Mamedyarov, European Ch, Antalya 2004) 9 e3 O-O. In Van Wely-Ivanchuk, Foros 2007, White continued 10 ~e2 ~xd4 11 exd4 h6 12 ~h4 'ii'd6 13 ~g3 'ii'e7 140-0 ttJe4 IS l:;lc1 (or IS .l:i.el ttJxg3 16 hxg3 followed by ~f3, which leaves White with some pressure on dS) IS ... ttJxc3 16 .l:i.xc3 ~f6, and here Van Wely suggests 17 ~f3 with some advantage due to his relatively active bishop-pair. 7 ~xd4 b6 (D) w What do we think of Black's exchange on move 6? On the positive side, Black gets rid of White's knight on d4, a centralized piece that has moved twice, while bringing White's queen onto a square on which it will probably be at- tacked. The move ... b6 can also serve to prepare ... ~cS as well as to discourage g3. But from White's point of view, the exchange has not been a bad thing. First, it brought the queen out for free, so that if it has to move again, that's no real loss of tempo, especially if White can choose the square it goes to. More generally, in a hedgehog position in which White has more space (for example, with c4 and e4), exchanges tend to favour him. Specifically, when Black swaps pieces the possibility of dynamic coun- terattacks based upon ... dS and ... bS breaks is reduced, because their success often depends upon attack by a maximum number of Black's forces. You will find that, contrary to the old saw about exchanges favouring the side with less space, they favour the side with more space quite as often. 8 iYf4! In view of the above, we shouldn't be too surprised by this move, which anticipates the attack by ... ~cS and prepares e4. 8 iVd3 is sometimes played with the same idea, but the queen has less influence from that spot. What about 8 e4? The move is hardly a blunder, yet it encourages Black to take the initiative, and White's queen will end up on a passive square.

1.Horvath-Kosten, Reims 2002 was a pretty and

thematic example: 8 ... ~cS 9 ~dl (this is aimed against ... ttJg4 and ... iYf6 or ... ~h4, attacking the f-pawn; unfortunately, it's an undeveloping move) 9 ... 'iVc7!? (the same idea with 9 ... ~b7 10 ~d3 'iVb8! is more accurate, avoiding ttJbS) 10 ~d3! (10 M?! 'iVeS! has the idea 11 ~b2? ~d4, or 11 bxcS 'iVxc3+ 12 ~d2 ~eS 13 f3 O-O! 14 ~c1 'iVxcS! IS .iM 'iYeS 16 ~xf8 Rxf8, when White has horrible dark-square weaknesses, a terrible bishop hemmed in by his own pawns, and a weak isolated pawn on c4) 1O ... ~b7 11 'iVe2 hS! (in order to answer 12 eS by 12 ... ttJg4, and to threaten ... ttJg4 should White castle) 12 h3 h4 (D).

238 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black wants to control as many dark squares as possible, and ... ttJh5-f4 becomes a theme (af- ter preparation). White on the other hand has caught up in development and is well central- ized, with prospects of a timely b4 or simplify- ing by SLe3. Play continued 13 b4? (Kosten suggests 13 ttJb5! 'ifVb8 14 e5 ttJh5 15 b4 SLe7 160-0 a6 17 ttJc3, which offers a very small ad- vantage, as does 17 ttJd4) 13 .. :~e5! 14 SLd2 SLd4 15 l:k 1 a6!? (this is not a bad move, but Black had the beautiful continuation 15 ... ttJh5! 16 ttJb5 ttJf4 17 'iVf3 SLe3!!, when every cap- ture of the bishop on e3 loses material!), and now White jumped from the frying pan into the fire with 16 O-O?! g5! (control of the dark squares is a consistent theme; now both ... g4 - perhaps preceded by .. .!:tg8 - and ... ttJh5-f4/g3 are in the air) 17 ~hl!? g4! 18 hxg4 'ifVg3!! (Black's queen can't be taken without allow- ing mate, but there's no good way to prevent ... ttJxg4) 19 SLe3 ttJxg4! 20 fxg3 hxg3+ 21 Wgl ttJxe3! 22 .l:t.f2! ttJf5 23 exf5 (23 ttJdl gxf2+ 24 ttJxf2 ttJg3 would be a funny finish) 23 ... gxf2+ 24 'iYxf2 SLxf2+ and Black went on to win. Quite a lot of excitement resulting from the modest 6 a3! We now return to 8 'iVf4 (D):

[diagram]
10 SLd3 a6 11 O-O ttJd7!? 12 'tWg3. Then Black

played ingeniously in Lautier-Topalov, Cannes 2002: l2 ... g6 13 SLf4?! "ViIIc7 14 i.c2 h5!, in- tending 15l:tadl h4! 16 i.xd6 hxg3 17 i.xc7 gxf2+. With hindsight, 13 SLe3! would have been tougher to meet.

9 e4 d6 10 ~g3 O-O 11 i.h6!

White is not really expecting Black to miss 12 fixg7#, or to lose material after ll...g6 12 i.xf8. He wants to put his light-squared bishop on d3 in order to defend the e-pawn, aim at the kingside, and discourage ... d5. But if he plays 11 i.d3 first, Black can reply ll...ttJd7!, with the idea of jumping to e5, to harass White's bishop and c4-pawn, or transferring to c5 as ap- propriate. So White forces Black's knight to the inferior square e8 before he continues his de- velopment. 11".ttJe812 SLd2 (D)

12 SLf4 i.b7 (Kasparov gives 12 ... e5 13 SLd2!

f5 14 exf5 i.xf5 15 SLe2 i.h4 16 'iUe3 with a slight edge) 13l:tdl SLh4 14 'iUh3 'iUf6 15 i.e3 i.g5 16 SLe2 i.xe3 17 'iUxe3 'iUe7 18 O-O ttJf6 19 l:td2l:tfd8 20 l:tfdl and White stands better, Kasparov-Van Wely, Armenia-RoW, Moscow

2004. This is a standard 'hedgehog' position

(see Chapter 10), and Black even has the better bishop, but as mentioned above, simplification by the exchange of two pairs of minor pieces means that Black must either make a compro- mising move such as ... e5, or sit around waiting while White slowly expands and makes prog- ress.

Now White is about to consolidate his space advantage, so Black wants to disturb the equi- librium. 12".ttJf6 Bruzon-Timman, Rapid match (game 2), Willems tad 2005 went l2 ... SLh4 13 'iVe3 SLb7

14 O-O-O!? (an ambitious move that presages

kingside action) 14 ... 'iUc7 15 f3 a6 16 Wbl i.f6

17 SLd3 i.c6 18 g4! WHb7 19 g5 SLe7 20 l:tc1!?

b5?, and Black has allowed the standard attack MAIN LINES WITH 2 ti:Jj3 AND d4 239 by 21 ttJd5!, since 21...exd5 22 exd5 wins the piece back, and otherwise either ttJxe7+ or ttJb4 is good. W 13 ~dl!? ~c714 .i.h6 ttJe815 ~d3 .i.a616 ~cl You can argue that White hasn't lost a mean- ingful tempo by ~dl-c1 because the queen is less than ideally situated on c7. 16 . ~c8 17 ~d2 ttJf6 18 O-O ttJd7 (D)

The knight is back to where it wanted to be all along. 19b3 Attacking the queen by ttJb5 might be objec- tively best hereabouts. However, White's ad- vantage might only be a theoretical one after ... ~xb5 because he has no easy way to make progress. 19 ... ~fe8 20 'it>hl ~b7 21 f4 a6 White may have a slight edge because of his greater space; still, the position is very near equal. Korchnoi - Ponomariov Match (game 2), Donetsk 2001

[diagram]
ttJxd4 e6 6 a3 ~e7 I won't go into 6 ... ~c5 7 ttJb3 ~e7, but it is a respectable alternative. 6 ... ~b6 (D) resembles the line 6 g3 ~b6, and leads to some fascinating play: a) 7 ttJb3 deserves notice because this line can also come from the 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 section above following 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 ~b6 5 ttJb3 ttJf6 6 ttJc3 e67 a3. Generally, 7 ... ~e7 is played, leading to 8 e4 O-O 9 ~e2 ~c7 10 O-O b6, with the kind of hedgehog structure we'll be seeing a lot of. But the immediate 7 ... d5!? is critical and not fully-tested. Then Izoria-Almasi, Bled Olympiad 2002 continued along natural lines: 8 ~e3 ~d8 9 cxd5 exd5 10 g3 ~e6 11 .i.g2.i.e7

[diagram]
White has restrained the isolated d-pawn. Black's challenge is to place his pieces actively and change the dynamics, with ... .l:!.e8, ... lIc8 and ... ttJe5-c4 as likely ways to get started. The game continued 13 .l::tcl .l:!.c8 (if 13 ... ttJe5 14 ttJc5 ttJc4, White has 15 ~d4! ttJxb2 16 ~b3 ttJc4 17 ~xb7 with excellent activity) 14 .l::tc2 (Pritchett suggests 14 ~c5, when 14 ... I:.e8 15 e3 b6 16 .i.xe7ltxe7 17 ttJb5 is only slightly in White's favour) 14 ... ttJe5 15 ttJd4 (15 .i.d4!? ttJc416 ~d3 ~d7! threatens ... ~f5, forcing 17 .i.xf6 .i.xf6 18 ttJxd5 .i.xd5 19 ~xd5 ~a4!, when more exchanges and a likely draw will re- sult) 15 ... ttJc4 16 .i.g5 ~h8 17 e3 h6 18 ~xf6 ~xf6 with full equality. If Black can get away with 7 ... d5, White's plans have gone awry.

240 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

b) With the conventional 6 a3 'iVb6 move- order, it seems to me that 7 tDdbS (D) may be stronger than in the main lines following 6 g3 'iVb6.

For some reason, this isn't played; perhaps it should be? A couple of ideas: bl) 7 ... tDeS 8 ..te3! is the reason that 6 a3 is so handy. Black can't like 8 ... 'fiaS 9 M, 8 ... 'iVd8? 9 ..tf4 d6 10 cS!, or 8 .. :~c6 9 tDxa711xa7!? 10 ..txa7 tDxc4, when he lacks compensation after 11 'iVb3!. After 6 g3 'iVb6 7 tDdbS tDeS, by con- trast, 8 ..te3? lets Black slide his queen to c6, at- tacking the rook on hI. b2) 7 ... d5 8 ..te3 d4!? (8 ... 'fid8 9 cxdS tDxdS 10 tDxdS exdS 11 'iVxdS) 9 ..txd4 tDxd4 10 'fixd4..tcS 11 'iVf40-0 12 b4 and White comes out on top. b3) Probably 7 ... a6 is best, with the idea 8 ..te3 'fiaS! 9 M 'iVd8 10 tDd6+ ..txd6 11 'iVxd6 tDg4; nevertheless, 12 ..tf4! ~f6 13 l!cl gives White some advantage.

7 e4 O-O (D)

w This position can evolve into a hedgehog pawn-structure after ... d6; because of the slow a3, however, White has to take care to prevent ...dS. 8 tDf3! a) Korchnoi gives 8 tDxc6 dxc6 9 ..tf4 tDd7 with equality. A sample line with a manoeuvre particularly known from the King's Indian and Pirc Defences is 10 ..te2 eS 11 ..te3 tDcs 120-0 tDe6! with the idea ... tDd4. b) 8 ..te2?! has been condemned on the grounds of 8 ... dS!, and indeed, that's where White's lack of development hurts; for exam- ple, 9 exdS exdS 10 tDxc6 (White should al- ready be looking to equalize, and 10 ..te3! is a better way) 1O ... bxc611..te3 ..te6 12 cS? tDe4!? (or 12 ... 11b8! 13 b4 as) 13 tDa4?! (13 tDxe4! dxe4 14 'iVc2 ..tdS favours Black, but only mildly), Ibragimov-Kudrin, Stillwater 2007, and now the easiest was 13 ... ..tgS! with a clear ad- vantage no matter how White plays it. 8 ... d6 In the 8th match game between these same players, Ponomariov changed course by play- ing 8 ... 'iVc7. There followed 9 ..tgS b6 10 ..td3 (10 .i.h4 was suggested) 1O ... h6!? 11 .th4 tDhS!. Black eyes the f4-square, and exchanges the bishop that covers it. Since retreating gives up the bishop-pair for no reason, White chose 12 ..txe7 tDxe7 13 O-O with equal chances in a complex game. 9 ..te2 b6 10 O-O ..tb7 11 ..tf4 (D)

Black would like to maximize his pieces' in- fluence and then break with ... bS or ... dS. White, as usual, will look to central play and queenside expansion. Since only the latter looks available, MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDf3 AND d4 241 the plan will be to play b4, supporting the moves cS and/or a4-aS with rooks and pieces. 1l. .. l:!.e8 ... lZ'leS-d7 is a standard reorganization in the hedgehog formation (whether a Sicilian De- fence or English Opening) and is available here because of the tactical fact that White's e-pawn is loose. Thus Black could well play 11...lZ'leS! 12lZ'ld2!? (perhaps 12 ~c2 ~c7 13 i:Ifdl a6 14 l:!.ac 1 should be tried, with the idea 14 ... lZ'lxc4?! IS b3lZ'leS? 16 iLxeS dxeS 17lZ'ldS) 12 ... lZ'led7 13 iLe3, again with a fairly normal-looking game in which Black has good chances to real- ize ... dS at some point. 12l:!.el a6 13 iLO 'fie7 14 b4l:!.fd8 IS .l:Iel It.Jes 16lZ'ld2 ~b8 17 h3!? Usually this prepares iLe3, but White holds back on that for a while, and then decides to keep pressure on the d-pawn. 17 ... iLe618 'fie2lZ'lg619 iLg3 'fib7 20 lZ'lb3 h6 21l:!.bl! (D)

A key move; now a well-timed cS or as will result in an open file and/or passed pawn. With a rook on bl, White very often plays cS as a pawn sacrifice, gaining not only the file, but c4 and as as pivot points for White's pieces.

21...iLfS 22 f3!? .ne8 23 iLf2 ~b8 24 ~e3

lZ'ld7 2S l:!.edl iLb7? According to Korchnoi, the best defence to the queenside was 2S ... iLe7! with the idea 26 a4 iLgS 27 'fiellZ'ldeS 28 aSlZ'lf4; nevertheless, 29 lZ'ld4 is extremely strong. Overall, White has outplayed his opponent strategically, and now cashes in: 26 lZ'la4! lZ'lgeS 27 lZ'lxb6 lZ'lxb6 28 ~xb6 lZ'lxe4 29 iLxe4l:!.xe4 30 lZ'laS ne7 31 bS! iLa8 At this point Korchnoi demonstrates a win by 32 ~xa6! l:tc2 33 b6 dS 34 b7; for example, 34 ... ,U,xf2 35 ~xf2 iLcS+ 36 'it'e2 'iif4 37l:tb3. Four Knights with 6 ltJdb5

1 e4 eS 2 lZ'lf3 lZ'lf6 3 lZ'le3 lZ'le6 4 d4 exd4 S

lZ'lxd4 e6 6 lZ'ldbS (D)

White moves his knight a second time in or- der to target d6 and c7. He intends to follow that up with 7 iLf4, increasing the pressure on those squares. 6 lZ'ldbS isn't as popular among lead- ing grandmasters as other moves, but in part that's due to the relatively uncharted complexi- ties of 6 a3 and a couple of the newer lines stemming from 6 g3. 6 lZ'ldbS should attract positionally-minded players who are comfort- able with slowly-developing play, and/or those of a less theoretical bent. Black, of course, needs to know this line: first, to survive early threats, and then, to avoid being squeezed to death. Ki. Georgiev - Topalov Sarajevo 2000 6 ... dS (D) This is the most established move, but the al- ternatives in the next game are important and inviting, because they avoid the endgame that almost always arises after 6 ... d5. Nevertheless, I should say that Black may have just as many ways to play for a win in a complex ending as he does in a tactical slugfest. 7 i.f4

242 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w In view of the threat of 7 ... d4, White forces the pace. The first thing that an experienced player will see is that he can win a pawn with the familiar trick 7 cxdS liJxdS (7 ... exd5? 8 iLf4) 8 liJxdS exdS 9 'iVxdS, intending 9 ... 'iixdS 10 liJc7+ and liJxdS. However, as in many openings in which this trick is possible, the purported victim of the trick is actually sacrificing a pawn for activity and attack. After 9 ... iLb4+ 10 iLd2 Black gets full compensation in two ways: a) With 10 ... O-O, Black can whip up an at- tack in the queenless middlegame following 11 'iixd8 .ti.xd8 12 O-O-O!? iLe6! 13 a3? iLb3! 14 axb4, and now 14 ... a5! is a killing shot, tak- ing over the a-file, but Black also won with 14 ... liJxM 15liJc3 .ti.ac8 16 .ti.elliJc2 17l:!.dl liJb4 181:tel ':c5! 0-1 in Nyback-Lehikoinen, Stockholm 2003; in the final position .. .lIa5 and mate is threatened, and White will have to give up massive material to prevent it. b) 1O .. :~e7 11liJc3?! (11 O-O-O!?) 11...O-O 12 iLg5 "ViIic7 13 e3 iLe6 14 'iWd2 ~a5 15 iLh4 g5! 16 iLg3 l:.fd8 17 ~c2 iLxc3+ 18 bxc3liJb4! and Black's superiority is obvious, Suba-Por- tisch, Thessaloniki Olympiad 1984. 19 cxM? "iVxb4+ ends in mate, and at the very least, Black can play ... liJxa2 and win White's c- pawn as well. 7 ... e5 (D) Black's attack on the bishop leads to a series of captures which results in gaining the bishop- pair, at the cost of a weakening of his pawn- structure and displacement of his king. It turns out that other counterattacking options simply don't suffice. Scxd5 w 8 iLg5 is slow, especially because of the trick 8 ... d4 9liJd5? liJxd5! 10 iLxd8iLb4+; then 11 ~d2 is forced, in view of llliJc3? dxc3 12 a3 c2+. S. . exf4 9 dxc6 bxc610 'iixdS+ 'iii>xdS (D) w This queenless middlegame has been con- tested over many years. Sometimes it's called 'drawish', but this only means that at the very top levels, grandmasters on either side of the board find it hard to get as many winning chances as they'd like, in particular compared with the moves 6 a3 and 6 g3. That's not really saying much, and the average player will have plenty of chances to win with either colour. Right off we have the radical difference in pawn-structures, with Black's isolated c- and a-pawns, and his funny pawn on f4 that can be either weak or strong. Then there is the issue of whether White's quick development by O-O-O+ or .l::!.dl + is enough to disrupt his opponent's game. Black's play stems from the fact that if White's knight on b5 retreats, he gets to keep MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDf3 AND d4 243 the bishop-pair; or, if White puts the knight on d6, Black will gain time by exchanging it and playing on the open files by ... J:Ib8 and ... .l:!.e8. Under some circumstances, the move ... liJg4 will be relevant, especially if White castles queenside.

11 J:Idl+

a) White doesn't get a chance to consolidate his structural advantage after 11 liJd4 (for a while this was White's main line) 1l...i.b7! 12 J:Idl1f;c7 13 g3 J:Id8! 14 i.g2 (watch out for the trick 14 gxf4?? J:Ixd4! IS J:Ixd4 cS) 14 ... l:i.xd4 (this mini-combination seems to equalize im- mediately, although 14 ... i.cS!? is also feasible) IS J:Ixd4 cS 16 J:IdS (16 liJdS+ liJxdS 17 J:IxdS fxg3 18 hxg3 i.xdS 19 i.xdS should be drawn due to the opposite-coloured bishops) 16 ... liJxdS 17 i.xdS fxg3 18 hxg3 i.xdS 19 liJxdS+ ~c6

20 e4 fS!? 21 liJc3 fxe4 22 liJxe4 and neither

side has much to play for, Reinderman-Oral, European Team Ch, Batumi 1999. b) 11 O-O-O+!? is more ambitious than 11 J:Idl +, but leaves f2 hanging in the line 1l...i.d7 12liJd6 i.xd6 (12 ... ~c7!? 13liJxf7 J:Ig8 is also played, yielding compensation in the form of Black's two bishops and his quick and active development) 13 J:Ixd6liJg4!. Then you'd think that Black's piece-play would be more impor- tant than his weaknesses, but it turns out that there are mutual chances after 14 f3 (14 liJdl can be met with 14 ... ~e7 or 14 ... ~c7! IS J:Id4 gS with a solid position; for example, 16 h4 h6

17 g3 fxg3 18 i.h3 hS!) 14 ... liJe3 IS J:Id4 and

here IS ... cS!? 16 J:Ixf4 fSled to an early draw in Wojtkiewicz-Zviagintsev, FIDE Knockout, Tri- poli 2004, but IS ... gS! is more dynamic: 16 g3 (16 h4 liJfS) 16 ... cS 17 J:Id3 ~e7 18 liJdS+! liJxdS 19 J:IxdS h6 20 gxf4 gxf4 21 J:IxcS J:Iac8

22 J:Ixc8 J:Ixc8+ and Black has enough for a

pawn. 11 .. i.d7 12 liJd6 (D) 12  i.xd6 12 ... J:Ib8!? is an amazing rook sacrifice that may well be sufficient, the main line going 13 liJxf7+ ~e8 14 liJxh8 (14 liJd6+ i.xd6 IS J:Ixd6 J:Ixb2 also comes to equality) 14 ... .l:i.xb2, and Black has the huge threat of IS ... i.b4. White's best move is IS J:Id4!, when best play is IS ... aS! (IS ... i.b4 isn't as convincing after 16 J:Ixb4 J:Ixb4 17 g3) 16 ~dl i.b4 17liJe4!, and Black's activity matches White's extra rook after

17 ... cS 18 liJxf6+ gxf6 19 ~c1 J:Ixa2 20 J:Ixf4 i.a4, when the game will soon end in perpetual check. A crazy and astounding line.

13 J:Ixd6 J:IbS 14 b3 J:Ib415 g3 (D)

15 . Re7 Or IS ... ~c7 16 .l:!.d2 i.fS 17 i.g2 liJe4, Rellers-Ernst, Swedish Team Ch 1997/8.

16 J:Id2h5!? 17 i.g2 h41S0-0 hxg319fxg3

fxg3 20 hxg3 J:Ih5! 21 l:!.f3 .lIe5 One may call this equal. The game was drawn in short order. Donaldson - Shulman Lindsborg (rapid) 2003

[diagram]
liJxd4 e6 6 liJdb5 d6 (D) In my opinion, this is an underestimated move. As far as I can tell from previous prac- tice, White has yet to find a reliable path to ad- vantage. 7 i.f4

244 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Attacking d6 is the only independent attempt to punish Black's move-order, since 7 .i.g5 a6 8 .i.xf6 gxf6 is a standard position in which Black stands no worse. However, 7 e4 is a Taimanov Sicilian Defence, a possibility which should be taken into account by both players. 7  e5 8 .i.g5 (D)

This .i.f4-g5 manoeuvre is a standard tech- nique in several modem opening lines, most fa- mously the Sveshnikov Variation of the Sicilian Defence (if reached via the sequence 1 e4 c5 2 tiJf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tiJxd4 tiJf6 5 tiJc3 tiJc6 6 tiJdb5 d6 7 .i.f4 e5 8 i..g5). White controls the d5-square. However, many of today's openings exploit the fact that a single outpost, however strong, doesn't necessarily produce a superior game, even in the absence of a similar weak- ness on the other side. There are multiple rea- sons for this, the most common one being that the opponent can work around the centre to un- dermine the pawn-supports for that outpost (this is best shown by example). Furthermore, the exchange of a piece occupying an outpost sometimes forces a pawn recapture, filling the hole there. Thus the very threat of exchange can force one's opponent to retreat. The classic ex- amples of this situation arise in the Sicilian De- fence and English Opening (see the various Botvinnik-structure lines in this book), but you will also run into it in other e- and d-pawn openings. After 8 .i.g5, in face of the positional threat of 9 tiJd5 followed by 10 tiJbc3, Black should kick the knight. 8  a69.i.xf6 As in the Sveshnikov, White can maintain the tension by 9 tiJa3 (D).

Black has a choice of ways to divert White from his positional goals; for example: a) S.Emst-Leenhouts, Dutch Team Ch 2007/8 continued 9 ... .i.e6 10 'iVd2 (or 10 e3) 1O ... .i.e7

11 g3 O-O 12 .i.g2 tiJaS! 13 O-O.l:!.c8 14.i.xf6

i..xf6 15 b3 tiJc6 16 tiJe4 .i.e7 17 .l:!.fdl. Now 17 ... 'iVb6, as played, and 17 ... .l:!.c7 are both sat- isfactory. But the dynamism in Black's position might be better illustrated by 17 ... tiJd4!?, threat- ening ... b5; for example, 18 e3 tiJf5 19 tiJc2! b5! 20 cxb5 d5 21 tiJc3 d4 22 exd4 exd4 23 tiJe4 axb5 24 tiJxd4 tiJxd4 25 ~xd4 'iVxd4 26 ':xd4l:tc2. b) The position after 9 ... .i.e7 10 e3 O-O 11 .i.e2 .i.e6 12 O-O has been reached more than once. One example went 12 ... .l:!.c8 (12 ... 'iVb6! and 12 ... 'iVaS are also at least equal) 13 Itcl ~aS 14 tiJabl IUd8 15 .i.xf6 .i.xf6 16 a3!? e4! 17 b4 'iVf5 18 'iVc2, Shabalov-A.Sokolov, Minsk 1986, and here I8 ... d5! would have been the most dy- namic and effective approach. MAIN LINES WITH 2 lDf3 AND d4 245 You can see how varied both sides' strategies and timing are, which suggests that there's sub- stance enough in this line to satisfy anyone. 9 .. gxf6 10 ltJa3 f5 (D)

This advance is seen in the main lines of the Sveshnikov Sicilian, but in our game White has played c4 instead of e4, so there are very differ- ent methods of play. It's worth noting that, by having played c4, White has stopped the move ... bS, crucial in the Sveshnikov, and made the manoeuvre ltJc2-e3 easier. However, he's also given Black squares on b4 and d4 to play around with and most importantly, a target on c4. 11 g3 White increases his control over dS and se- cures a good square for his bishop. This is dou- ble-edged, since it removes a defender from c4 and takes two moves to implement. Some ex- amples will give a feel for the play: a) 11 e3 iLe6 12 ~d2 iLg7! 13 O-O-O "iVaS prevents 14 ~xd6?? due to 14 ... .l:.d8, and 14 ltJdsllVxd2+ IS1:!.xd2 O-O-O was equal in V.Zil- berstein-Lein, USSR Ch, Baku 1972. b) I1ltJc2 is a productive-looking strategy, intending ltJe3-dS with a dominant outpost; for example, ll...iLg7 12 ltJe3 O-O 13 ltJed5 iLe6 14 e3. However, as I pointed out above, this is by no means a guarantee of having the better game. Here Black got sufficient counterplay in A.N.Panchenko-Z.Almasi, Budapest 1991 by means of the characteristic ... bS break: 14 ... l:!.c8 IS iLe2 e4! 16 O-O ! (D) (White anticipates sac- rificing a pawn for counterplay). 16 ... ltJaS! 17 b3 bS 18 1:!.c1 bxc4 19 bxc4 ltJxc4 20 ltJa4! ltJeS 21 1:!.xc8 iLxc8 22 ltJab6 iLb7?! (returning the pawn by 22 ... iLe6 23 iLxa6 ltJd7! 24 ltJxd7 "iWxd7 is an easy equal- izer) 23 "iVa4! ~h8!? (23 ... llVgS) 24 iLxa6 iLxa6 2S 'iVxa6 J:'Lg8, and here 26 ltJf4! defends sol- idly, giving White a modest advantage. 11 ... iLg7 12 iLg2 O-O 130-0 iLe6 14 'iVd2 e4

(D)

A thematic advance. At what point Black should play ... e4, if at all, constitutes one of the most important decisions in this variation. For one thing, Black thereby gives up the f4- square to a knight or another piece, as well as making d4 available for occupation. He fur- ther weakens his pawn on fS, in that it can't ad- vance and will therefore become more of a target. Finally, Black potentially allows White the option of f3, which may favourably change the pawn-structure for White. On the positive side, Black's g7-bishop gains tremendously in scope, and can also come to eS to defend the d6-pawn. Black's knight gains access to that same new square eS from which to attack c4 and oversee the critical d3- and

246 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

f3-squares. Lastly, his e4-pawn disables White's g2-bishop.It's remarkable that the positive and negative features of the e-pawn advance are so delicately balanced; in fact, the overall evalua- tion of the position before and after 14 ... e4 tends to be the same! 15 ~fdl 'tWa5 16 lbd5 White goes for the ending. Again, this seems to be a value-neutral transformation: each side's positional advantages persist as though noth- ing has happened. An obvious alternative is 16 ~ac1, when 16 ... ~ac8 17 ~h3?! (17 'iie3) 17 ... lbd4 18 ~f1? f4! 19 ~xe6 fxe6 20 gxf4 'iih5 gave Black a winning position in Goren- shtein-Stoliarov, Dnepropetrovsk 1966. 16  ~fd8 17 J::tac1 'i!Vxd2 18 .u.xd2 (D)

... ~xd5! An excellent, non-thematic move based upon concrete analysis. Instead, the game is level af- The point. Black has several ideas, including the moves ... e3 and ... lbxa2, while the knight ties White to defence of the d-pawn. 20 e3!? White guards against ... e3 and prepares ~f1 in some lines. This should be adequate, but per- mitting Black to play ... lbd3 is risky. Safer was 20 l:!.c4! lbxa2 21 ~h3 b5 (21...e3 22 fxe3 ~h6 23lbc2) 22 ~c7, when the situation remains in equilibrium. 20  lbxa2!? 20 ... J::tac8! is also good. 21l:!.c7 b5 Shutting out the knight on a3. Now White fi- nally gets his chance to gobble that weak for- ward f-pawn. 22 ~h3 ~ac8 23 ~xc8 ~xc8 24 ~xf5 .l:tcl + 25 ~g2 b4! 26lbc2? After the obvious 26 lbc4!?, 26 ... ~xc4! 27 b3 lbc I! 28 bxc4lbb3 follows, with the idea of marching the passed pawns down the board supported by the bishop and knight on c5. This would deter anyone from 26 lbc4, but by sheer luck (and computer assistance), White could then defend by means of 29 ~a2 lbc5 30 ~a5! b3 31 ~xc5 dxc5 32 ~xe4 a5 33 ~f3! a4 (33 ... b2 34 ~e4) 34 ~dl and he holds. The rest of the game is pretty, ifby no means forced: 26 ... a5 27 lbd4 a4 28 ~xe4 b3 29 'Ot>f3 lbc3!! (D) ter 18 ... ~ac8 19lbb6 ~b8 20 !kdl (lest ... lbe5 W steal the advantage) 20 ... ~e5. 19 cxd5 lbb4! (D) w 30 bxc3? But upon 30 ~f5, Black plays 30 ... .u.dl !. ... ~xd4! 0-1 Regardless of the recapture, Black plays

31...a3 and the pawns roll home. You can see

MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDf3 AND d4 247 that this variation is dynamically balanced and worthy of playing with either colour. Vadasz - Rogulj Karlovac 1979

[diagram]
4.Jxd4 e6 6 4.Jdb5 i.c5 ( D)

Black simply develops and to some extent ig- nores his dark-square problems. When he plays ... i.cs, it's not clear whether the game will simplify or turn exciting; as you'll see, that's quickly decided over the next few moves. I won't go into 6 ... i.b4 except to say that it very often transposes to 6 ... i.cS 7 i.f4 O-O 8 i.d6 or 8 i.c7.

7 i.f4 Usually White foregoes 7 4.Jd6+, a move that keeps Black's king in the centre but loses time; for example, 7 .. .<3;;e7 8 4.Jde4 4.Jxe4 9 4.Jxe4 i.b4+ 10 i.d2!? (10 4.Jc3 is slow; after all, it's the 6th move made by this knight! Black can liquidate the centre and win space by 1O ... dS 11 cxdS exdS 12 e3 d4) 1O ... dS! 11 cxdS exdS 12 a3 i.xd2+ 13 4.Jxd2 .l:i.e8 (or 13 ... ~b6) 14 g3, Szilagyi-Planinc, Varna 1970, and one of many good moves is 14 ... i.fS, with the idea IS i.g2?!

4.Jd4 16.l:i.c1 .l:i.c8.

[diagram]
A neglected move that David Cummings has tried to revive with some fascinating analysis. I'm not sure that it results in equality, yet it's a weapon for those willing to speculate. I won't examine more than a fraction of the theoretical detail associated with the traditional move 7 ... O-O (D).

This will often lead to positions with the queens off the board. At first, it may seem that the game becomes insufficiently difficult to offer substantial winning chances. However, players below grandmaster level will still be rewarded for outplaying their opponents. The larger issue is whether you have a taste for the slow nature of the line: a) 8 4.Jc7?? eS! 9 4.Jxa8 exf4 will not only win two pieces for a rook for Black (after the knight on a8 falls), but do so in a position where Black comes out with better development and the initiative. b) 8 i.c7 is the 'drawish' move: 8 ... ~e7 9 i.d6 i.xd6 10 'iVxd6 'iVd8! (D). White's position initially makes a strong im- pression due to his dark-square control. As it happens, Black will soon drive the queen away by ... 4.Je8, which will allow him to set up the well-known hedgehog formation with ... a6, ... d6 and ... b6: 11 e4 b612 i.e2 a6 13 4.Ja3 4.Je8 14 'iVd2 i.b7 ISl:!dl d6 160-0 'iVc7 17 f4.l:td8

248 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

18 Whl ttJf6 and Black has no problems. You

should note that both here and in line 'c', Black's central majority is a counterbalance to W White's space. c) 8 ii.d6 lli'b6!? (by attacking f2 directly and b2 indirectly, Black keeps things somewhat livelier than with 8 ... ii.xd6 9 ttJxd6 ~b6 10 ~d2 ttJd4 11 O-O-O lli'xd6 12 ~xd4 ~xd4 13 .l:i.xd4 b614 e4 e5!, Agrest-Eingom, Graz 1997)

9 e3 ii.xd6 10 ~xd6 a6 11 c5 ~a5 12 ttJa3 b5!

13 cxb6 ttJe8! 14 ~d2 d5 15 ii.e2 .l:i.b8. This po- sition is unbalanced and offers scope for a com- plex fight. We now return to 7 ... e5!? (D): w 8 ii.e3! White wants his occupation of the d6-square to be permanent, and he is willing to take on doubled pawns to ensure it. Cummings shows that the other natural move, 8 ii.g5, is only equal after 8 ... ii.xf2+! 9 'it>xf2 ttJg4+ 10 'it>el ~xg5, when 11 ttJc7+ Rd8 12 ttJxa8 ~f4! draws: 13 ttJd5 (White doesn't escape by 13 ~d6 ~f2+ 14 'it>d2 lli'e3+ 15 'it>dl!? ttJf2+ 16 'it>c2 ttJd4+ 17 'it>bl because of 17 .. :~d2!) 13. .. ~f2+ 14 'it>d2 ~d4+ 15 'it>el 'iVf2+ liz-liz Grinshpun- Shabtai, correspondence game 1995. If Black wants to avoid this draw, his best path is 8 ... d6 (8 ... h6?! 9 ii.xf6 'iVxf6 10 ttJc7+ 'it>d8 11 e3!; 8 ... ~b6 9 ii.xf6! ii.xf2+ 10 'it>d2 gxf6 11 ttJd5 ~a5+ 12 'it>c2! ttJd4+! 13 ttJxd4 exd4 14 e4! ii.e3! 15 ttJxf6+ 'it>d8 16 ttJd5 and White has the upper hand) 9 ii.xf6. Then 9 ... gxf6! doesn't seem that bad. The problem with 9 ... 1lhf6, again, is the reply 10 ttJc7+! 'iifi>d8 11 e3! l::tb8 12 ttJ7d5. 8  ii.xe3 9 ttJd6+ 'it>f8 10 fxe3 ttJg4! (D) When I first saw this position recommended for Black, I was incredulous. It's precisely the one arising from 1 c4 c5 2 ttJf3 ttJf6 3 ttJc3 d5 4 cxd5 ttJxd5 (this is an Asymmetrical Variation from Chapter 9) 5 e4 ttJb4 6 ii.c4 ii.e6!? (an older move; the well-known one is 6 ... ttJd3+) 7 ii.xe6 ttJd3+ 8 'it>fl fxe6 9 ttJg5, with colours reversed, but White is a tempo ahead! We've seen that in many reversed positions in chess, the 'extra' move for one side is passive or overcommittal in the context of the larger vari- ation, but in this particular line (with 6 ttJdb5 .i.c5 7 ii.f4 e5 8 ii.e3), the extra move is ttJc3 (i.e., ... ttJc6 is missing in the Asymmetrical line). You could hardly have a more perfect move for a bonus: it eyes the forward outpost on d5, can come to the defence of the vulnera- ble point at f2, and prepares for O-O-O. Defying logic, however, Black's position has its own resiliency. By analogy with the reversed-colour situation, the move ... Wif6 is Black's key to counterplay, but here it does nothing useful after ttJce4. So he resorts to the moves .. :it'g5 and ... h5. Naturally, those moves reflect the new reality that Black is to some extent defending instead of attacking, and that the move ... h5 is associated with ... .l:i.h6 and ... .l:!.xd6, ridding Black of his most deadly enemy at the cost of the exchange. Very likely White can come out with some advan- tage here, but it's still surprising that such a line isn't refutable and has in fact scored well for Black. 11 ~d2 By way of illustration, one of Black's moves with a tempo less is 9 ... ~b6, but after the analo- gous 11 ~b3 in our position, the 'bonus' knight MAIN LINES WITH 2 CiJf3 AND d4 249 on c3 gets in the way of the white queen's protection of e3, so Black can capture the pawn by 11...tZJxe3, and if 12 c5, 12 ... 'iYM+ 13 g3 'iYhS handily protects f7. However, 11 cS is a good try. For example, l1...tZJxe3 (11...b6!?) 12 'iid2 'iiM+ (12 ... tZJd4 13 l:tcl 'iigS 14 g3) 13 g3 'iYd4 14 tZJcbS! 'iixd2+ IS ~xd2 tZJxfl+ 16 l:thxfl f6. Then White's pieces look dominant, but Black can play for a speedy ... b6, so perhaps it's not so bad for him. 1l ... 'iig5 (D) Black can also play 11...hS straightaway with the idea ... l:th6, which is probably objectively better. Then Anikaev-Yurtaev, Frunze 1979 con- tinued 12 g3 'iYgS (12 ... M) 13 e4!? (13 Ji,g2!)

13. .. 'iixd2+ 14 ~xd2. Here 14 ... l:th6! 15 tZJfS

l:te6 is more accurate than the game's 14 ... h41S Ji,g2 h3 16 Ji,f3 tZJf6, when White should have played 17 tZJdS l:th6 18 cS b6 19 tZJfS with a clear advantage.

12 e4?! 12 tZJdl was originally recommended in the few books that dealt with the line, but Cum- mings is right that simply 12 ... hS with the idea ... l:th6 makes you wonder what good the knight on dl is doing. On the other hand, the more aggressive 12 tZJdS! is difficult to meet, and poses real prob- lems for the 6 ... Ji,cS idea (at least if 11 ... 'iYgS is played); then 12 ... hS 13 cS (13 g3 h4) 13 ... l:th6 14 g3! M? IS Ji,g2! has the idea IS ... tZJxh2? 16 tZJe4, or IS ... l:txd6 16 cxd6 tZJxh2 17 O-O-O! hxg3 18 l:tdgl, when Black's kingside breaks down. 12  Ji'f6 13 e3? (D)

13. .. tZJxe3 14 '!Vxe3

Still worse was 14 tZJxc8 tZJd4!. After this the game goes its own way. I'll show the entertain- ing finish:

14. . :tlVxd6 15 Ji,d3 h5 16 tZJd5 b6 17 .l:tfl

tZJb4 18 'iYf3 tZJxd3+ 19 'iYxd3 Ji,b7 20 O-O-O l:i.c8 21 'it'bl .l:th6 22 'iYf3 Ji,xd5 23 .l:txd5 'iYe6 24 'iVa3+ 'ii;>g8 25 'iVxa7 l:tf6! 26 ::'c1?! 'iYg4! 27 .l:txe5 d6 28 lte7 'iVe2 29 'iVa6? ~d3+ 30 'i2Jall:txc4! 0-1 The end is 31l:tbl 'iYxbl + 32 'it'xbll:tfl #. Four Knights with 6 g3 Karpov - Topalov Linares 1994

[diagram]
tZJxd4 e6 6 g3 (D)

In many ways, this time-honoured move is more logical than 6 a3 or 6 tZJdbS, because

250 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White gets on with his development and places the bishop in its customary place in the English Opening, along the long diagonal. Of course, the bishop takes two moves to get to g2, so the dynamic idea of ... d5 must be taken into ac- count. In reality, since that problem proves manageable, White's most serious difficulty is with his c-pawn, which becomes vulnerable to attack. 6  .lic5 When examining any of the Four Knights lines, one of the first things to check is whether Black can successfully free his game by means of ... d5. An initially popular way of doing so was 6 ... .lib4 7 .lig2 O-O 8 O-O d5, when the best line is 9 cxd5 exd5 10 .lie3 hte8 (this is tradi- tionally queried, with 10 ... .lixc3 11 bxc3 given and agreed to yield White an edge; then moves like ~bl, 'ilVa4 and htfdl would be part of an ef- fective strategy) 11 .l:tc1 .i.g4!? (D). w We are following Portisch-Donner, Santa Monica 1966, the game that more or less laid this line to rest. It continued 12 'ilVb3!?, a clever pawn sacrifice which has variously been given one or two exclamation marks. The game con- tinued 12 ... .lixc3 13 lIxc3liJxd4 14 .lixd4 .lixe2 15 .l::!.fcl and White had a harmonious position with multiple threats for a mere pawn. After 15 ... liJe4 16 'fJ.c7? .lia6? 17 "iWf3! liJg5 18 'ilVf5 .lic4 191Ixb7, Black was positionally lost. But trust the computers to spoil another classic. Mine instantly finds 16 ... .lic4!, refuting the line, based upon 17 "iVxb7liJd6 18 'iVc6liJb5 or 17 .l:tlxc4liJd2! and wins. Instead of 16 .u.c7, 16 'fJ.e3 .lia6 17 f3 would have given White com- pensation for his pawn, but no more than that. But surely White had a favourable isolated queen's pawn position at move 12? I think so; after 12 h3! .lih5 (12 ... .lixc3 13 ~xc3liJxd414 hxg4! liJc6 15 .lig5 and White will safely win the d-pawn) 13 g4.lig6, 14 ~b3! (this version of Portisch's idea seems to work) 14 ... .lixc3 15 ~xc3 liJxd4 16 .lixd4 ~xe2 17 ~dl really is difficult for Black; for example, 17 ... liJe4 (not 17 ... .lie4? 18 .lin) 18 ~e3 ~xe3 19 .lixe3 and after winning the d-pawn White will retain his bishops and initiative. 7 liJb3 .lie7 (D) w Black embarks upon a strategy that applies to a variety of positions, including the Sicilian De- fence. He first drives the knight from the centre and then puts the bishop where he wants it any- way, on e7. The issue, obviously, is whether White's knight is better placed on d4 or b3. There's no easy answer. On d4 the knight is better centralized and looks into key points in Black's position such as c6 and e6. It works with the bishop on g2 to prevent ... d6, a key part of Black's intended set-up. On the other hand, you could also argue that because of Black's pawn-structure, the knight on d4 was restricted from all potential entry points (especially since ... a6 is generally played at the first moment when liJdb5 could become relevant). It might be compared with a knight on d4 in a Taimanov or Kan Variation of the Sicilian Defence. Thus a case can be made for the decentralized and su- perficially less influential knight on b3. One non-trivial consideration concerns Black's own freeing moves, namely, that ... d5 is now pre- vented and that ... e5 won't come with tempo. The knight on b3 may also come in handy MAIN LINES WITH 2 tiJj3 AND d4 251 supporting the move c5, although that is not a vital argument in its favour. As one more illustration of the maddening plasticity of this opening, the game before you really opened I d4 lbf6 2 c4 c5 3 lbf3 cxd4 4 lbxd4 e6 (now it's an English Opening) 5 g3 lbc6 6 i.g2 i.c5 7 lbb3 i.e7 8 lbc3, and now it's a Four Knights Symmetrical English! 8 i.g2 O-O (D) The enterprising 8 ... b6 is premised upon 9 O-O O-O 10 i.f4 i.a6! 11 lbb5 d5! 12 lbc7 i.xc4!, gaining a strong mobile centre and a pawn for the exchange. There are several alter- natives, but it might be that exploiting the pin to return to the centre by 10 lbd4 is worthwhile, with the idea 1O ... i.b7 11 lbdb5 d6 12 i.g5 a6 13 i.xf6, etc.

90-0 d6 Black sidesteps the positional error 9 ... a6?, when White plays 10 c5!. 10 i.f4lbh5!? With 'iid2 (or 'i1rVc2) and ':fdl in the air, Black goes after the bishop. Two other ideas are 1O ... lbg4!? with the idea ... lbge5, and 1O ... h6!?, thinking about ... e5 and ... i.e6 (without having to face i.g5). 11 e3! The voluntary acceptance of doubled f-pawns has popped up from time to time throughout this book. Of course, 11 i.e3 can't be bad. With the pressure off d6, Black might play 11 ... i.d7 with the idea 12lbb5 'iib8. 11 ... lbxf412 exf4 (D) An aesthetically appealing picture. White's two forward bishops' pawns contest the same squares as Black's centre pawns and, at least

temporarily, his bishop on g2 and rooks coming to the centre files will be superior to their coun- terparts. Black will have a hard time achieving freeing breaks, and ... d5 appears particularly hopeless. Nevertheless, he can (and does) pre- pare ... b5, if only to force White to make the weakening move a4. His other natural idea would be to occupy the c-file and target the c- pawn. What are White's plans? It will be difficult to put pressure on d6 with his dark-squared bishop gone, but an attack by f5 is the logical way to make progress. If Black responds by ... e5, he gives White an outpost on d5, but oth- erwise White will play fxe6 and either win the d5-square (if Black captures with his bishop) or create a weak pawn on e6 on an open central file if Black plays ... fxe6. That pawn on e6 is easily attacked by a rook on el, knight on d4 and bishop on h3. Naturally this strategy won't be implemented so easily, but the idea of allow- ing the bishop to be captured on f4 has become standard in similar positions. In lines of the Queen's Indian Defence which involve ... i.xf3 and exf3, for example, f4-f5 is played for the same reasons. 12  i.d7 13 ~d2 'iVb8 141::[fel g6 For the reasons given above, Black wants to stop f5. But this move is quite weakening. 15h4! With Black's queen off-centre on b8, White feels justified in attacking the king. 15 a6 16 h5 b5 17 hxg6 hxg6 18 lbc5! dxc5 The first point is 18 ... i.e8? 19lbxe6!? (or 19 lbxa6 1'ha6 20 cxb5) 19 ... fxe6 20 l:he6 with too strong an attack.

252 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

19 ~xd7 ~c8 (D) 20 ~xe6! Karpov comments "The triumph of the light- squared strategy!"

20. . ::'a7 21 ~xg6+! fxg6 22 ~e6+ <3Jg7 23

.i.xc6 White has enough material already and owns the important central squares. With Black's king so exposed, this is decisive. 23  l:!.d8 24 cxb5 .i.f6 25lbe4 .i.d4 26 bxa6 ~b6 27 ~dl ~xa6 281Ixd4! Not the only win, but it produces some nice geometry: 28  ~xd4 29 "iWf6+ 'It>g8 30 ~xg6+ ~f8 31 ~e8+!? 31 "iWh6+ <3Jg8 32lbf6+ <3Jf7 33 lbh5! is the more devastating computer solution. 31  ~g7 32 "iWe5+ ~g8 33 lbf6+ 'It>f7 34 .i.e8+ ~f8 35 "iWxc5+ 'ilVd6 36 ~xa7 ~xf6 Karpov points out the trap 36 ... ::'dl + 37 ~g2 ~gl+! 38 ~xgl?? "iWdl+ 39 ~g2 'ilVhl+! 40 ~xhl with stalemate. But 38 <3Jh3 wins. 37 .i.h5 ~d2 38 b3 ~b2 39 'It>g2 1-0 Main-Line Four Knights Symmetrical: 6 g3 'iYb6

[diagram]
lbxd4 e6 6 g3 'ilVb6 (D) This has been the main line of the Four Knights Symmetrical Variation for at least 50 years. Black brings out the queen, which may very well be attacked later, in order to force White's knight back. 6 ... "iWb6 really has no log- ical superiority over other moves, but there is a concrete one, namely, that the move ... lbe5, w played with tempo against the c-pawn, will now clear a square on c6 for the queen, from where it hits hI and c4. That seldom happens, of course; nevertheless, White will have to make compromises in order to prevent it. At this point, White plays either 7lbb3 or 7lbdb5 in a vast majority of games. Let's discuss the ideas as we travel through them. Filippov - Khalifman Linares 1997

[diagram]
lbxd4 e6 6 g3 'iVb6 7 lbb3 (D)

In the last game, we discussed the pros and cons of having the knight on b3. The ideas in this position are much the same, but you could argue that its support for the move c5 gains in importance with the black queen's presence on b6. At any rate, the game is soon ruled by spe- cifics. 7 . lbe5 MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDj3 AND d4 253 Over the years, this has always been the main move, because it forces a favourable change of structure. To understand why practice has grav- itated in this direction, a cursory examination of the two very natural alternatives won't hurt: a) 7 ... dS is no longer popular, but has been used in the World Championship and other ma- jor contests. The resulting play illustrates a simplified isolated queen's pawn position: 8 cxdS lLlxdS 9 lLlxdS exdS 10 .i.g2 (D) (10 ~xdS?! .i.e6 is way too risky for White).

a1) Karpov-Korchnoi, Brussels 1988 shows what happens when the side with the isolated pawn can't disturb the equilibrium: 1O ... .i.e6 11 0-01!d8 12 .i.gS! f6 13 .i.d2 .i.e7 14 .i.c3! O-O lslLld4lLlxd4 16 ~xd4 .i.cs 17 "iVd2 WHd6

18 b4 .i.b6 19 .i.d4 .i.fS 20 1!ac1 .i.e4 21 .i.h3!

l:tfe8 22 1!fdl and White has locked up the key squares. a2) Black's more aggressive approach goes 1O ... .i.b4+ 11 .td2.i.g4 120-0 I!d8?! (12 ... O-O

13 h3 .i.hS should be met by 14 .i.e3 !) 13 .i.xb4

~xb4 14 'iUc2 O-O ISl:tfd1 li'c4 16 .l:td2! 1:tfe8

17 e3 g6 18 1!c 1 with a clear superiority for

White, Smejkal-Cebalo, Marseilles 1986. b) 7 ... .i.b4 could hardly be more natural, de- veloping quickly and increasing Black's control over the crucial dS- and e4-squares. Neverthe- less, White gains a definite advantage by 8 .tg2. For example, 8 ... dS 9 O-O! dxc4 10 .i.e3 'iUa6 11 lLlcs ~aS 12 ~d6 lLle7, Tukmakov- Cherniaev, Geneva 1999, and now 13 nfd1! would have been very strong. So in Illescas- Yudasin, Pamplona 1992/3, Black chose the natural move 8 ... lLleS, but White came up with a typical pawn sacrifice to exploit his opponent's weak dark squares: 9 cS! i.xcs 10 lLlxcs WHxcs

11 O-O dS 12 e4! ? dxe4 13 lLlxe4lLlxe4 14 .i.xe4

O-O IS .i.f4! fS? 16 nc1 WHaS 17 b4! ~xb4 18 iLxeS ~xe4 19 ':el ~dS 20 ':'c7! .l:.f7 21l:!.xf7 ~xf7 22 WHhS+ with a winning position for White. S e4 Defending the c-pawn isn't easy. 8 .i.e3? fails to 8 .. :~c6.

... .i.b4! 9 ~e2 (D) Likewise, White's e-pawn has no other con- venient defence.

[diagram]
Over the years, this has proven to be the most accurate move. 9 ... 0-010 f4lLlc6 11 eSlLle8 12 i.e3 ~c7 13 .i.g2 d6 14 exd6 lLlxd6 IS O-O iLxc3 16 bxc3 lLlfS 17 iLf2 gave the bishops a sweeping view of the board in Rotshtein- Managadze, Halkida 2000. 10f4 10 iLd2 with the idea of O-O-O will be seen below, in the game Gulko-Alekseev. ... lLlc6 Black should wait until White's queen's bishop is committed before exchanging on c3, because 1O ... i.xc3+? 11 bxc3lLlc6 12 .i.a3! is ideal for White. n .i.e3 .i.xc3+ 12 bxc3 ~c7 13 .i.g2 O-O These moves are not all forced, as you might guess, but the position after 13 ... O-O is consid- ered the main line and has been contested in more important games than any other variation of the Four Knights. Instead, 13 ... eS!? (D) tries to avoid the main lines; it is certainly under-analysed and has a decent reputation.

254 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w For some reason 14 O-O has been neglected here. Perhaps White has been afraid of 14 ... lbg4, but IS .i.c1 preserves the bishop, which might even come out to a3 after Black's knight is driven away. I think that this deserves close consideration and may be White's best route to advantage. Instead, practice has seen: a) 14 cS dxcS IS i.xcS can be countered by IS ... i.g4, when Smejkal-Gdanski, Polanica Zdroj 1991 continued 16 ~e3 b617 i.a3 O-O-O with full equality. Alternatively, Black should have no problems after Palliser's recommended line IS ... exf4 160-O-O i.g4 17 i.f3, although now Black should play 17 ... .i.xf3! 18 ~xf3 lbeS 19 'ilVxf4 b6 20 .i.d4 lbfd7 rather than 17 ... fxg3, when 18 eS! i.xf3 19 ~xf3lbd7 20 i.d6 'iVb6 21 'iVxg3 O-O-O 22 ~hfl gives White promising play. b) 14 fS b61S g4.i.a6 (or IS ... h6) 16 gSlbd7

17 O-O (17 ~dl may be a better move-order, an-

swering 17 ... lbaS with 18lbxaS bxaS 19 'iVd2!?, when 19 ... O-O-O is unclear) 17 ... lbaS! 18lbxaS bxaS 19lHdl?! lbb6 20 i.xb6!? axb6 21 ~abl i.xc4 22 'iVf2 bS, Wells-Emms, Southend 2008. Black has consolidated and is a pawn ahead; the only negative is his king position, which shouldn't be too big a problem. After 23 f6!?, the easiest solution was undoubtedly 23 ... .l:Ig8!. Returning to the main move 13 ... O-O (D), White must now make a fundamental decision: whether to open up the game or keep it closed. 14c5 In the next game we see 14 O-O.

14. .. dxc5

This capture is almost automatic these days, but 14 ... dS is playable, and only mildly in White's favour. w 15 i.xc5 ~d8 16 e5 lba5 17 i.b4 From this point on, it's hard to imagine White getting the slightest winning chances. The game can also end in a quick draw after 17 exf6lbxb3 18 axb3 ~xcS 19 'iVeS 'ilVb6 20 'iVgS ~e3+, when White should have acquiesced to a perpet- ual check in Uhlmann-Van der Wiel, Baden- Baden 1992. However, White has an opportunity here to mix things up, one that has almost escaped no- tice. The game Akesson-T.Piihtz jr, European Ch, Dresden 2007 saw 17 i.d6! (D).

17 ... ~xc3+ (17 ... ~xd6 18 exd6 'iVxc3+ 19 "iUd2 ~xd2+ and either recapture will do be- cause of White's ongoing pressure along the files and long diagonal) 18 'ilVd2 ~xd2+ 19 lbxd2lbdS? (19 ... lbe8! is correct, but White's wonderful bishops must be worth a pawn; for example, 20 i.b4 lbc6 21 i.a3 i.d7 22 'it>f2 f6!? 23 .l:Iabl b6 24lbc4 ~ac8 2S ~hc1; proba- bly it's about equal- you'll see that such a po- sition offers both sides more to play for than MAIN LINES WITH 2 tOf3 AND d4 255 the main lines do) 20 i-xd5 .l:txd6 (20 ... exd5 21 i-c7) 21 exd6 exd5 220-0 g6 23 .l:tfc1 i-e6 24 .l:tc5 b6 25 .l:tc7. Black will have only a W pawn for the exchange and have to defend against active rooks. White went on to win the game. 17 ... ltJxb3 18 axb3ltJd5 19 i-xd5?! 19 'iWc4 has led to some quick draws; for ex- ample, 19 ... 'iWd7 20 'iVd4ltJxb4 21 'iVxd7 i-xd7 22 cxb4 i-b5 23 i-xb7 .l:tab8 24 i-a6 '12-'12 Kramnik-Salov, Wijk aan Zee 1998. 19  exd5 20 'iWe3 This prevents ... d4, hits a7, and prepares a timely i-d6. Surely White cannot have any problems here? 20 .. i-f5! (D)

The position of each side's opposite-coloured bishop is more important than any other consid- eration here, because they can be neither op- posed nor exchanged off without material loss. 21 i-c5 Transferring to d4. 21 .l:txa7?? is a blunder due to 2l...d4; Ribli gives 21 i-d6 'iWc6 22 'iVd4, but White could be tied down after 22 ... .l:tdc8 23 'it'd2 a5, when Black has prospects of slip- ping into the light squares by ... i-e4, ... h5-h4 and a queen transfer by ... 'iVd7-h3 or something similar.

21...b6 22 i-d4

Now this bishop is restricted by its own cen- tre pawns. 22  :iVd7 You can already envision a formation with Black's bishop on e4, his queen on h3 or f5, and ... h5-h4, with the rooks to follow. 230-0 .l:tac8 (D) 24l:tf2 i-e4 251i'e2 .l:tc6! 261'kb5 Ribli makes the excellent suggestion that White flee back to the centre by ~fl-e1-d2, al- though it wouldn't be perfectly secure there. Another idea is 26 'iYfl, intending f5 and maybe even h3 and ~h2. Then Black would have to re- treat temporarily by 26 ... i-f5, but he has a good plan in ... h5-h4 and ... :g6, as we see in the game.

26.  .l:tdc8 27 l:ta6 h5 (D)

281i'n Too late. Trying to divert Black by 28 e6 looks right, but White's pieces are too far away to defend the king. A pretty line is 28 ... 'iVxe6 29 l:txa7 h4! 30 f5 'iYh6 31 g4 .l:txc3! 32 i-xc3 lhc3 (threatening 33 .. J:tc1+ 34l:i.fl ~e3#) 33 .l:ta1 .l:tg3+! 34 hxg3 hxg3 35 .l:tg2 1'ke3+ 36 ~h1 i-xg2+ 37 'it'xg2 'it'f2+ and mates. A tes- tament to the power of opposite-coloured bish- ops in assisting the attack. 28  h4 29 f5 hxg3 30 l:tf4 gxh2+ 31 ~xh2 l:th6+ 32 ~g3 l:i.h5! 33 e6 fxe6 34 f6? 'iWf7

256 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black could also win immediately along the lines of the game by 34 ... eS! 3S 1:b.g4 g6 36 .ixeS .l:!.xc3+!, etc. 35 .l:tg4 .l:!.xc3+! 36 .Bxc3 'ilc7+ 37l:tf4 Or 37 ~f4 'ilxc3+ 38 'iiitf2 ~c2+. 37 . :ikxc3+ 38 'iiitg4 'ile5 0-1 Akesson - Schandorff Nordic Ch, Reykjavik 1997

[diagram]
ttJc3 ttJf6 6 g3 ~b6 7 ttJb3 ttJe5 8 e4 .Bb4 9 ~e2 d6 10 f4 ttJc6 11 .Be3 .Bxc3+ 12 bxc3 ~c713 .Bg2 0-0140-0 (D)

Castling is more flexible than 14 cS. In re- cent years, White hasn't entered into this posi- tion much, in spite of decades of practice at the highest levels. That may be a function of the relative difficulty of attack and defence. Theory cites games suggesting that Black stands better; objectively, however, I think that White has im- provements and a definitive assessment is prac- tically impossible to arrive at. 14  b6 This variation can be productively compared to the Samisch Variation of the Nimzo-Indian Defence (1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 e6 3 ttJc3 .Bb4 4 a3 .Bxc3+ S bxc3, in Volume 2), and other branches of that opening. As in the Nimzo-Indian, White has two bishops and kingside prospects (g4- gS), but his doubled c-pawns are targets and Black is able to train several pieces on the c-file and eventually wins at least one pawn ( ... .Ba6, ... ttJaS, .. :ikc7 and .. Jbc8). White will try to mix things up in both the centre and kingside. As so often when one side has two bishops and weaknesses, he is willing to jettison a pawn in exchange for extra time to pursue his attack . The blocking move 14 ... eS seems premature after IS fS, although that's not entirely clear. Moutousis-Wojtkiewicz, Athens 1992 was a di- saster for Black following IS ... b6 16 g4 .Ba6 17 gS ttJe8? (Anand gives 17 ... ttJd7) 18:f3 ttJaS? (here 18 .. .f6! 19 g6 hxg6 20 fxg6 ttJe7! is a fine offer of the exchange: then 21 .Bh3 ttJxg6 22 .Be6+ :tf7 is hard to evaluate due to White's weaknesses) 19 ttJxaS bxaS 20 .l:th3 g6 21 'iVf2 ~xc4 22 'ilM hS 23 gxh6 1-0. The game could end with 23 ... 'iiith7 24 .in 'ilc6 2S fxg6+ fxg6 26 ~e7+. 15 g4 For a while, White turned to the alternative IS ttJd4. It threatens 16 ttJxc6 and prepares ttJbS. But Black has a surprise retort: IS ... ttJxd4! (it seems contradictory to straighten out White's pawns, even should Black manage to win the pawn on c4) 16 cxd4 .Ba6 (D). w Now Black threatens not only the c-pawn, but ... dS. We saw in the Samisch Variation of the Nimzo-Indian how Black could straighten out White's c-pawns by ... cxd4, and after cxd4, play ... dS. Carlsen-Volokitin, Biel 2006 continued 17 :tac1?! (too ambitious; White should settle for 17 eS!, and 17 ... .Bxc4 18 .l:i.fc1 or 17 ... ttJdS 18 exd6 ~xd6 19 .Bf2 llac8 20 .l:!.fc1, when 20 .. :ikc6! 21 .in! ttJf6! prepares ... .Bb7 and keeps White on the defensive) 17 ... .l:!.ac8 18 eS ttJdS!. After this, Black will win material and is able to fend off White's attack on the kingside. The game continued 19 .ixdS exdS 20 fS!? dxc4!? (Black has the better bishop, hence 20 ... .Bxc4 21 ~hS f6 22 e6 ~e7 is appropriate, MAIN LINES WITH 2 'Df3 AND d4 257 when ... .Bd3-e4! follows; also good is 20 ... dxeS

21 f6 g6) 21 f6 g6 22 "iVg4? (however, 22 e6

fxe6 23 .Bh6 .l:r.f7 24 "iVxe6 "iVd7 2S dS! .ibS! is good for Black) 22 ... "iVc6! 23 .l:r.f4 dxeS 24 dxeS .Bb7 2S "iVh3 .l:r.fe8 26 ~f2 1:1xeS! 27 Itcxc4 ii'xc4 28 .l:r.xc4 .l:r.xc4 (along with Black's mate- rial advantage, his rooks and bishop collaborate beautifully in the attack) 29 ~d7 lIc2+ 30 ~gl .Bc6 31 'lid4? .l:r.dS 32 "iVg4 hS 0-1. We now return to the position after IS g4

(D):

15 .. .Bb7 This is the accepted solution, resisting ... .Ba6 for a few moves so as to keep an attack on White's centre, which in tum helps Black de- fend against the kingside attack. lS ... .Ba6 has a mediocre reputation. Black may be able to hold his own in that line as well, but he has to be very careful; for example, 16 gS tDd7 17 1:1f3 l:!.fe8 18 l:!.h3 tDf8, and here Lobron-Hulak, Erevan Olympiad 1996 saw 19 fS! tDeS 20 ~hS 'lWxc4. At this point, instead of 21 .Bd4? ~e2! 22 'ifh4 "iVg4!, when White's attack dissipated, the stan- dard attack by 21 f6! is promising, because 2l...~e2 22 fxg7 ~xg7 23 ~h6+ ~g8 24 .Bd4 or even 24 g6!? gives White positive chances, the latter line proceeding 24 ... fxg6 2S .ifl ~g4+ 26 l:tg3 .ixfl! 27 kIxg4 tDxg4 28 ~f4 tDxe3 29 ~xe3 .Ba6 30 ~d4.

16 g5 tDd717 .l:r.f3 (D)

White is playing for a brute-force attack by .l:r.h3, ~hS and fS. The question is whether that abandons the rest of the board too quickly. 17 ... .l:r.fe8! Black's idea is to bring a knight to f8 in order to defend h7. The rook goes to e8 so that after

White's fS, Black will answer ... exfS and have another piece in play. Two other moves are supposed to be good for Black, but that's not at all clear: a) 17 ... tDe7 has been praised on the basis of Lobron-Kramnik, Dortmund 1995: 18 .ti.h3 l:tfc8 19 'lWhS tDf8 20 tDd2 dS. But here White had 21 fS!, which is quite dangerous in compar- ison with White's attack in the main line. b) Illescas-Leko, Leon 1996 went 17 ... .l:r.ac8 18l:!.h3 .ti.fe8! 19 ~hS?! tDf8 20 lUI!? .Ba6!, and Black got the better of it. However, 19 l:td1 ! is an improvement, when things are by no means clear. White should hang around in the centre for a while in these positions, taking advantage of the weakness on d6 and holding c4 for a while. There is time for fS later. 18 .l:i.h3 tDf8 (D)

19 Itfl?!

For the last time, White should act in the cen- tre until Black shifts either his bishop to a6 or knight to as, which both make fS more effective;

258 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

for example, 19 J:!dl! .Ba6 (19 ... .l:Iad8) 20 ~S .Bxc4 21 fS ttJeS 22 f6 .l:Iad8 23 .Bd4 with ttJd2 next. All this is very unclear. 19 .Ba6 20 ttJd2 ttJaS! 21 'iVhS ttJxc4 22 ttJxc4 .Bxc4 23 J:!f2 In this position, 23 ... J:!ac8! was a good move, because the attack by 24 fS meets with 24 ... exfS 2S exfS .l:IeS! and White has no way to add fuel to the fire. Gulko - Alekseev Russia vs USA (Internet) 2005

1 c4 cS 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 e6 S

ttJc3 ttJf6 6 g3 ~b6 7 ttJb3 ttJeS 8 e4 i.b4 9 WVe2 d610 .Bd2 (D)

White embarks upon a completely different plan: to keep his pawn-structure intact and cas- tle queenside, with the idea of simplifying and putting pressure on Black's d-pawn. The dan- ger is that his king will become exposed on the queenside.

10. .. O-O

Both W. .. i.d7 and W ... aS are playable. White is held to have some advantage against the lat- ter following 11 f4 ttJc6 12 ttJa4 .Bxd2+ 13 ~xd2 ~b4!? 14 ~xb4 ttJxb4 IS .l:Idl. At this point Palliser contributes the original and dy- namic idea IS ... bS! 16 ttJb6 (16 cxbS may yield a very slim advantage) 16 ... bxc4!; for example, 17 ttJxa8!?cxb3 18 axb3 .Bb719:c1 ttJxe420 i.bS+ ~d8 21 ttJb6 ttJcS. 17 ttJd4 is a notewor- thy alternative. You'll need to devote some study to this variation in order to play it with confidence.

11 O-O-O

11 f4 ttJc6 12 O-O-O allows the positionally-

based counterattack 12 ... eS!, which practice has shown to be at least satisfactory. See the note to Black's 12th move. l1 ... aS Black goes for the attack, but he's not strictly forced to. He can try 11.. .. Bd7, for example. Also, ll...ttJc6 12 ttJbS .Bxd2+ 13 J:!xd2 may favour White, but not enough to brag about fol- lowing 13 ... dS!, with the likely follow-up 14 exdS exdS IS cS ~a6 16 ttJc3 'iVxe2 17 i.xe2 .ifS 18 f3.

12 f4 a4!? (D)

Leading to crazy complications. The ini- tially slower option is 12 ... ttJc6 13 .Be3 'iVa6. Then 14 'iVf3! should be looked at, aiming the fl-bishop directly towards Black's queen. In Gleizerov-Dvoirys, Cheliabinsk 1989, White's 14 ttJbS?! was met by 14 ... a4!, sacrificing the queen for two pieces, a pawn and pressure fol- lowing IS ttJc7!? axb3 16 ttJxa6 bxa2 17 ~c2 .l:txa6 18 .Bg2 eS! 19 fS!? .ics with a powerful positional grip and attacking chances. Finally, 14 ttJa4 eS! IS fS .Bd7 16 iVc2 ttJe7! 17 ttJb6 a4! 18 ttJxa8 J:!xa8 19 ttJd2 a3 20 b3 J:!c8 gave Black a meaningful advantage in Marin-Z.Al- masi, Bled Olympiad 2002, since .. .dS and/or ... bS follows. w 13 fxeS axb314 a3 dxeS!? Black sacrifices a piece and the play enters into a forced phase. The alternative 14 ... .Bxc3 IS i.xc3 dxeS 16 .ixeS may be playable, but has generally given White the advantage in practice. IS axb4 J:!al + 16 ttJbl iVa7 17 iVd3 iVa2 18 .Bg2 l:te819 .Bc3 l:te7 20 ~d2!? MAIN LINES WITH 2 tiJj3 AND d4 259 20 ~d8+ .ne8 21 'ifd3 would draw, but White decides to go for more. 20  .nd7 21 ttJa3! .i:i.xdl+ 22 Itxdl (D) Here is White's point: he will have a piece and rook for a queen and pawn, but Black's queen will be stuck for an indefinite time on a2. On the other hand, White needs a long time to organize an attack on it. This position has been reached several times. Rather than pile up more theory, let's have fun watching the game. 22 . h5!? 23 .lif3 .nxd3+ 24 ~xd3ltJd7 Black wants to rescue the queen by ... ltJb6- a4. 25 e5! ~f8 26 ~e4! Now Black needs be careful about a move of White's rook followed by .lid1 and .lixb3. 26 ... ~e7 27 .nel f5 28 .lidl b5+! (D) Not 28 .. .fxe4? 29 b5! and White wins. 29 ~xb5 ltJb8? 29 ... ltJf6 is a better try. Then 30 exf5 exf5 31 'ita4 .lie6 32 .lixe5 keeps the queen safe, but still gives Black a lot to worry about in the form of the passed queenside pawns. After 29 ... ltJb8?, 30 ~a4! would have won by force: 30 ... .lid7+ (30 .. .fxe4? 31 c6! ltJxc6 32 .lixb3) 31 b5 ltJa6 32 .lixe5! ltJxc5+ 33 .l::txc5 ~al 34 .lixh5 and Black is getting killed, in terms of both material and attack. Agrest - Ivanchuk Swedish Team Ch 200213 IltJf3 e5 2 e4 ltJf6 3 ltJe3 ltJe6 4 d4 exd4 5 ltJxd4 e6 6 g3 ~b6 7 ltJdb5 (D)

For some reason, it took a long time for this dynamic move to catch on; presumably there was a fear that the knight had no plausible re- treat-square, or simply that the tactics were un- favourable. At any rate, White has a few simple ideas: .lif4, ltJd6+, or some combination of .lie3 and ltJa4 to drive the queen back. Black can take comfort in the fact that 7 ltJdb5 takes a tempo from White's development, and that un- like 7ltJb3, it lets a bishop settle in on c5, when White's f2-pawn is more of a target. 7 .. ltJe5!? This has always been the most important re- ply, covering d6 and creating the immediate threat of ... ltJxc4. In addition, the c6-square is cleared, potentially for the queen. On the other hand, ... ltJe5 moves a piece for the second time while exposing it to the very dangerous move .lif4. Two of Black's alternatives fail to impress, but 'c' below is definitely worth looking into: a) 7 ... a6?! 8 .lie3! 'ilVaS 9 ltJd6+ i.xd6 10 'ifxd6ltJe4 11 ~d3ltJxc3 12 i.d2! is obviously

260 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

strong for White; compare Black's bishop with White's! b) 7 ... ~cS 8 ~g2! sacrifices a pawn for gain of time. Black is faced with a dilemma. It's dif- ficult to justify 7 ... ~cS without accepting the sacrifice; for example, 8 ... dS 9 O-O dxc4 10 ctJd6+ ~xd6 11 "i!Vxd6, as in Rustemov-Karia- kin, Dos Hermanas 2003, gives White control of the dark squares; and 8 ... ctJeS is well met by 9 ~f4. However, 8 ... ~xf2+ is extremely risky: 9 'it>f1 ctJg4 (otherwise 10 ctJa4 wins some- thing) 10 ~d6! (D).

The dark squares are Black's Achilles' Heel in the Symmetrical Four Knights. He has to re- spond to the threat of ctJc7+: 1O ... 'it>d8 (after 1O ... ctJe3+ 11 ~xe3 ~xe3, one successful way to attack is 12 b4! 'it>d8 13 cS, etc.) 11 ~gS+ f6 12 ctJa4 ~a6 13 h3 ~xa4 (13 .. .fxgS 14 hxg4 threatens IS .l::!.xh7!, and 14 ... ~xg3 loses to IS 'iVxg3 'iVxa4 16 'iVc7 + 'it>e8 17 ~e4! ':f8+ 18 'it>g2) 14 hxg4 ~b6 IS .l::!.xh7 ':e8, Greenfeld- Emelin, Beersheba-St Petersburg 1998, and now 16 ~xc6! bxc6 17 ~h4 is virtually winning, es- pecially because 17 ... cxbS 18 ':xg7 ~d4 19 .J::i.f7! 'iVa6 20 1:txd7+ is the end. c) It's interesting to see what happens when Black simply strikes back in the centre by 7 ... dS

I think that this is an underestimated move that is quite playable: c1) 8 ~g2 d4 9ctJa4 "i!VaS+ 10 ~d2, and in place of 1O ... ~b4?! llctJcS! O-O 12ctJd3, Kas- parov-Vaganian, Skelleftea 1989, 1O ... 'iVd8! 11 O-O ~e7 is a serious improvement, when 12 'iVc2 eS 13 f4!? e4! 14 ~xe4ctJxe4 IS 'iVxe4 O-O is risky for White. w c2) An unexplored variation is 8 ~e3 d4! 9 ctJxd4 (always be wary of losing your dark- squared bishop in the Four Knights: 9 ~xd4?! ctJxd4 10 "i!Vxd4 ~cS 11 'iVf4 O-O! and Black is ready for 12 ... eS) 9 ... "ihb2 10 ctJdbS! ~b4. Black nears full equality; perhaps White can still fight for the slightest of edges by 11 iLd2! ctJd4! 12 ':cl (12ctJxd4?? ~xc3 13ctJb3ctJe4!) 12 ... ctJxbS 13 cxbS (13 ctJxbS?? ctJe4) 13 ... O-O 14 ~g21Id8 ISlIc2 'iVa3 160-0. We now return to 7 ... ctJeS!? (D): 8~g2 The next game will feature 8 ~f4. 8 ... a6!? 8 ... ctJxc4 is generally criticized, but it may be quite a good option. White is supposed to play 9 'iVa4, which may not be worth much after 9 ... a6 10 "i!Vxc4 axbS; for example, 11 ~xbS (11ctJxbS ~cS 12 ~e3 ~xe3 13 ctJc7+ C:;e7 14 ttJxa8 ~xf2+ IS \tJf1 ~d4 with at least enough com- pensation for the exchange, Mkrtchian-Bur- tasova, European Women's Ch, Dresden 2007) MAIN LINES WITH 2 fbf3 AND d4 261 ll....i.cS! 120-00-0 13 'iVxb6 .i.xb6 14 b3?! (still, Black seems comfortable enough after

14 e4 d6) 14 ... dS IS .i.b2 .i.d7 16 e3 l;Ifc8

Mkrtchian-Golubenko, European Women's Ch, Dresden 2007. Black has a central majority and free play. 9 tba3!? (D) White gambits a pawn. 9 ~a4 has never achieved much. In the forced queenless middle- game after 9 ... Itb8 10 .i.e3 .i.cs (1O ... axbS?! 11 .i.xb6 bxa4 12 .i.c7) 11 .i.xcS ~xcS 12 'iVa3, White has some space and a touch of dark- square control, but Black's pieces coordinate well. For example, 12 ... b6 13 tbd6+ c3;e7 14 'iVxcs bxcS IS tbxc8+ Ithxc8 16 b3 gS! helps Black secure the knight on eS and plans a space-grab with ... hS. This has given good play in several games, such as 17 h3 hS 18 f4! gxf4 19 gxf4 tbg6 with the idea of ... tbh4 and easy equality, Agrest-Emms, Harplinge 1998. 9 ... .i.xa3 It's possible to play slowly with 9 ... .i.e7, when White is generally held to stand slightly better, but not much. Gelfand-Nisipeanu, Bled Olympiad 2002 went 10 O-O d6 11 'iVb3 ~c7 12 .i.f40-0 13 Itfd1, and instead of 13 ... tbg6?! 14 .i.e3 tbd7 IS tba4 .l:tb8 16 .i.a7 lIa8 17 'iVe3, Black could try 13 ... tbfd7! 14 nac1 Itb8. 10 bxa3 tbxc411 .i.g5 d5 Certainly this is a very natural move, and probably the best one, but it's also a target for the line-opening e4. Here are some other moves that illustrate White's compensation for the pawn: a) 1l...h6 12 .i.xf6 gxf6 13 O-O Itb8 (Gel- fand-Van Wely, Bled Olympiad 2002) is slow because of Pritchett's suggestion 14 tbe4!. b) ll...'iVcS!? attacks gS and, indirectly, c3: 12 .i.xf6 gxf6 13 O-O!? (13 .l:!.c1 is possible) 13 ... tbe3! (D), Agrest-A.Kovacevi6, European Clubs Cup, Kallithea 2002. Here Kosten suggests the three-pawn sacri- fice 14 fxe3 'iVxe3+ IS 'it>h1 ~xc3 16l;Ic1, but it's probably not enough if Black rejects the last pawn and plays 16 ... 'iVeS!. Very likely 14 tbe4! tbxd1 IS tbxcs is the best try. c) The game Gelfand-Macieja, Bermuda 2004 was instructive: 11...llVd8 12 .l:.c1 dS? (Gelfand analyses 12 ... O-O 13 O-O h6! 14 .i.xf6 'iVxf6 IS tbe4 ~e7 16 .l:!.xc4 dS 17l:tc3 dxe4 18 .i.xe4 eS 19 ~c1 with an edge, intending l:tc7; while not disastrous, that is a little awkward for Black) 13 O-O (D). White stands better here because e4 is going to crack things open; for example, 13 ... tbd6 (13 ... tbeS was played, but 14 e4! d4 lSllVa4+! llVd7 16 l:!.fd1! would have been extremely strong; similarly, Gelfand gives 13 ... O-O 14 e4

262 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

d4 15 ttJe2 d3 16 ttJf4 ttJe5 17 ttJh5! with an at- tack) 14 e4! ttJdxe4 15 .i.xe4 dxe4 16 wgxd8+ ~xd8 17 ttJxe4 and White wins, in view of 17 ... ~e7 18l:!.c7+ .i.d7 19l:tdll:thd8 20 ttJc5. 120-0 Black is dangerously behind in development, yet he needs only a few moves to consolidate his powerful centre. 12  .i.d7 (D) Previously Black played 12 ... O-O here. w The bishop development is more ambitious, preparing .. J:tc8; on the other hand, his king is exposed in the centre. 13 e4?! This shouldn't work. Pritchett suggests two possibilities: 13 l:tbl 'ilVc5 (13 .. :iVa7? 14 e4!) 14 l:txb7, after which 14 ... l:tc8 15 e4 ttJd6 16 .l::i.xd7!? is a crazy line. Or White can go for broke with 13 .i.xf6 gxf6 14 .i.xd5? exd5 15 ttJxd5, when he gives 15 ... wgc6 16 'ilVd4; how- ever, 15 .. :iVd6! 16~d4.i.c617ttJxf6+~e718 'iYxc4 'iVxf6 is another story. 13  ttJxe4?! An important juncture. Black could have played 13. .. d4! 14 ttJe2 e5 and brought White's 13th into doubt; for example, 15 l:tb1 'iVe6! 16 .i.xf6 gxf6 with the idea 17 ~xb7 .i.b5!. Thus what follows, however fascinating, isn't too im- portant for theory, and I'll limit the notes. 14 ttJxe4 dxe4 15l:!.bl "iVc5!? 16 l:txb7 O-O! 17 ~c1.i.b518 a4! .i.xa419 .i.xe4l:tac8!? 20 .i.e7 ~e5 21l:!.el White can't take the exchange: 21 .i.xf8? ~xe4 22 l:tb4 .i.c6! 23 f3 'ilVd4+ 24l:tf2 .i.d5. Now Black absolutely insists upon sacrificing material:

21  JUe8! 22 .i.xh7+ ~xh7 23l:.xe5 ttJxeS Moves like ... .i.c6 and ... ttJf3+ are looming. 24l:.c7 .i.c6 25l:.xc8?! l:.xc8 26 f4 (D) An escape-square saves the day. 26 . ttJf3+ 27 ~f2 ttJxh2 28 wgdl .i.dS! 29 f5 .l::!.c4 30 'iYhS+ ~g8 31 f6 At this point, 31...l:.c2+ 32 ~e3 ttJn + 33 ~d3 .l::!.d2+ 34 ~c3 ttJxg3! 35 'iYe5 ttJe4+ 36 ~b4 is probably a draw, because Black's king is too exposed to perpetual checks. The game was eventually drawn anyway. The notes to Black's moves 7 and 8 are of particular interest for this line. Aronian - Leko MoreliaiLinares 2008

[diagram]
ttJxd4 e6 6 g3 'ilVb6 7 ttJdbS ttJe5 8 .i.f4 (D)

White plays very directly. This has always been a scary line for Black, but with accurate MAIN LINES WITH 2 tDj3 AND d4 263 play (requiring study), he can apparently reach a satisfactory position. 8 . ttJfg4 Practically forced if Black doesn't want to be driven back. Other moves are risky at best: a) 8 ... d61ed to disaster for Black in L.B.Han- sen-de Firmian, Danish League 1997/8: 9 i..g2 a6? 10 'iVa4 ttJfd7?? (D).

11 c5! ttJxc5 (11...~xc5 12 i.e3) 12 ttJxd6++ Re7 13 tLld5+ 1-0. Mate follows: 13 ... exd5 14 'iVe8+ Rxd6 15 i.xe5#. Black has a better course in 9 ... tLlfg4 10 O-O a6, but White still gained a significant advan- tage after 11 ttJa4! 'iVd8 12 tLla3 tLlg6 13 i.d2 l:tb8 in Wells-Yakovenko, European Ch, War- saw 2005. Then White's 14 c5!? was ingenious, especially had he met 14 ... dxc5 with 15 ~c2!, but the attack with 14 h3 tLlf6 15 i..e3!, threat- ening i.b6 and i.a7, is also very strong. b) 8 ... i.c5? 9 i.g2! (White gains time by ig- noring the f-pawn) 9 ... i.xf2+? (9 ... a6 10 ttJa4! ~a5+ 11 i.d2 i.b4 12 tLlc7+!) 10 ~f1 and Black can't hang on to his pieces; for example, 1O ... tLlfg4 11 'iVd6! ~xd6 12 tLlxd6+ Re7 13 h3 'it>xd6 14 hxg4 i.b6 15 tLle4+. 9 ~a4!? (D) A remarkable idea whose worth is still unre- solved. White simply lets Black capture on f2. Tactics are the whole point now. For many years, the standard line has been 9 e3 a6! 10 tLlc7+!? (10 h3 axb5 11 hxg4 ttJxc4 12 ~b3 gives equal chances after 12 ... d5!) 1O .. :~xc7 11 'iUxg4. Now there are a couple of satisfactory moves; for example, 11 ... d6. More ambitious is 1l...~xc4! 12 ~dl! 'iUc6 13 e4 i.b4!, threatening ... 'iVxe4+, when White can sacrifice the exchange by 14 i.xe5!? ~xe4+ 15 ti'e2 ~xhl 16 O-O-O, but either 16 ... ~c6, or 16 ... .i.xc3 17 bxc3 ti'xh2, as in Smirin-Holzke, Port Erin 2004, puts the burden of proof on White. Now the complications are enormous: 9  g5!? After 9 .. :iVxf2+, an abbreviated and admit- tedly superficial line continues 10 'it'd2 'iVc5! (1O ... 'iVb6!? 11 .i.h3 g5 12 i.xg5) 11 ttJe4 (11 ~c2!? results in a labyrinth of possibilities)

13 ttJed6+ 'it'd8 and the position is still un- clear. 10 .i.xe5 ttJxe5 11 O-O-O a6 12 e3 .l::tb8 13 tLld4 'iUc7 14 i.e2 Both sides have made natural moves and it appears that White stands better, but soon Black gets effective counterplay.

14.  .i.e7 15 Wbl tLlc6 16 l:Icl!? ~e5 17

J:thdl h5! 18 ~al g4! Black may not be fully equal at this point, but he has counterchances based upon the idea of ... h4. After some ups and downs, the game was drawn. Anti-Benoni Variations

1 c4 c5 2 tLlf3 ttJf6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tLlxd4 (D)

We've already discussed quite a few lines that can come from this move-order, including 4 ... tLlc6 5 tLlc3, which transposes to the Four Knights above. This is also the starting point of what are called 'Anti-Benoni' variations, be- cause they come up after the Benoni moves 1

264 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

d4 ttJf6 2 c4 cS 3 ttJf3 cxd4 4 ttJxd4. I'll show a couple of games with the most important moves other than 4 ... ttJc6. Dorfman - Glavina Monaco 2002

[diagram]
This is a radical and aggressive approach that is normally associated with a pawn sacri- fice. A pair of other moves can go in the Anti- Benoni category: a) The infrequently-played 4 ... a6!? (D) has the idea of either S ... eS, now that ttJbS isn't pos- sible, or S ... dS. w It is not easy for White to get an edge, but a good try is S ttJc3 dS (S ... eS 6 ttJc2 ttJc6 7 g3 i.cs 8 i.g2 O-O 9 O-O gives White the upper hand because control of dS hasn't cost him any- thing in the way of positional concessions) 6 ttJf3! dxc4 (6 ... e6 7 cxdS exdS 8 i.gS i.e6 9 e4!? dxe4 10 'tlVxd8+ ~xd8 11 ttJd4100ks good for White) 7 'ikxd8+ ~xd8 8 e4! e69 ttJeS ~e8 10 ttJxc4 with the advantage (and incidentally exploiting the hole on b6 created by 4 ... a6), Olafsson-Miles, Teesside 1975. b) 4 ... e6 S ttJc3 (D) is highly transposi- tional, with some unique possibilities.

I'm not going to investigate these in depth, but here are some guideposts: bl) S. .. i.b4 6 g3 is a Nimzo-Indian Defence. For reasons of space, I'll have to refer you to the theory and practice of that line. At present, Black seems to be holding his own. White has other moves such as 6 e3, 6 ttJc2 and 6 i.d2 which are passive or unimportant. Somewhat more challenging is 6 ttJbS, although there is more than one good reply. One is 6 ... dS!, which forces White to react; for example, 7 i.f4 (7 cxdS exdS 8 i.f4 O-O has the idea 9 ttJc7? ttJhS) 7 ... O-O 8 e3 ttJc6 (or 8 ... a6 9 a3 i.aS 10 ttJd6 i.c7!?) 9 a3 i.aS 10 b4 a6 11 cxdS exdS 12 bxaS axbS 13 i.xbS ~xaS with equality, Olafs- son-Gipslis, Reykjavik 19S7. b2) Black can also play S. .. a6, after which 6 e4 is a Sicilian Defence, Kan Variation, and 6 g3 can lead to unique positions; for example, after 6 ... 'tlVc7, White often gambits his c-pawn by 7 i.gS 'iixc4 8 .l::tc 1. I'll leave that for you to study. b3) That leaves S ... dS 6 cxdS, when Black should shun 6 ... exdS, because 7 i.gS is a good version for White of the Queen's Gambit De- clined. However, 6 ... ttJxdS may be satisfactory, when Hansen thinks Black stands all right after 7 ttJdbS a6 or 7 i.d2 i.e7 (or here 7 ... i.cS). c) Black can aim for an Accelerated Fian- chetto Maroczy Bind by 4 ... g6, to which White MAIN LINES WITH 2 ti:Jj3 AND d4 265 can acquiesce by 5 ttJc3 .Bg7 6 e4 ttJc6. But you should note that 7 ttJc2 denies Black the popular lines which involve ... ttJxd4, so he may B lack motivation to play this move-order. Other- wise, 5 g3 (or 5 ttJc3 ttJc6 6 g3) 5 ... .Bg7 6.Bg2 ttJc6 7 ttJc3 transposes to the Pure Symmetrical line of Chapter 7, which goes 1 c4 c5 2 ttJc3 ttJc6 3 g3 g64 .Bg2 .Bg7 5 ttJf3 ttJf6 6 d4 cxd4 7 ttJxd4. 5 ttJb5 (D)

White plays the most consistent and ambi- tious move, trying to exploit Black's weakness on d6. Against other moves Black can develop rapidly and easily. Nevertheless, White must now deal with a fairly effective pawn sacrifice: 5 .. d5!? Actually, the very rare 5 ... d6 could use some tests, with the idea 6 .Bg5 .Be6. 6 cxd5 .Bc5 Not 6 ... ttJxd5?? 7 ~xd5 'iUxd5 S ttJc7+. 7 ttJ5c3 7 d6?! is too ambitious: 7 ... O-O! S ttJc7 ttJe4!

9 e3 .iM+!, which has no satisfactory answer;

for example, 10 ttJd2 'iixd6 11 ttJxaSl:i.dS, etc. 7  0-08 e3 S g3 (D) has been popular in recent times. The game Aronian-Sutovsky, European Team Ch, Khersonisos 2007 went S. .. ~b6 (S ... ttJg4 9 e3f5!? 10 .Be2 ttJf6 11 a3 'it>hS 12 M .Bb6 13 'iHb3 ttJa6 14 ttJd2 f4 15 ttJc4 fxe3 16 .Bxe3 .Bh3 17 O-O-O! favoured White in Vera-Gokhale, Linares 1997) 9 e3 .Bg4 10 .Be2 .Bxe2 11 ~xe2 e4 12 a3 (12 ttJd2 and 12 g4!? are known alter- natives) 12 ... ttJbd7 13 ttJd2l;I.feS 14 M .ifS 15 O-O ~c7 (with the idea ... ttJb6 and ... ~d7, eye- ing the d-pawn and also White's kingside light squares) 16 .Bb2 ttJb6 17 ttJb5! ~d7 IS d6!? (IS .Bxf6 gxf6 19 d6l:te5 is complex, but prob- ably favours White) IS ... ttJfd5 19l:i.ac1 .Bxd6 20 ttJxd6 ~xd6 with a position that isn't abso- lutely clear, because Black's knights are so well-placed.

8. .. e4 (D)

What does Black have for a pawn? In the first place, his pawn on e4 is a wedge that cramps White's pieces. Because of the territory that it stakes out, White will always have to accept some risks if he castles. That is, Black has a va- riety of ways to attack a castled king in these kinds of positions; for example, ... l;I.eS, ... ~e5 intending ... .Bd6 or ... ~g5, ... .Bf5 followed by ... ttJbd7-e5, attacks with ... h5, and so forth . Which is not to say that the counterattacking moves a3, M, .Bb2 and ttJd2-c4 won't elimi- nate that attack before it gets going, merely that many players of White have been blown away without making obvious mistakes. Thus we'll usually see White making at least some of his

266 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

queenside moves before castling. Another fac- tor here is that White's d-pawn is vulnerable to various attacks, including ... ttJbd7-b6 and/or ... "fife7 with ... l:td8. White's first goal is to hang on to his d5- pawn, of course, which he can sometimes do by a combination of attack on the e4-pawn and the sort of quick development on the queenside that we just referred to. Sometimes he can trade the pawn for positional gains. In our main game, he takes a different approach. 9 iLe2 (D) 9 ttJd2 has been the choice in the majority of games. Without going over the extensive theory, it seems as though Black is holding his own. Mikhalchishin-Kasparov, USSR Ch, Moscow 1981 was an early game that brought 4 ... e5 to general attention: 9 ... "fife7 10 iLe2 l:!.d8 11 a3 ttJxd5 (today, 11...a5 12 "fifc2 iLf5 13 O-O ttJbd7 is a more conventional approach, with compen- sation for the pawn) 12 ttJxd5!? .l:!.xd5 13 "fifc2 iLf5 14 b4 iLb6 15 iLb2 ttJc6 16 O-O ~g5! 17 'it>h 1 (Kasparov assesses 17 ttJc4 iLg4 18 iLxg4 ~xg4 as equal), and although 17 ... .l:td6?! 18 ttJxe4! iLxe4 19 'iVxe4l:td2 could have been an- swered by 20 iLa6! with the better game, Black can improve by Kasparov's 17 ... .l:tc8!, which should equalize. He gives 18 l:!.ac1 :dd8, but we know that this is pre-computer era analysis, since 18 ... ttJxb4! 19 'iVxc8+ iLxc8 20 ':xc8+ iLd8 gives Black a much superior game.

9. .. 'iVe7

9 ... l:!.e8 with the idea ... iLf5 is the other ap- proved set-up; presumably White could con- tinue as in the game.

10 a3 a511 g4!? (D)

This apparently weakening advance is typical of what White is doing today in many openings.

11 g4 can be defended on multiple grounds:

a) it threatens to play an early g5, driving Black's knight away from the e-pawn, which can be attacked by ttJd2 and'iVc2; b) White directly prevents the standard move ... iLf5; c) White's king wasn't likely to castle any- way, for the reasons given in the note to 8 ... e4. 11 ... h6 (D) This doesn't work out well, but 11...l:td8 12 g5 ttJe8 13 ttJd2 iLf5 14 ttJb3 or 14 i.g4 gives White some advantage. 12 ttJd2!? Another way to continue grabbing space is

12 h4 'iUe5! (versus g5) 13 ttJd2 ttJxd5 14

ttJdxe4 ttJxc3 15 ttJxc3 ttJc6 16 'ilVd5, Gelfand- Gofman, USSR Junior Team Ch, Kramatorsk 1989; White is still a pawn up, although his po- sition has some holes after 16 ... l:i.d8 17 "fifxe5 ttJxe5 18 g5 hxg5 19 hxg5 iLe6. MAIN LINES WITH 2 fbf3 AND d4 267

12 . .lbbd7? This virtually loses. 12 .. J:td8! is much better. 13 h4! lDb614 d6! (D) 14 . .ltxd6 15 g5 hxg5? 15 ... lDfd5 is better, but Black has no com- pensation following 16lDcxe4. 16 hxg5lDh7 17lDdxe4 .lte5 18 "iUb3! Threatening the b6-knight and preparing g6, so Black has to accede to a lost queenless middlegame. The rest is easily comprehensi- ble: 18  'i*'e6 19 'iVxe6 .ltxe6 20 f4 .ltxc3+ 21 lDxc3 l:tfd8 22 e4 f5 23 exf5 .ltxf5 24 .lte3 .ti.d6 25 .ltxb6 l:txb6 26 lDd5 l:te6 27 lDc7 1-0 Gelfand - Pantsulaia FIDE World Cup, Khanty-Mansiisk 2005

1 c4 c5 2 lDf3lDf6 3 d4 cxd4 4lDxd4 b6 (D)

Black aims for a hedgehog pawn-structure, as described in Chapter 10, but stops White from playing g3 and makes e4 more difficult for White to accomplish. 5 lDc3 .ltb7 6 f3 White wants to enforce e4 and establish a Maroczy Bind structure. Since the moves g3 and e4 aren't immediately playable, the most interesting alternative is 6 .ltg5, which is now infrequently seen in master practice. For one thing, .ltxf6 isn't much to be feared so that, for example, 6 ... d6 7 .ltxf6 gxf6 gives Black the two bishops and open g-file. Even 6 ... e6 7lDdb5 d6100ks all right, because 8 'iVa4 .ltc6 9 'iVc2 a6 10 lDd4 i..b7 results in an acceptable type of hedgehog position. 6  e6 Notice how White wins the centre following 6 ... d5 7 cxd5 lDxd5 8 lDxd5 "iUxd5 9 e4. Then the possibilities of .ltb5+ and 'iVa4+ create dif- ficulties for Black.

[diagram]
Some very important points about move- order come up on this and the next two moves. 9 ... lDbd7?! is apparently a positional mistake, because White can play 10 O-O (or 10 a4!) 1O ... .lte711 a4! (D).

Now there isn't all that much to do about the move a5, since 11...a5 would permit ttJb5 and expose d6; furthermore, any counterplay by ... b5 would be permanently forfeited. So P.H.Niel- sen-Aronian, Amber Rapid, Monte Carlo 2006 continued 11.. J::tb8 12 a5! bxa5 13 lDb3 .lta8 14 .l:.a2 (defending b2 so as to prepare lDxa5) 14 ... O-O 15 ttJxa5 (the a5 outpost limits Black, and may eventually assist White in advancing his queenside pawns) 15 ... "iUc7 16 'iVd2 d5 17 cxd5 exd5 18 exd5 .ltd6, and now simply 19

268 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

~hl i.xh2 (19 ... l:tfe8 20 liJc4!) 20 liJc6! i.xc6 10. O-O (D) 21 dxc6 would have been very strong. In view of this and the following note, the rarely-played 9 ... 'iJlc7 may deserve further con- sideration, although it commits the queen rather w early and exposes it to l:tc1/liJd5 tricks. 100-0 Has Black's move-order with 9 ... i.e7 com- pletely solved his problems? Because of the de- lay in ... liJbd7, White can play 10 'iJla4+ (D).

Now 1O ... 'lilVd7 looks innocent enough but White doesn't need to play 11 'iJlxd7+, which has been automatic. In fact, I don't see a truly ad- equate answer to llliJb3! i.d8 (forced, to save the b-pawn) 12 .l:i.dlliJc6 13 'iJla3! i.c7 14 cS!. And if Black plays 1O ... liJbd7, White at least temporarily wins the bishop-pair by 11 liJc6 i.xc6 12 ~xc6, when Black's best move is 12 ... O-O!, in order to cut off the white queen's es- cape-squares with ... liJcS. Still, White can annoy Black with 13 !tdlliJcS (what else?) 14 i.xcs bxcS IS eS ~e8! 16 'lilVxe8 liJxe8 17 f4!, and while Black is far from lost, the pawn-structure is not friendly to his dark-squared bishop. Perhaps with that in mind, Black has an- swered 10 ~a4+ by 1O ... liJfd7!? 11 0-00-0 in a couple of games. Then, because of Black's ret- rograde development, White has the unusual possibility of gaining space by 12 f4!?; for ex- ample, 12 ... 'iJlc7 13 fS liJcs 14 'ilVc2 liJc6 IS liJxc6 'iJlxc6 (1S ... i.xc6? 16 b4 liJd7 17 fxe6 fxe6 18 i.g4) 16 i.f3 with some advantage. You can understand that Black might prefer not to be forced into the lines just examined. He may want to look into earlier move-orders (9 ... 'lilVc7! ?), hoping to circumvent this issue. 11 ~d2 a) Now if White plays 11 a4, ll...liJc6 stops 12 as; that is why Black waited on ... liJbd7. Nevertheless, since the e4-pawn isn't directly attacked in that case, White should consider 12 f4! with the idea 12 ... liJxd4?! (12 ... ~c7 13 ~c1 liJxd4 14 'iJlxd41eaves White with more space) 13 'iJlxd4liJd7 14 ~adl, intending eS. b) You could argue that the move 11 ~hl will be necessary in most lines of this variation anyway, so playing it now has a certain logic. Some subtleties arose in Agrest-Kohlweyer, Bajada de la Virgen 200S: ll...liJbd7?! (it looks as though 11...'iJlc7 is the right move-order, when 12 .l:i.c1liJbd7 13 'iJlel ~ac8 14 ~f2 ~fe8 IS b4 is a standard line whose verdict is still un- clear) 12 a4! .ne8 13 as! (D).

Now Black's queenside will be compro- mised: 13 ... dS!? (13 ... bxaS 14liJb3 gives White an outpost on as and a substantial positional MAIN LINES WITH 2 0,f3 AND d4 269 superiority; 13 .. J!c8 doesn't help after 14 axb6 tbxb615 'iVb3!) 14 cxd5 (14 exd5 exd5 15 tbf5 is also good; if White's knight gets the f5- square in these hedgehog lines, then Black has to be ready either to capture it or to drive it back right away) 14 ... exd5 15 exd5 (15 tbf5! dxe4 16 axb6) 15 ... bxa5?! 16 tbf5 .1f8, and now one road to advantage would be 17 d6! g6 18 tbh6+ <3dg7 19 tbe4!.

11...tbbd7 12 .IUdl WIIc7 13 .l:Iac1

Both sides have brought their pieces to ideal squares.

13. . J::!.acS 14.1n WIIbS 15 a3!

White gets nowhere if he doesn't challenge the enemy pawns, and a direct queenside as- sault is the only way to do so. 15 .. J::!.feSI6 b4 (D)

Many games have arrived at this traditional main line. Black's next is a popular option, al- though he hasn't done badly with the older 16 ... .1f8. 16 ... .1dS!? Black wants to play ... .1c7 and aim at White's king. We saw this precise idea in the Taimanov Sicilian in Volume 1. 17 tbb3 tbe5!? This looks like an obvious move, but it does sacrifice a pawn. The immediate 17 ... .1c7 can be met by 18 .1f4 tbe5 19 .1g3, when White's bishop protects the kingside against ... d5. IS WIIxd6?! (D) Objectively, White is better off going for the vulnerable b-pawn by 18 tba4 d5! 19 exd5 exd5 20 c5, and a fairly random line is 20 ... tbc4 21 .1xc4 dxc4 22 .1f4 WIIa7 23 cxb6 .1xb6+ 24 tbbc5! with the better chances for White.

... .1c7 19 ~d2 h5? Black misses his chance for 19 ... tbxc4! 20 .1xc4 .1xh2+ 21 <3dhl 1:txc4 with fair counter- chances. 20 c5! (D)

... b5 The attractive 20 ... tbeg4 falls tactically short after 21 g3! ':'cd8 22 ~e2, when 22 ... .1xg3? 23 hxg3 WIIxg3+ fails to 24 .1g2, while 22 ... tbxe3 23 ~xe3 bxc5 24 tbxc5 .1b6 25 tb3a4 .1a7 26 <3dg2 leaves White with space and the key queenside squares. From this point onwards, White holds all the trumps. 21 tba5 .1aS 22 a4 tbg6 23 h3l:tcdS 24 WIIel bxa4 25 ~xdS ~xdS 26 tbxa4 h4 27 tbb6 tbh5 Now 28 .1xa6 would have won fairly easily, and even 28 tbxa8 .1h2+ 29 'It.i>hl tbg3+ 30 <3dxh2 tbxfl ++ 31 <3dg1 does the job. I should emphasize that the lines in the notes to White's moves 10 and 11 could provide a disincentive to 4 ... b6 as a whole.

9 Asymmetrical Variations

In a number of Symmetrical English variations, Black tries to break the symmetry at an early stage by playing ... dS. After the usual pawn ex- change on dS and recapture with the knight, he wants to control as much central terrain as possi- ble, even to the possible detriment of his devel- opment. These variations are hard to describe with overarching general themes, because they go off on their own at such an early stage. Therefore I'll discuss them individually. Nimzowitsch's 5 e4 and Grunfeld Relatives

1 c4 c5 2 l2Jf3l2Jf6 3l2Jc3 d5 4 cxd5l2Jxd5 (D)

w This move-order might appeal to you as Black, because it opens up many ways to work your way into systems that you might not oth- erwise be able to reach. For example, S g3 l2Jc6 6 .1i.g2 gives you the choice of 6 ... l2Jc7 (a Rubinstein Variation, analysed in this chapter), or 6 ... e6 (a Keres-Parma Variation, also dis- cussed below), or 6 ... g6 7 O-O .1i.g7, which is one of the better forms for Black of the Pure Symmetrical lines with S l2Jf3 l2Jf6 from Chap- ter 7. 5 e4 With this move, first brought to general atten- tion by Nimzowitsch, White's advance cedes d4 to his opponent along the lines of modem Si- cilian Defences such as the Najdorf and Svesh- nikov. The important alternative S d4 (D) can lead in a variety of transpositional and independent directions:

a) S ... e6 6 e4 (6 g3l2Jc6 is the Keres-Parma Variation below) 6 ... l2Jxc3 7 bxc3 arrives at a Queen's Gambit, Serni-Tarrasch Variation. This is generally considered somewhat favourable for White due to his big centre, yet it is defi- nitely playable and Black might want to con- sider its use for practical play. b) S ... cxd4 6 'iVxd4 is well-known at the master level. Play usually continues 6 .. .lLlxc3 (6 ... e6 7 e4 and now 7 ... l2Jc6 8 .1i.bS l2Jxc3 9 'iUxc3 transposes to 6 ... l2Jxc3 7 'ilVxc3l2Jc6 8 e4 e6 9 .1i.bS, and thus emphasizes the importance of the move 9 .1i.bS in our main line; also possi- ble is 7 ... l2Jxc3 8 'ilVxc3 .1i.d7, to forestall.1i.bS; then Polugaevsky-Keres, Tallinn 1973 went 9 .1i.e2 l2Ja6!? 10 O-O nc8 11 'iVb3 l2Jcs 12 'ilVe3 .1i.e7 13l2JeS 0-014 b3 'ilVb6 lSl2Jc4 and White stood somewhat better) 7 'ilVxc3 (D). White's slight lead in development is a plus, but even more so his prevention of ... eS. What is arguably the main line goes 7 ... l2Jc6 8 e4 (the

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 271

most effective move, establishing a central pres- ence; others are relatively passive, but perhaps 8 i.g5!? is worth a look) 8 ... e6 (now Black threatens 9 ... i.b4) 9 i.b5 (9 a3 and 9 i.d2 are also played) 9 ... i.d7 10 O-O ~6 11 a4 ~c5 12 'iVd3 ~d6 13 ~e2!. In most games from this position, White has established some advan- tage. One basic idea is to capture more space by e5, setting up a standard position in which White can play i.f4 and l:tac1, of course, but also put pressure on a castled king via i.d3, 'ilVe4, h4 and the like. c) 5 ... tiJxc3 6 bxc3 g6 invites the Exchange Griinfeld main lines, which would arise after 7 e4. White can also play 7 i.g5 i.g7 8 ~d2. However, his most popular alternative to the Griinfeld Defence has been 7 e3. A famous ex- ample went 7 ... i.g7 8 i.d3 (8 i.b5+ is the most common alternative, while 8 i.c4 and 8 i.e2 are also played upon occasion; these are techni- cal lines that I won't go into) 8 ... 0-09 O-O ~c7 10 l:rbl b6 (as you might expect, there are plenty of alternatives on all of these moves, such as 1O ... l:rd8 and 1O ... tiJd7) 11 ~e2l:td8 12 i.e4 and now: cl) 12 ... i.a6 (this move has generally been praised in spite of leading to an inferior posi- tion) 13 c4 tiJc6 14 d5 f5 15 i.d3 e5! 16 e4! tiJd4 17 tiJxd4 cxd4 18 i.g5 l:rf8 19l:!.fc1 .l:tac8 20 i.d2 l:rf7 21 a4 and White launched a pro- ductive queenside attack in Karpov-Kasparov, World Ch match (game 23), Seville 1987. c2) Black might try to improve by 12 ... i.b7 13 i.xb7 'ilVxb7 14 dxc5, and now, instead of 14 ... .txc3 15 ~c2 i.g7 16 i.b2 with an edge for White, play 14 ... 'ilVc7!? 15 cxb6!? axb6, with the kind of Griinfeld pawn sacrifice that we have seen before. Then he has two open files facing isolated pawns, and excellent spots for his knight such as c5, a4 and c4. Similarly complex is 14 ... tiJd7 15 i.a3! ~c7 16 cxb6 tiJxb6. Let's return to 5 e4 and look at some practi- cal examples. The Knight Tour S. .. ltJb4 Lalic - Klasan Zagreb 2007

[diagram]
e4 tiJb4!? (D) The alternative 5 ... tiJxc3 is featured in the next section. w Black's ambitious knight move concedes to White a considerable lead in high-quality piece development, but in return he gets positional compensation. Specifically, Black's knights can land on the enemy weaknesses at d4 and d3, and can be readily supported by queen and rooks on the d-file. The 5 e4 tiJb4 variation is initially a battle of positional ideas in their starkest form, but in the end the contest will usually tum dynamic and depend upon details as each player tries to impose his will on the po- sition. 6i.c4 The most interesting move. White goes for classic development. At the same time, he agrees to give up the castling privilege in order to fight for every central square. For 6 i.b5+, see the next game.

272 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

6 . liJd3+ (D) The tricky 6 ... .Be6 7 .Bxe6 liJd3+ 8 ~f1 fxe6 has been cast in doubt by 9 liJgS, when w one logical line goes 9 ... ~d7 10 ~f3! liJeS 11 "iVh3 ~d3+ (White has a clear superiority after

11...liJbc6 12liJxe6.i:.c8 13 f4) 12 "iVxd3liJxd3

13 c;t>e2liJf4+ 14 c;t>f3 eS IS d4! liJc6 16 dxeS liJg6 17 e6 and White stands clearly better. For a very surprising comparison, see the analysis of 3 ... liJc6 4 d4 cxd4 SliJxd4 e6 6liJdbS .icS!? 7 .Bf4 eS 8 .Be3 .Bxe3 9 liJd6+ 'it>f8 10 fxe3 in the Symmetrical Four Knights chapter. w 7 c;t>e2 White forces matters. 7 .Bxd3 'iYxd3 leaves White's light squares undefended and grants Black the bishop-pair. After exchanging Black's queen by 8 'iYe2 'iYxe2+ (8 ... 'iYd8!?) 9 ~xe2, White can use his lead in development to keep the game level (but no more than that) by, for example, 9 ... liJc6 10 d4 cxd4 II liJbS ~d8 12 liJfxd4 liJxd4+ 13 liJxd4. 7 . liJf4+! Only rarely does Black give White a four- piece lead in development(!) by 7 ... liJxc1 + 8 .l:txc1, but it does show how important Black's grip on d4 is that he only gets a moderate disad- vantage following 8 ... liJc6 9 .JibS! .Bd7 10 d4 cxd4 11 .Bxc6 .Jixc6?! (l1...bxc6 12 'iVxd4 'iYb6 is probably better, though 13 lIhdlleaves White nicely centralized) 12liJxd4 .Jid7. This is Halkias-Sutovsky, Terme Zrece 2003. Kosten brings attention to the straightforward line 13 'iYb3! e6 14liJcbS l:i.c8 IS 'iYg3!, when Black has to deal with the move liJc7+ along with problems developing his f8-bishop. 8 c;t>f1 liJe6 (D) Black has moved his knight six times and it's White's move! But leading grandmasters have contested this position for decades. This illus- trates the importance they attach to structural factors and lasting advantages. In fact, if White develops casually, say by 9 d3, Black might even achieve the better game with the consoli- dating moves ... liJc6, ... g6 and ... .Bg7. White needs to counter that plan immediately. 9b4! White decides that Black's grip on d4 needs to be broken, even at the cost of a pawn. The same principle applies to 9 d4!? (almost un- known but unclear and worth investigating) 9 ... cxd4 (9 ... liJxd4 10 .Bf4!) 10 .Bxe6 .Bxe6 l1liJxd4 .Jic4+ 12 c;t>gl with the idea 'iVa4+. The most aggressive alternative is 9liJeS (D), whose long history could fill a monograph with wild tactics and seemingly irrational strategies.

Since it is no longer the main line (although still a fully legitimate continuation), I shall limit myself to fragments:

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 273

a) 9 ... ttJd7? runs into 10 ttJxf7! <i;xf7 11 i.xe6+ 'it'xe6 12 ~b3+ with a decisive attack. b) 9 ... ~d6 could fill a few chapters of the aforementioned monograph. Then 10 'tli'a4+ is actually unresolved to this day, and 10 f4 can lead to fantastic complications, as exemplified by 1O ... ttJd7 11 ~a4 a6 12 d4 cxd4 13 ttJbS ~cS 14 b4 ~b6, Horn-Trauth, Riva del Garda 2004; now best play appears to be the amazing IS fS! ttJd8 16 .i.f4 .t:.b8! (D). w 17 ttJa7!! Wlixa7 18 .i.bS ttJc6! 19 .i.xc6 bxc6 20 ttJxc6 'iVb7 21 ttJxb8 ~xe4 22 .i.g3 'tli'xfS+ 23 'it'gl and White is probably winning. c) 9 .. :~d4 10 ~a4+! (10 f4 is also good) 1O ... .i.d7 11 ttJxd7 ~xd7 12 .i.xe6 fxe6 13 ~xd7+ 'it'xd7 14 eS! g6 IS ttJe4 b6 16 d4! cxd4? 17 h4! ttJc6 18 f4.i.h6 19 g3, and White is effectively a piece ahead. d) 9 ... g6 10 ~a4+ leads to unclear play. In brief: 1O ... .i.d7 (10 ... ttJd7? is too slow: 11 d4! and already there's no good defence to ttJxf7) 11 ttJxd7 ~xd7 12 .i.xe6 fxe6 13 ~xd7+ 'it>xd7 14 eS!? (a risky plan that is based upon perma- nently denying Black's king's bishop any scope) 14 ... .i.g7 IS ttJe4 b6 16 f4 (note the similarity to line 'c', but here Black has an extra tempo) 16 ... l:!.f8 17 d4! ttJc6 (17 ... cxd4 18 'it'e2) 18 g3 ttJxd4 19 'it'g2 'it'c6 with ongoing complica- tions, Vallejo Pons-Fernandez Romero, Dos Hermanas 2002. 9 .. g6!? This has taken over as Black's main move. The fianchetto has an unquestionable positional basis, in that 1O ... .i.g7 will reinforce the d4- square. This involves declining White's pawn sacrifice and sacrificing one of his own. Black can playa different move-order by 9 ... ttJc6 10 bxcS ttJed4 (1O ... g6 11 .i.xe6.i.xe6 12 d4 .i.g7 transposes to the note to Black's 12th move). Then 11 .i.b2 e6 12 ttJxd4 ttJxd4 13 ~g4!?, preventing ... .i.xcs or here simply 13 ttJa4 with the idea h4-hS gives White some advantage. Of course, the capture on b4 is also critical. Over the years White has done very well in both theory and practice following 9 ... cxb4 10 ttJe2 (D) (10 ttJdS was the original idea; it remains unclear).

Rather than describe the nuances of move- order, I'll show a couple of the many examples that have accumulated: a) 1O ... ttJcS (this is the knight's seventh move out of the ten that Black has made, and soon it will have to move again! The idea is to attack e4, lure White's queen to the c-file and then attack it; maybe this is going too far, al- though it has been played by at least two grand- masters) 11 ~c2 e6 (1l...ttJc6 12 d4 ttJd7 13 .i.f4 takes charge of the centre) 12 d4 ttJcd7 (this is not a tremendous square for the knight; another move is 12 ... ttJca6, but White's pres- sure grows following 13 .i.b2 or 13 .i.gS .i.e7 14 h4) 13 .i.gS! .i.e7 (13 .. .f6 is met by 14 .i.xe6! fxgS?! IS ttJxgS!) 14 .i.xe7 ~xe7 (14 ... 'it'xe7 IS ~d2!) IS .i.xe6! O-O (lS ... fxe6?? 16 ~xc8+ ~d8 17 ~xb7) 16 .i.b3 ttJc6 17 eS!? ttJb6 18 ~e4 ttJaS 19 dS ttJxb3 20 axb3 WIIcS?! was played in Schebler-K.Miiller, Hamburg 2006. Now 21 ttJgS! g6 22 ~h4 hS 23 ttJe4 is winning in view of 23 .. :~Vc2 24 ttJf6+ rJdg7 2S ~d4!, when Black has no good defence to 26 e6. White's centre and development more than out- weighed the pawn.

274 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

b) 1O .. .'~Jc7 11 d4 e6 12 h4! (D).

From the time that 9 b4 hit the scene, the h- pawn advance has been part-and-parcel of White's strategy. It wins space, prepares a rook- lift from hI, discourages ... g6 due tohS, and po- tentially attacks Black's kingside; for example, 12 ... ttJd7 13 hS (Kasparov demonstrated a fur- ther role for 12 h4: 13 .ligS! iL.e7 14:tel ttJb6 IS .lid3 f6 16 .lif4 ttJa6 17 hS with a powerful attack looming, Kasparov-R.Griinberg, Ham- burg (simul) 1985) 13 ... h6 14 .lif4 (or 14 .lib2 with command of the game) 14 ... ttJb6 IS .lid3 .lid7 16 ttJeS!? .lia4 17 ~d2 .lie7 1811h3 ttJbS 19 .l:.g3! ttJxd4 (l9 ... 'it>f8?! 20 ~b2 as 21 dS!, with development, space and centre) 20 J:[xg7 1:!f8 21 .I:tel .lif6, Filippov-Van Wely, FIDE Knockout, Tripoli 2004, and now 22 ng3 or 22 l1h7 favours White. 10 bxc5 .lig7 (D) w Everything revolves around the d4-square, which Black intends to dominate completely by playing ... ttJc6, so White gives up one of his best pieces to contest it, at the same time ceding the bishop-pair to his opponent. 1l.lixe6 Black was also threatening ... .i.xc3, winning a piece. A strange-looking option, untried as far as I know, would be 11 .lidS!? ttJc6 12l1bl. 1l . .i.xe6 12 d4 .lic4+ Many of the ideas are similar after 12 ... ttJc6 13 .lie3 (D). White will make almost any con- cession necessary to get his centre moving:

a) 13 ... .i.c4+ is the natural move: 14 'it>gl ~aS IS l1el fS 16 dS! .lixc3 17 dxc6 bxc6 18 ~c2 (Black has broken up White's pawn-pha- lanx, but at material cost) 18 ... l1d8 19 h4l1d3 20 .lid4! l1xd4 21 ttJxd4 .lixd4 22 "fixc4 ~d2 23 :th3 fxe4 24 'it>hl l1f8 2S l1bl and White wins, Vallejo Pons-See1, Bundesliga 200S/6. b) After 13 .. .'iVaS, 14 l1el is theory's main line, but 14 ttJe2! .i.c41S dS! with the big centre should favour White; for example, IS ... .lixe2+ 16 ~xe2 ~bS+ 17 ~d3 (or 17 WeI ttJb4 18 J:tb 1) 17 .. :iIVxd3+ 18 ~xd3 ttJb4+ 19 'it>c4 .lixal 20 ~xb4 .lig7 21.l:tbl 0-022 Rc4 and the pawns are too strong. c) The course of Diachkov-Anastasian, Mos- cow 2007 was a little less rational: 13 ... O-O 14 lIel ~aS IS ttJe2!? .lixa2 16 dS!? (16 h4) 16 ... lHd8?! (16 ... ttJb4) 17 .lid2 "fia3 18 dxc6 bxc6 19 ~e1 .lib2 20 l1c2 ~b3, and here 21 lIc3! .lixc3 22 ttJxc3 would have been strong. Nevertheless, Black may find that his best chances rest with this line.

13 Wgl O-O 14 h4!

A standard device. As mentioned above, this advance is associated with attack and the

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 275

activation of White's rook. Another benefit of h4 is that White gains an escape-square for his king on h2, as needed. 14. .ltJc6 15 ~e3 'iYa5 16 llel llad8 17 h5 tDxd4 18 ~xd4 Or 18 tDxd4 e5 19 h6! ~h8 20 tDd5! ~xd5 21 tDf5! gxf5 22 exd5. All the tactics are going White's way. 18 . ~xd4 19 tDxd4 e5 20 tDd5! ~xd5 21 exd5 exd4 22 'iVxd4 'iVxa2 23 d6 'iVe6 24 ~h3 lld7 25 lle3 'iVf5 26 h6 f6 27 lle7 llxe7 28 dxe7 lle8 29 'iYc4+ 1-0 Kallai - J. Horvath Balatonbereny 1996 1 tDf3 tDf6 2 c4 c5 3 tDc3 d5 4 cxd5 tDxd5 5 e4 tDb4 6 ~b5+ Here White is concerned with quick devel- opment and an immediate attack. Ironically, this often leads to technical positions without the lasting attacking prospects that come with 6 ~c4. 6  tD8c6 7 d4! Otherwise 7 ... a6 followed by ... tDd3+ or ... ~g4 and ... tDd4 gives Black the positional trumps; for example, 7 d3 a6 8 ~xc6+ tDxc6 (8 ... bxc6 9 O-O, and 10 'iVa4 after Black cap- tures on d3) 9 O-O ~g4 10 h3 ~xf3 11 'iYxf3 e6. Black has effective control over d4. 7  cxd4 8 a3! (D)

8 .. ~d7!? This less-frequently played move provides a smooth way to steer clear of the worst compli- cations, and may be one reason that White doesn't play 6 ~b5+ at the top levels any more. The main line for years has been 8 ... dxc3 9 ~xd8+ ~xd8 10 axb4 cxb2 11 ~xb2. White obviously has a lot of pieces in play, and the open a-, c- and d-files to attack along. However, Black has an extra pawn, and no weaknesses as yet. That said, Black needs to know what he's doing. The main line goes l1...e6 (l1...f6 12 e5! is irritating for Black; 11...~d7!? is like the game but slightly worse due to 12 ~xc6 ~xc6 13 tDe5 'it>e8 14 tDxc6 bxc6 15 'it>e2 and White properly keeps his king in the centre, although Black was fine anyway in Piket-Shirov, Wijk aan Zee 1999 following 15 ... f6 16 lla6 e5 17 ~c3 ~d7) 12 O-O ~d7 13 ~xc6 ~xc6 14 tDe5 '>te8 15 tDxc6 bxc6 (D). w The key to this position is that by the time White wins the a- or c-pawn, Black will have his pieces out; for example, 16 lla4 f6 17 llc1 (or 17 ~fa1 'i;f7 18 llxa7+ .llxa7 19 llxa7+ ~e7, Lautier-Kasparov, Tilburg 1997; a draw was im- mediately agreed after White carelessly played 20 1J.c7?, and the World Champion missed 20 ... c5!, which would have won a pawn be- cause of 21 bxc5? 1J.b8 or 21 b5 llb8) 17 ... 'it>d7 (Cummings suggests 17 ... ~e7 18 llxc6 'it>f7, which is dead level) 18 llca1 ~d6 19 e5 ~xe5 20 ~xe5 fxe5 21 llxa7+ .uxa7 22 llxa7+ 'it>d6 23 ~xg7, V.lvanov-Biriukov, St Petersburg Ch 1999, and now 23 ... llb8 24 .llxh7 ':'xb4 25 'it>f1 c5 is the simplest way to full equality. Black's team of passed pawn plus rook is quite as good as White's. We now return to 8 ... .ltd7!? (D): 9 tDxd4! Definitely the most interesting move. Several top-level games have been drawn following 9

276 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w axb4 dxc3 10 bxc3 g6! 11 O-O ~g7; for example, 12 ~f4 O-O 13 l::tc1 as!, Christiansen-Ivanchuk, Amber Blindfold, Monte Carlo 1993. 9 .. lLlxd410 ~xd7+ 'ili'xd711 axb4 e6! Straightforward development is best, and

11...e5? 12lLld5 should definitely be avoided!

12 ~e3 (D)

White has drummed up some threats. With his next move Black takes advantage of the fact that the d4-square is permanently available for a piece. 12  J:tdS! 13 ~xd4!? It turns out that there's no way to win mate- rial or establish a worthwhile initiative. One of the most exciting games in this line went 13 O-O ~xb4 14 ~xd4 ~xd4 15 ~a4+ <3;;e7 16 lLlb5 'ili'xe4! 17 lIfel! ~xel+!? 18 l:i.xel ~xel 19 ~a3+ ~f6 20 lLld6 (instead of20 'ili'f3+ ~e7 21 ~a3+, drawing), and now the best move is 20 ... h6!, as played in Gleizerov-Petrienko, USSR 1985, when 21 h4!? a5! 22 ~g3 ~e7 23 lLlxb7? (23lLle4 holds) 23 ... l:td5 favoured Black. 13  Ji'xd4 14 'ili'a4+ Wid7 IS ~e2 a6 16 ~xd7+ nxd717 bS axbSlSlLlxbS g619 na7 ~g7 2011dl Here the game went 20 ... ~xb2?, when 21 I:txd7 ~xd7 22 nxb7+ ~c6 23 nxf7! would have won a pawn. Instead, Black could play 20 ... .l:i.xdl 21 <3;;xdl ~xb2 22 nxb7 O-O and there's not much left to argue over. Exchange with S  Ct:Jxc3 Krasenkow - Protaziuk Polish Team Ch, Suwalki 1999

1 c4 cS 2 lLlf3lLlf6 3 lLlc3 dS 4 cxdslLlxdS S

e4lLlxc3 (D) Black wants nothing to do with the craziness of 5 ... lLlb4. w 6 dxc3!? Someone who plays 5 ... lLlxc3 will probably be disappointed to see this move, since now he essentially has to enter a queenless middlegame that can be annoying to defend. Black probably chose this move-order with the intent of trans- posing to the main-line Grtinfeld Defence fol- lowing 6 bxc3 g6 (6 ... e6 7 d4 is a Semi-Tarrasch) 7 d4, which is at any rate a much more exciting variation. 6 .. ~xdl+ Anything else lets White play ~f4 and i.c4 with a traditional lead in space and development. 7 <3;;xdl (D) White now has a modest advantage based upon the fact that his pieces will find better squares than his opponent's. His king has a nice

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 277

square on c2 (the same one used in many queenless middlegames), and Black has issues with his own c-pawn, in that protecting it (af- ter i.e3) requires some loosening of the posi- tion, and its presence restricts his dark-squared bishop. To be clear, if Black is well-prepared and ready to defend a somewhat worse posi- tion, he should achieve a draw; however, the lack of winning chances and passive posture will not appeal to most players below the very highest levels. Fortunately for us, the resulting positions are highly instructive. 7 ../iJc6 a) Griinfeld players (presumably the clear majority of those who play S. .. ltJxc3) may want to play 7 ... g6, a position which has occurred fairly often at the top levels, in part because it can also arise when Black plays an early ... g6 and then transposes to this position. The good side of ... g6 is that by not touching his e-pawn, Black doesn't create a weakness on d6, nor block off his queen's bishop. The bad news is that it takes two moves to get the bishop to g7, and in that position its scope is limited by White's pawn on c3. The most natural continu- ation is 8 i.e3 b6. White has two extra pieces out and Black's queenside is very slightly weak- ened. The famous game Anders son-Tempone, Buenos Aires 1979 went 9 a4 ltJc6 10 i.bS i.d7 11 ~c2 i.g7 12l:thdl a6 13 i.c4 i.g4 14 h3! i.xf3 IS gxf3 (White's bishop-pair will be very powerful in the open board, and his dou- bled pawns don't prevent him from expanding in the centre) IS ... O-O 16 f4! l:ta7 17 eS as 18 l:td2 e6 19l:tadll:tc8 (D). 20 ~b3! (starting a tour on the light squares that decides the game) 20 ... i.f8 21 i.bS l:tcc7 w 22 i.xc6! lIxc6 23 'It>c4 i.e7 241Id7 lIcc7 2S lIxc7 'u'xc7 26 ~bS J::!.c8 27 J::!.d7 ~f8 28 ~xb6 ~e8 29 .l::tb7 .i.d8+ 30 c;ir>bS c4 31 i.cs 1-0. b) 7 ... i.g4 gets Black's pieces out quickly, something that he often forgets to do! Then 8 'It>c2 is White's most flexible move; he doesn't fear ... i.xf3 because his bishops will have free rein thereafter; for example, 8 ... ltJd7 (8 ... ltJc6 9 .i.e3 e6 10 i.bS creates the usual problems for Black: his f8-bishop has no scope and d6 is weak) 9 i.f4 (Carsten Hansen's suggestion) 9 ... .i.xf3!? 10 gxf3 eS 11 i.e3. White has a nice position, especially with his control of dS. 8 'It>c2 The king takes up safe residence and pro- tects the weak point d3 against any future incur- sions. White can also play 8 .i.f4, for which you should compare what follows, or 8 i.e3. In the latter case, 8 ... e6 is solid, even if it creates that situation mentioned above with Black's bish- ops restricted by their own pawns. In Cvet- kovic-Palatnik, USSR-Yugoslavia, Krk 1976, White played modestly: 9 'It>c2 i.d7 10 i.e2 .i.e7 11 l:thdl O-O-O 12 J::!.d2!? (12 a4! intending as is a more typical plan) 12 ... f6 l3lIadlltJaS 14 eS!? At this point, Black hasn't any special worries if he plays 14 ... i.c6.

8. .. e6 9 i.f4!

Compare this with the previous note. White didn't have to provoke ... e6 by i.e3, and so he can put the bishop on its more active square straightaway. 9 ... f6 (D) 10 ltJd2! Now White intends to combine moves like a4, i.bS and ltJc4, while a background theme is ltJc4-d6+.

278 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
Gaining time and opening up squares for Black's light-squared bishop. On the other hand, d5 becomes the board's only outpost and the a2-g8 diagonal is weakened. 11 .1e3 .1e6 12 .1c4 Not a subtle move; White wants to end up with the better bishop, and at the same time he clears the way for eventually putting a knight or rook on d5. 12  .'~f7! Kosten mentions 12 ... .1xc4 13 ttJxc4 b5, when after 14 ttJd2, Black won't be able to an- swer 15 a4 effectively. After that move, White either gains the a-file, or (upon ... M) he gets the c4-square back again while Black has only weakened his position.

13 a4 .1e7 14 .1xe6+ <;t>xe6 15 ttJc4 b6 16

l:thd1 ~hd8 (D) w Depending upon your experience and tastes, you may consider this position fairly harmless or a real bother for Black. In either case it's good to get used to the basic ideas because such end- games are not uncommon (the central pawn- structure can arise from several openings). White's advantages of good-versus-bad bishop and the d5 outpost are fine, but neither de- scribes a winning plan. For his part, Black has little to do, since White covers all the d-file squares to which Black could infiltrate, or upon which Black could put a piece. This gives White some time to work with. 17 .l:txd8 .l:[xd818 g4! While hardly decisive, this advance com- plies with the strategic principle that, when you stand better in one sector but can't make prog- ress, you should look to open a second front. 18  g6 (D) w 19l:tg1 White discourages .. .f5 and prepares king- side action. 19  .l:th8! Now if White isn't careful, ... h5 will activate Black's rook. 20 <;t>d3 cJ;;;f7 Black is presumably trying to cover White's penetration points on the g-file. He could also play simply 20 ... lId8+ and return to h8. If he tries the dynamic 20 ... h5!? 21 gxh5 g5!, White counters with 22 h4! gxh4 23 h6 .1f8 24.l:[hl .1xh6 25 lIxh4 J::td8+ 26 ~e2 .1xe3 27 ttJxe3. Then White controls d5 and f5, but Black can still try to cover his weaknesses and use the g- file following 27 ... ttJe7!. Even though White is on the better side of the draw, Black's position is probably sound enough to hold, a description that characterizes the entire variation. 21 h4~e6?!

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 279

Again, 21...h5 is playable, and less compli- ant. The opening themes have persisted into the endgame, so let's follow the play, albeit without w detail: 22 h5! ltd8+ 23 ~c2 .l:lg8 24 hxg6 hxg6 25 lthl lbd8 26 lba3 lbc6 27 lth7 l:tc8 28 lbc4 ltfS 29 i.d2 f5!? 30 lth6! fxg4 3111xg6+ ltf6 32ltxf6+ ~xf6 33 ~d3 ~g6 34lbe3 (D)

34. .. i.g5?

Black drops a pawn for too little return. He is still within that drawing range that has accom- panied him all game and could survive with 34 ... ~h5! 35 ~c4 i.h4! 36 i.ellbe7, played to prevent lbf5, but also planning ... lbg6-f4. 35lbxg4 i.xd2 36 ~xd2 ~g5 37 f3 ~f4 38 ~e2 a6 39lbf6 b5 40 lbd5+ ~g5 41lbc7 bxa4 42lbe6+ 1-0 Keres-Parma Variation 1 c4 The Keres-Parma Variation can arise via a great number of move-orders. For example, the official ECO sequence for the start position is 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 lbc3 lbf64 lbf3 c5 (QGD, Semi-Tarrasch) 5 cxd5lbxd5 6 g3lbc6 7 i.g2 i.e7 8 O-O O-O. Any combination of ... lbf6, ... e6, ... c5, ... d5, ... lbc6, ... i.e7 and ... lbxd5 ver- sus c4, lbc3, lbf3, g3, i.g2, d4 and cxd5 over the first seven moves will do.

1. .. c5 2 lbc3 lbf6 3 lbf3

For example, 3 g3 e6 4 lbf3 d5 5 cxd5 lbxd5 6 i.g2lbc6 7 d4, etc., is a common move-order. 3 ... d5 4 cxd5lbxd5 5 g3lbc6 6 i.g2 e6 7 d4 i.e7 8 O-O O-O (D) This is the initial position. We'll look at three games from this point. Schandorff - Greenfeld European Clubs Cup, Saint Vincent 2005

[diagram]
g3 lbc6 6 i.g2 e6 7 d4 i.e7 8 O-O O-O 9 lbxd5 I'll give this move the most attention because the great majority of masters are using it, and the positional themes are well defined. Suba's 9 l:tbl!? (D) has never been fully in- vestigated.

This is in the genre of semi-waiting moves, primarily designed to be useful against most logical replies while improving conditions should the opponent do nothing committal. In this instance, one obvious point is that if Black plays ... lbxc3, then bxc3 opens the b-file. Fur- thennore, if White proceeds with e4, there are several lines in which the b-pawn is defended so that i.f4 or i.g5 becomes possible, and

280 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

others in which potential forks on c2 are pre- vented. Here are a few examples: a) The rook move's worth became clear in Suba-Cebalo, Skopje 1984: 9 ... cxd4 10 ltJxd4 ltJxd4 11 'it'xd4.i.f6 12 ~c4ltJxc3?! 13 bxc3 (hitting b7) 13 ... 'it'a5 14 .i.e3 (or 14l:.dl!, when 14 .. :~xc3 15 ~a4 threatens .i.a3) 14 ... 'iVxc3 15 'iYa4!, and Black was at a loss for good moves. b) 9 ... h6 favours White after 10 e4ltJb6 11 dxc5 .i.xc5 12 e5! with the ideas of'i!Ve2, ltJe4, h4, etc. c) 9 ... ltJb6 10 dxc5 .i.xc5 11 'iWc2 (or 11 ~3) 11....i.d7 12 l:tdl l:'l:c8 13 ltJg5 g6 14 ltJge4.i.e7 15 .i.h6l:!.e8 16 :tbcl yields a prom- ising attacking position. d) White has to sacrifice a pawn if he wants to make serious progress versus 9 ... 'i!Va5: 10 .i.d2! ltJxc3 11 .i.xc3 'it'xa2. Now Speelman- Alburt, Taxco Interzonal 1985 continued 12 e3!? l:.d8 13 'iYe2 cxd4 14 ltJxd4 ltJxd4 15 .i.xd4 and the two bishops provided compensa- tion. Still better seems 12 b3!, which threatens 13 l:!.al; then after 12 ... 'iVa6 13 dxc5, Black should abstain from 13 ... .i.xc5? 14 b4 'iVc4 15 l:!.c1 .i.xb4 16 .i.xg7, etc. e) 9 ... .i.f6 makes a lot of sense, putting di- rect pressure on the centre: 10 ltJxd5!? (10 dxc5! may be best, when 10 ... .i.xc3 11 bxc3 ltJxc3 12 'iVxd8 lhd8 13 l'.tb2 is critical; then 13 ... e5 14 l:!.c2 ltJb5!? 15 a4 ltJbd4 16 ltJxd4 ltJxd4 17 J::[b2 will show White's bishops to good effect) 1O ... 'iWxd5 (1O ... exd5! 11 dxc5 ..tf5 must give Black at least fair value for his pawn) 11 dxc5 'iVxc5 (11.. :Ylixa2 12 .i.g5! .i.xg5 13 ltJxg5 has ideas of "iVc2 and/or ltJe4-d6) 12 ~a4! .i.d7 13 .i.e3 W1e7 14 'iVe4! l:tac8 15 b4 with a queenside initiative, Suba-Petursson, Thessaloniki Olympiad 1984. 9 .. exd5 9 .. :~'xd5? is well answered by 10 .i.e3!, when Black will inevitably lose a pawn. 10 dxc5 With this move, White isolates Black's d- pawn. The only other way to scare up chances is 10 .i.e3 c4 11 ltJe5 (D). This is a standard manoeuvre in the Tarrasch Queen's Gambit. Whether it is effective de- pends upon whether White can make one of two moves work: e4 or b3. Soffer-Greenfeld, Israeli Team Ch 1999 continued 11.. .. i.f5! (a

tactic to remember is 11.. . .i.e6?! 12 ltJxc4!, when after 12 ... dxc4 13 d5, at the very least Black's pawns will be weakened; Black can partially recover by declining the sacrifice: 12 ... .i.f6! 13 l:tc1!? ltJxd4! 14 ltJd6! 'it'xd6 15 .i.xd4 with a modest advantage for White; the ltJxc4 trick occurs in various openings and is worth filing away in your memory bank) 12 ltJxc6 (12 'iVa4ltJxe5 13 dxe5 d4 14 .i.f4 g5 15 .i.d2, with an unclear game, is old analysis by Tal) 12 ... bxc6 13 W1a4?! 'ifb6! (the b-file is more important than any other factor here) 14 l:tfc1? (14 b3 c3!?) 14 ... a6! 15 b3 'ifb5 16 "iVxb5 axb5 with a positionally won game. Black intends ... .i.a3 or ... .i.b4, when his bish- ops are clearly more effective than White's, and they will escort his passed c-pawn for- ward. 10 ... .i.xc5 (D) w 11 .i.g5 White has many approaches here, of which the bishop move has become the most popular

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 281

by a considerable margin. Here are a few typi- cal set-ups from older lines: a) 11 ltJg5!? h6! (1l...~d4 12 ~c2! g6 13 ~b3 i.f6 14 ~xd5 ltJd4 is an old line which is far from clear) 12 ltJh3 (12 ~c2 ~xf2+! 13 J:!.xf2 hxg5, and now 14 ~d2 ~e6 15 'ii'xg5 f6 is interesting, with a fight between two bish- ops and structure, whereas 14 ~b3 ~e6! 15 "iVxb7 "iVd6 16 ~xg5 J:!.ab8 is evenly balanced) 12 ... ~xh3!? (12 ... g5! would restrict the knight) 13 ~xh3 J:!.e8 14 J:!.b1 (sometimes we think that an exchange like 14 e3? d4 15 exd4 ltJxd4 merely liquidates, but with ... "iVf6 and ... l:!.ad8 coming, it can only favour Black) 14 ... d4 15 a3!? ~e7 16 b4 ~b6 17 J:!.b2 J:!.ad8 18l:!.d2 a5!

19 b5 ltJe5, Tarjan-Tukmakov, Odessa 1976.

Black is not necessarily better here, but he has more dynamic play. b) 11 a3 (D) used to be popular, intending b4 and ~b2. I'll simply indicate a direction or two.

bl) Black can restrain b4 by 11...a5, but he should be a little careful about the looseness that creates on his queenside: 12ltJe1! d4!? (or 12 ... i.e6) 13 ltJd3 i.b6 14 ~d2 l:!.e8 15 J:!.c1 ~g4! 16.l:!.e 1 J:!.c8 17 h3 ~f5 (both sides' pieces are more or less ideally placed for this kind of position; now White tries to utilize the weak- ness created by 11...a5) 18 ~b3! ~e4?! (better is 18 ... ltJe5) 19 ~xe4l:he4 20 ~b5! with ad- vantage, Petrosian-Peters, Lone Pine 1976. b2) 1l...~f5 12 b4 ~b6 13 J:!.a2! (White's idea is that attacking the d-pawn by .l:f.a2-d2 and then ~b2 is better than 13 ~b2; of course, there are trade-offs) 13 ... ~e4 14 .l:!.d2 "iVe7 15 ~b2 J:!.fe8 16 'iVaI (16 "iVb3!?) 16 .. .f6! (the key move, reducing the effectiveness of White's queen-and-bishop line-up) 17 J:!.fd1 iVe6 18 "iVa2 l:!.ad8 and both sides stand solidly, Por- tisch-Spassky, Bugojno 1978. c) 11 b3 ~f5 12 ~b2 ~e4 13 J:!.c1 "ile7 14 "ild2 ~b6 (after 14 ... d4, 15 'iVg5! simplifies to a pleasant position) 15 e3 t!fe8 16 lIfdl l:!.ad8. Normally, 17 ..tal, 17 "iVe2 or 17 ~d4 is played now, but White should avoid 17ltJd4?! (D).

This is the natural move, but with the light squares slightly weak, it's better to keep an eye on e5. Black can play 17 ... ..txg2! 18 'it>xg2 iVe4+ 19 'it>g 1 ltJe5 20 ~c2 h5!, which is a bit awkward for White, because d3 and f3 have to be watched over while Black intends ... h4 or ... .l:tc8; this position is within drawing range, but should obviously not be White's first choice. 1l  JWd7!? (D) Black has to make a key decision at this point; the text-move avoids creating weaknesses but blocks off his own bishop. In the next game we'll see examples of 11 .. .f6 and 11 ... "ilb6. w

282 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

12lbe1! d4 This is always a tough decision, and often Black would rather not advance the pawn be- fore he has more pieces out. Here 12 .. J~e8! is best, when 13lbd3 i.b6 14 i.d2!? ~d6 15lbf4 i.g4 keeps Black's pieces active and the game level, Bu Xiangzhi-J.Polgar, Bie12007. 13lbd3 i.b614 i.d2 .l:!.e815 :leI 'ilVd6 (D) w

16 a4 a617 'ilVb3

Apparently more accurate is 17 as! i.a7 18 'ilVb3 'ilVe7 (otherwise it's hard to develop), and White has a choice of plans; for example, 19 'ilVa4 (19 'ilVd5!? i.e6 20 ~h5 keeps an eye on both sides of the board) 19 ... i.d7 20 lbf4! h6 21 ~b3. White has a comfortable advantage in these positions. 17.. lba5 18 ~d5!? ~xd5 19 i.xd5 i.f5?! This opens the way for White to break into Black's position. 19 ... i.e6 20 i.xe6 ':xe6 21 i.xa5 i.xa5 22 b4 i.d8 23 ~ac1 (D) may be objectively drawn, but the resulting position isn't easy for Black.

White controls the c-file (1:.c4, 'it'fl and 1:.fel can follow), and he has some queenside territory. Even if one pair of rooks comes off, the asym- metry of White's good knight versus Black's bad bishop creates difficulties for Black. 20 b4lbc6 21 a5 (D)

21 .... i.a7? 2l...i.d8 22 b5!? (or 221:.ac1) 22 ... lbxa5 23 i.xaS i.xa5 241:.xa5 i.xd3 25 i.xb7 i.xb5! 26 i.xa8 1:.xa8 may be winning for White, but it will take a lot of work. 22 b5! axb5 23 a6 1:.ad8 24 i.g2! i.e4 25 i.xe4l:.xe4 26 axb7 i.b8 271:.ec11:.e6 281:.a8 1-0 There's no defence; for example, 28 ... 'it'f8 29 .i.f4 ~e7 30 ~xc6 1:.xc6 31 1:.xb8 :xb8 32 i.xb8l:.b6 33lbc5. Anand - Timman Prague (rapid) 2002

[diagram]
g3 lbc6 6 .i.g2 e6 7 d4 i.e7 8 O-O O-O 9lbxd5 exd510 dxc5 i.xc5 11 i.g5 f6 As opposed to 11..:iVd7 in the last game, Black wins a tempo for development. However, he weakens the a2-g8 diagonal, which may be more serious than it at first appears. The other major option is 11 ... 'iVb6, which is active but does have the drawback of weaken- ing Black's protection of d5. True, the immedi- ate capture 12 ~xd5?! i.e6 13 'iVd2 h6 14 i.e3 I:i.fd8 gives Black more than enough play, but 12 :c1 forces 12 ... d4 (D) and leads to complex isolated d-pawn play. Two examples:

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 283

w a) 13 4:Jd2?! contemplates 4:Jc4, 4:Je4 or 4:Jb3. However, Black can strike quickly at e2, as illustrated by Zsu.Polgar-Lautier, Polanica Zdroj 1991: 13 .. ..l::te8 14 4:Jb3!? i.f8 IS ':el h6 16 i.f4 i.g4 (once Black achieves ... i.g4 and . .. l:!.ad8 in isolated d-pawn situations with White's bishop on g2, he's usually solved his problems) 17 h3 (or 17 i.xc6 bxc6 18 "iVxd4 i.b4!) 17 ... i.e6 18 i.xc6 bxc6 19 ~xd4 i.xh3 20 i.e3 i.e6 21 ~c3 ~a6 22 a3 i.dS 23 4:Jd4 ~c8!. Black has come out of the opening in fly- ing colours and wins with an assault on the king: 24 4:Jf3 ~h3 2S l:!.edl i.d6! 26 l:!.xdS (not only is ... i.xg3 a threat, but ... l:!.e6-g6 or ... l:!.e4-g4 is next, so White concedes material) 26 ... cxdS 27 l:!.dl l:!.ac8 28 ~d3 i.cs 29 i.xcs l:!.xcS 30 b4 l:!.cc8 31 bS ~g4 32 4:Jd4 ':c4. Black has consolidated and won easily. b) 13 ~c2! seems to improve for White: 13 ... i.d614 4:Jd2 i.e6 IS 4:Je4! i.e7 (White had to calculate the consequences of IS ... 4:Jb4 16 ~d2 4:Jxa2 17 4:Jf6+! 'it'h8 18 ~d3! g6 19l:!.cdl) 16 i.xe7 4:Jxe7 17 4:JgS (17 ~cS !?) 17 ... i.fS 18 ~cS l:!.fe8 19 b4!?, Illescas-Lautier, Dos Her- manas 1994. Black's position is hardly terrible, but White's bishop still exerts pressure on b7 and the central squares; also, his pieces coordi- nate better. 12 i.d2 (D) This passive-looking retreat is based upon the idea that c3 will be the ideal square from which to blockade a pawn on dS, in conjunction with e3. If Black prevents that by playing ... d4, then 4:Jel-d3 is the strategy. But 12 i.d2 has an- other point that took a while to become appreci- ated. 12  i.fS

12 ... i.e6 is well answered by the standard manoeuvre 13 4:Jel and 14 4:Jd3, but White sometimes uses the alternative set-up 13 e3 'iVd7 14 i.c3. Then 14 ... lIad8 IS i.d4! (D) is instructive .

White doesn't want to trade his knight for Black's bishop on d4, because his 'bad' dark- squared bishop would be no better than Black's knight on c6. But after IS i.d4, either IS ... i.xd4 16 4:Jxd4 or IS ... 4:Jxd4 16 4:Jxd4 would give White a standard positional pull versus the d- pawn. Korchnoi-Sturua, Basle 2001 continued IS ... i.d6! 16l:!.cl l:!.fe8 17 ~b3 4:JaS 18 ~c3 and White stood slightly better. 13 b4! (D) A new move at the time. Having extra terri- tory on the queenside proves valuable. 13 ... i.b6 How about capturing the pawn? Taking with the bishop is a mistake: 13 ... i.xb4? 14 4:Jd4! i.xd2 IS 4:JxfS ~a5 16 "iWb3. Tsesarsky analy- ses the more complex 13 ... 4:Jxb4 14 i.xb4 i.xb4

284 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

15 ttJd4! .tc8 16 ~3 Wile7 17 ~abl .tc5 18 ~xd5+ 'it'h8 19 ttJf5 Wile5! 20 'iVxe5 fxe5 21 l:tb5 .txf5 22 .l:!.xc5 with a modest advantage for White. 14 bS ttJe7 IS .tb4 White's pieces have come to life, and the d- pawn is in danger. Whatever Black does will compromise his position. IS . .te4!? Black's weaknesses on d5 and e6 also end up hurting him after 15 .. J~e8 16 ttJd4, with the idea 16 ... .te4 17 .th3 or 16 ... .tg4 17 l:Icll':lc8 18 'iid3!. 16 .th3! (D)

This not only hits e6, but stops Black from contesting the c-file by ... l:.c8. 16  'it'h8 16 ... .txf3?! 17 exf3 weakens Black's light squares further and favours the two bishops. Even the doubled f-pawns, which are indeed a drawback to White's position, open the way for occupation of the e-file by 'iVe2 with Itfel next. 17 ttJd4 .l:!.e8 18 a4 .txd4 The knight is simply too strong on d4. 19 ~xd4 ttJfS Black has to try something because .l:!.fdl and f3 are coming. 20 'iid2 ~6? This will lose. Tsesarsky gives 20 ... ttJd6 21 :tac1 ttJc4 22 'iid4 a6 23 .l:!.fdl and White is in command, since f3 will soon follow. 21 .l:i.ac1 ttJd4? 22 as 1-0 A piece falls. White's play demonstrates how the need to defend the isolated pawn can force Black to make concessions. Filippov - Volzhin Gistrup 1996 1 ttJf3 ttJf6 2 c4 cS 3 ttJc3 e6 4 g3 dS S cxdS ttJxdS 6 .tg2 ttJc6 7 O-O .te7 8 d4 O-O 9 e4 (D)

This unpretentious move sets up a big centre and intends to use it for attacking purposes. 9  ttJdb4 Black puts some pressure on d4 and tries to break up White's centre, based upon the idea 10 d5 exd5 11 exd5 ttJd4! 12 ttJxd4 cxd4 and the d-pawn is immune. There are two other major moves; here are some games with representa- tive positional and tactical themes: a) 9 ... ttJxc3 10 bxc3 (D). Now play revolves around White's ability to advance his centre; he has done extremely well over the years: al) 1O ... b6 allows 11 d5! ttJa5 12l:Iel; for example, 12 ... exd5 13 exd5 .tf6 14 ttJe5 .tb7 15 .tf4 .l:i.e8 16 ~d3 .txe5 17 .txe5 with a very large advantage based upon space, the bishops

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 285

and the passed d-pawn, Gulko-Adamski, Co- penhagen 2000. In the game, Black lost a pawn after 17 ... ltJc6? 18 .ltf4 VWd7 19 .lte4!, attack- ing c6 and h7. a2) 1O ... cxd4 gives Black's pieces a little more room to work with: 11 cxd4.ltf6 12 .ltb2! (the bishop is better-placed here than on the more centralized position after 12 .lte3, in part because it covers eS, but also because it makes an effective dS possible) 12 ... b6 13 .l:tbl! .1i.b7 14 dS! exdS IS exdS ltJaS 16 ltJeS (since the knight will occupy the c6-square next, Black exchanges it off, but White's bishops become terribly strong) 16 ... .ltxeS 17 .ltxeSli.c8 18.l:tc1 'iVd7 19 .ltc3!? .lta6 20 l:i.e 1 ltJb7 21 ~d4 f6 22 .ltb4! ~hc1 23 l:Ixc1 l:Ic8 24 .l:txc8+ ~xc8 2S h4 .ltbS 26 d6ltJcS 27 'iVdS+! 'It>f8 28 'iVe4!! <Ji;f7 (28 ... ltJxe4? loses on the spot to 29 d7+, but everything else is winning for White as well) 29 VWe7+ 'Ot>g6 30 hS+ 'It>xhS 31 'iHf7+! 1-0 Christiansen-Portisch, Linares 1981. b) 9 ... ltJb6 10 dxcS (D) (the other main line is 10 dS exdS 11 exdS ltJb4 and 12ltJel or 12 ltJeS). As in our main game, White would like to prepare eS and VWe2, so Black will either ex- change queens or try to prevent eS: bl) 1O ... .ltxcS 11 .ltf4! prevents ... eS and maintains a small central edge (as opposed to 11 'iVe2 eS !). b2) 1O ... VWxdl IIl:Ixdl .ltxcS 12 .ltf4 f6 13 .l:tac1 eS 14ltJbS exf4! IS .l:txcS fxg3 16 hxg3 .ltg4 17 l:Id2 (this position appears innocent enough, but Black has to be careful, because a knight on d6 can be a bother, and the move .. .f6 has weakened e6) 17 ... l:Ifd8! 18 ltJd6 .ltxf3 19 .ltxf3 and now:

b21) 19 ... ltJc8?! 20 eS! (D) brings the f3- bishop to life.

Sunye Neto-Bouaziz, Novi Sad Olympiad 1990 continued 20 ... ltJxeS 21 .ltdS+?! (this should only help Black; 21 .ltxb7! .l:tb8 22 .ltdS+ 'It>f8 23 l!.xc8 is good for White) 2l...'lt>h8?? (21...'lt>f8 improves the king's position) 22 llxc8? (22 .ltxb7! nb8 23 .ltxc8 wins because White has the ltJf7+ idea) 22 ... J:!.axc8 23ltJxc8 lIxc8 24 .1i.xb7 (White has bishop vs knight and a queenside majority) 24 ... 11c1 + 2S ~g2 g6 26 b3 J::tc7 27 .1i.a6 'Ot>g7 28 f4ltJf7 29 .ltc4 <,t>f8 30 <,t>f3 'Ot>e7 31 .l:te2+ <,t>d8 32li.e6, and White had increased his seemingly minor advantage and went on to win. b22) 19 ... ltJeS! can be met by 20 .ltdl, when 20 ... ltJc8?! favours White after Korchnoi's sug- gestion 21.l:lcdS, but Ribli's 20 ... ~f8! improves . So instead, 20 .lthS!? g6 21 .lte2 might be best. 10 dxc5 (D) White hasn't played this very much (espe- cially not in conjunction with 11 a3), preferring

286 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the moves 10 a3 and 10 d5, which theory ulti- mately pronounces equal. But after 10 dxc5, Black is under pressure to find an answer to the basic idea of e5 and ltJe4.

10. .. ..txc5

White's position is clearly preferable follow- ing 1O .. :ii'xdl 11 lhdl ..txc5 12 e5 with the ideas ltJe4 and a3. 11 a3!

11 e5 is the usual move, and has a lot of the-

ory behind it; Black can keep an approximate balance. 11 ... ltJd3 (D)

11...'iVxdl doesn't improve Black's situa-

tion after 121hdlltJc2 13l:r.a2!; for example, 13 ... ltJ2d4 14 b4ltJxf3+ 15 ..txf3 ..td4 16 I!.c2 ..tb6 17 ltJa4 ltJd4 18 ltJxb6 ltJxf3+ 19 'iitg2 axb6 20 ~xf3 e5. Black's bishop needs to get out, but he is in terrible shape after 21 :c7, 21 l:r.d6 or the sadistic 21 g4! (preventing ... f5). w 12 b4! ltJxc1 Tsesarsky analyses 12 ... ..td4 13ltJxd4 ~xd4 14 'iVc2 l:r.d8?, and now his 15 ..te3 is strong, but 15 l:r.dl! practically wins on the spot. 13l:r.xc1..tb6 Upon 13 ... ..td6, 14 ~e2! has in mind l:r.fdl or e5; and 13 ... ..te7 14 e5 (or 14 'iVe2) runs into the same type of structural issue.

14 e5 'iVe715 'iVe2 (D)

White has achieved the basic bind that he had in mind when playing 10 dxc5. He has greater space, a powerful bishop, a beautiful square on e4 for a knight (and queen), and an outpost on d6. If that weren't enough, there are definite kings ide attacking prospects! It's sur- prising, to say the least, that this line with 11 a3 hasn't been used more often . 15 ... ..td716ltJe4l:r.ad817l:r.c4?! (D) There are better moves such as 17 .l:tfd I! and

17 b5 !, with the point 17 ... ltJd4 18 ltJxd4 ..txd4

19ltJd6. Both of those give a substantial advan- tage, but the rook advance has a hidden pur- pose.

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 287

17 ... a6! A good reorganizing move: Black activates both his knight and passive bishop. w

18.l:.fc1 tDa7 19 'iWc2!? h6??

Tsesarsky gives some analysis of 19 ... tDb5 20 'iWd2!, when the queen shifts to the kingside to good effect. But both 19 ... i.b5 and 19 ... i.c6 are better, verging upon equality. 20 tDf6+! (D)

1-0 The rook on c4 comes through after all! 20 ... gxf6 21 l:tg4+ 'lith8 22 ~d2! 'lith7 23 l:th4 leads quickly to mate. Rubinstein System

[diagram]
tDc7 (D) Incidentally, 5 ... e6?! is considered an error because of 6 tDxd5 exd5 7 iVb3 and a pawn falls. This was confirmed in Gelfand-Kramnik, FIDE Candidates match (game 8), Sanghi Nagar 1994: 7 ... tDc6 (7 ... i.e6 8 ~xb7 tDd7 doesn't threaten anything) 8 ~xd5 ~xd5 9 i.xd5 tDb4 10 i.e4 f5 11 i.bl and Black had insufficient compensation. The approach with ... tDc7 is called the Rubin- stein System. Black's idea now is to play ... e5 and set up a sort of Maroczy Bind Sicilian in re- verse - more about which in a moment. The main positions of the Rubinstein very often arise after White has played tDf3 on an early move; for example, 2 tDf3 tDf6 3 tDc3 d5 4 cxd5 tDxd5 5 g3 tDc6 6 i.g2 tDc7. With any such move-order, Black needn't deal with various early options that White has in the next few moves below. However, you may note that this sequence allows 5 e4, as analysed above. Finally, I should say that Black can combine the move ... tDc7 with ... g6 and ... i.g7, which is much rarer and a bit suspect. I won't be cover- ing that. The Rubinstein Variation is a long-estab- lished and respected line. When you notice that in so many games Black will get the better position versus just slightly inaccurate or pas- sive play, you begin to understand why leading players have traditionally had so much respect for the Sicilian Maroczy Bind, which is the same opening with an extra tempo: 1 e4 c5 2 tDf3 tDc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tDxd4 g6 5 c4. Indeed, it's worth taking a look at this Sicilian line with 5 ... i.g7 6 tDc2 tDf6 7 tDc3, when we have a reversed version of the main line of the Rubinstein that comes from 5 ... tDc7 6 tDf3 tDc6 7 O-O e5; White's extra move in the Rubinstein is O-O. As we know, the study of re- versed positions often shows that things are not so simple, in that an extra move can impart information to the opponent. Nevertheless, the basic Maroczy structure should not be under- estimated. After 5 ... tDc7, White's main move is 6 tDf3. In the next game, we'll see the important 6 ~b3. Before turning to those, however, let's look at the slightly controversial forcing move 6 ~a4+ (D). This is important to know about, because it either forces Black into a passive position or wins a pawn: 6 ... i.d7 (6 ... tDd7 7 tDf3 followed by d4 is good for White; 6 ... iVd7 is playable but slightly depressing after simply 7 ~xd7+ tDxd7

288 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
.i.g2 ttJc7 6 ~b3!? By an attack on the b7-pawn, White compels Black's response. 6  ttJc6 7 ii.xc6+ bxc6 (D) w The structure has stabilized and we have the familiar sight of doubled c-pawns on an open file, as in several English Opening lines and in the archetypal Nimzo-Indian Defence. In com- mon with those cases, Black has the bishop- pair and will soon gain space via ... eS to com- pensate for his weaknesses. He can also operate down an open d-file and manoeuvre a knight to d4. On the other hand, by contrast with the Nimzo-Indian, his doubled, isolated c-pawns already stand on an open file and are therefore easily attacked. The dynamics of this trade-off are remarkable, and I'll address the fundamen- tal positional factors again over the next few moves. As an aside, I should say that the sequence 1 c4 cS 2 ttJc3 ttJc6 3 ttJf3 g6 4 d4?! (White should prefer 4 e3!, as described in Chapter 8, which is why Black tends to forego 3 ... g6) 4 ... cxd4 S ttJxd4 ii.g7 6 ttJc2 ii.xc3+ 7 bxc3 'tliaS is exactly the same as our line with 6 ~b3 ttJc6 7 ii.xc6+ bxc6 8 'iVa4, because White has taken an extra tempo with 'iVb3-a4 in the latter case. S'iYa4 This is the more forcing move-order, assum- ing that you want to play 'iVa4 at all, because it bypasses some irregular but dangerous gambits which can occur if you tarry on b3. It's also possible to keep the queen on b3 in order to save a move and perhaps influence central op- erations. An interesting example went 8 ttJf3 f6 (the conventional idea, preparing ... eS) 9 d3 eS

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 289

10 ~e3 ttJe6 (10 ... ~e6!? 11 "it'a4 "it'd7 has also been played, giving Black a more aggressive and natural set-up than when he has a bishop on d7 or c8; although this grants White easier ac- cess to the c-pawns, Black's kingside counter- attack is faster than usual, with unclear results; a curious answer to 10 ... ~e6 would be 11 ~a3!? c4 12 ~a4 cxd3 13l:td1 with unclear prospects in which White retains his structural superior- ity) 11 O-O ~e7 12l:tfc1 ttJd4! 13 ~xd4!? cxd4 14 ttJe4 (White is following the principle that the cS-square is the important weakness, re- gardless of whether a pawn is on it) 14 ... .ltd7 IS ttJcS!? (IS a3! l:tb8 16 ~c2 O-O 17 b4 would be positionally consistent, targeting cS) lS ... .l:Ib8! 16 ~a4 ~xcS 17 l:txcs l:txb2 and now White unleashed 18 ttJxeS!?, when 18 ... .l:Ixe2? 19 ttJxc6! gave him a strong attack in Lerner- Thorsteins, Lugano 1989, but Black should have accepted with 18 ... fxeS 19 nxeS+ <3;;f7 20 ~xd4 (20 'iVc4+ <3;;g6!) 20 ... l:tbS! 21 .lIxbS cxbS 22 ~xa7, when it's not completely clear, but Black's pieces coordinate well on the light squares after 22 ... l:te8. Now let's return to the position after 8 ~a4

8 ... ~d7 8 .. .'i*'d7 is frequently played, when White almost always replies 9 ttJf3. Then one example was Psakhis-Tukmakov, Rostov-na-Donu 1993: 9 .. .f6 10 d3 eS 11 ~e3 ttJe6 12 O-O .l:tb8 13 l:tab1 hS?! (too ambitious; Black should pre- pare to castle with 13 ... ~e7) 14 ttJe4 ttJd4 IS ~xd4 cxd4 16 l:tfc 1 l:tbS! 17 l:tc2 as 18 l:tbc1, and White had c-file pressure with outposts on c4 and cS. 9 ttJf3 f6 10 O-O e5 11 d3 ttJe6 (D) Here 1l...'iVb8! 12 .lIbl ~b4 13 ~c2 ttJbS has been suggested; it's consistent with Black's goal: active piece-play to counteract his weak- nesses. w 12 ttJe4 Two instructive alternatives: a) Sometimes a bald simplification suffices to give Black equality: 12 .lte3 .lte7 13 1:tfc1 ttJd4! 14 .ltxd4 cxd41S ttJe4 (so far, so normal) lS ... ~b6! 16 'iVc4 'iVb4!? 17 ttJcS "it'xc4 18 .l::txc4 ~xcS 19 .l:!.xcS <t;e7 20 ttJd2 Ithb8 21 b3 nbS 22 .l:.ac1 .:tab8 and White couldn't make progress in Mamedyarov-Wojtaszek, World Ju- nior Ch, Istanbul200S. b) You may be wondering why White doesn't attack the cS-pawn with b3 and .lta3, as he does in the Nimzo-Indian (via ... ii.a6). That's a reasonable idea, and 12 b3 .lte7 13 ii.a3 isn't bad. Black gets to show a new twist, however: 13 ... O-O 14 .l::tfc1 l:Ib8! IS ttJe4 (IS ~xa7?? .l:i.a8) lS ... .l::tbS! (D). w

290 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black is threatening ... l::ta5, winning a piece, so either the bishop has to retreat, to some ex- tent negating the purpose of b3/.ita3, or White plays 16 ~c4 ~h8, when ... ~a5 and ... ~d4 will equalize, and for the first time the attacking move .. .f5 is becoming relevant. Black has at any rate levelled the game.

12.  .ite7 (D)

Informator analysts show the line 12 ... ~d4? 13 ~xd4 cxd4 14 f4!, another theme to watch out for if Black is undeveloped. w 13 .ite3 ~d4 IS ~c4?! This gives Black time to get everything acti- vated. It was better to bring more pieces into play by 15l::tfcl "iWb6, with dynamic equality. IS  J:!b8 16 ~cS?! .itxcs A cautious move. Black could grab a pawn by 16 ... J:!xb2, or try to simplify by 16 ... .ith3! 17 nfcl J:!xb2 1811abll::txbl 19 J:!xbl ~d5!' 17 ~xcS ~b6 18 ~a3! ~xb2 19 ~xa7 J:!b7 20 ~cS ~f7 21 "iWc4+ .ite6! 22 ~xc6 J:!d8 23 nfel.itdS 24 ~cS .itxf3 2S exf3 "iWc3 26 J:!ac1! 'iVxd3 27 f4! White gets counterplay just in time. 27  exf4 28 "iWhS+! ~f8 29 J:!cdl J:!bS! 30 ':'xd3 J:!xhS 31 gxf4 112_112 Black is tied to the d-pawn, which limits his opportunities. This game illustrates a remark- able range of themes. Lputian - Leko Wijk aan Zee 2000

1 c4 cS 2 ~f3 ~f6 3 g3 dS 4 cxdS ~xdS S

~g2 ~c6 6 ~c3 ~c7 (D) For Black, this is the key move to save his W pawn on c5 and rid himself of one of White's best pieces. Generally ... ~d4 is better after .ite3 is played (shades of so many other English Opening lines).

14.itxd4

Not 14 ~xd4?!, which frees Black's bishops after 14 ... cxd4 15 .itd2 c5 16 ~c4 'iVb6! intend- ing ... .ite6. 14 cxd4 (D) w 70-0 Castling is the obvious move, and 7 d3 e5 8 O-O transposes. But after 7 d3 e5, the rare 8 ~d2 .itd7 (versus 9 .itxc6+) 9 ~c4!? is unique and potentially important: 9 ... b5 (if Black foregoes 9 ... b5 with 9 ... .ite7, then 10 f4! exf4 11 .itxf4 gives him a different set of problems, beginning with White's intention to put a piece on d6) 10 ~e3 b4 (this is the move given in the books; 1O ... .l:i.b8 11 O-O .ite7 is a logical option, when

12 a4 b4 13 ~cd5 might follow) 11 ~cd5

~xd5 12 ~xd5. This sequence may be more

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 291

important than indicated by the scant attention that it has received. A plausible follow-up is 12 ... i..d6 (Black saves the bishop that protects W the c-pawn) 13 0-00-0 (D). w In this complex position, White has control of the long diagonal, two excellent posts for his knight, and a vulnerable enemy c-pawn to at- tack. His first move might be 14 i..d2, with the idea liJe3-c4 and l:tel, or perhaps 14 b3 intend- ing i..b2 and e3. Black has more space and pro- spective attacks on both wings. He can play for .. JS-f4 with a knight on d4, and include an at- tack by ... ~e8-hS; whether that's realistic is an- other matter. All this should be looked at more closely; it may well be a productive way for White to im- prove upon the main lines, or at least try some- thing different. Apart from 7 O-O and 7 d3, White has these moves worth noting: a) 7 a3, preparing b4, is a standard anti- Maroczy Bind strategy. As it turns out, this plan is fairly useless after 7 ... g6!, since 8 b4?! i..g7! 9 bxcS liJe6 10 i..b2 liJxcs (with the idea ... i..e6) is effective; for example, 11 liJa4 i..xb2 12 liJxb2 i..e6 13 0-00-0 14 l:tel WiaS and Black stands somewhat better because of his supe- rior pawn-structure, Andersson-Portisch, Biel Interzonal 1976. b) The generally accepted solution to 7 Wia4 (threatening liJeS) is 7 ... i..d7 8 Wie4 g6! 9 liJeS i..g7 10 liJxd7 'ir'xd7 11 0-00-0 (D). Black is ready to play ... liJe6-d4. So White's main plan is to expand on the queenside by 12 a3 intending b4; for example, 12 ... l:tac8 13 l:tb1 (Black's main point is shown by 13 b4?! cxb414 axb4 liJbS!) 13 ... liJe6 14 b4 b6!? (or 14 ... cxb4 IS axb4 ~fd8! 16 bS liJaS) IS bS liJcd4 16 e3 liJfS 17 Wia4, Pigusov-Estremera Panos, Las Palmas 1996, and here 17 ... c4! captures the d3-square. Then best play is probably 18 i.c6! 'iVd3 19 1:!b4! liJgS! (with the idea 20 :!.xc4? liJf3+) 20 i.g2 i.xc3 21 dxc3 liJe4 22 i..xe4 ~xe4 23 Wixa7, when, if he feels he must, Black can take the draw with 23 ... liJh4 24 gxh4 ~g4+. 7 ... e5 (D) w 8d3 White has various alternatives which the reader may wish to investigate; for example: a) One significant variation, which also can be introduced on moves 6 and 7, begins with 8 b3. After i..b2, White wants to play ltel and ei- ther liJe4 or liJa4, attacking both cS and eS; he may also play liJe1-d3. a1) A respected solution is 8 ... i.g4 9 i..b2 ~d7; for example, 10 ltel f6 (or 1O ... liJe6) 11 liJe4 liJa6. Black's knight goes to a6 fairly often in the Rubinstein, usually in order to protect the

292 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

cS-pawn. He might choose that square for it, in- stead of e6, so as to deter the move b4, or sim- ply because a knight on a6 stays out of the way of other pieces. This is a complex position with mutual chances. One possibility is 12 tbel (heading for d3) 12 ... Ji.e7 13 f3 (not 13 tbd3? ~xd3) 13 ... Ji.hS 14 tbd3 Ii.d8, and the game is roughly level. White should probably pass on IS tbexcS?! tbxcs 16 tbxcs 'iYxd2 17 ~xd2 .l:i.xd2 18 tbxb7 .l:txb2 19 .l:i.xc6 O-O!. a2) Black can also play more convention- ally by means of 8 ... Ji.e7 9 Ji.b2 O-O 10 ZIc1 f6 with an interesting game. After 11 tba4 b6, 12 tbxeS? fails because the a8-rook is defended; this idea crops up in several openings. b) 8 tbel (D) has the idea of .i.xc6+, 'iVa4 and tbd3, when the enemy centre becomes vul- nerable.

Theory has never quite settled down in this popular line. Black has many solutions, none terribly clear: bl) 8 ... Ji.d7 9 tbd3 f6 10 b3 Ji.e7 11 f4 exf4 12 tbxf4 O-O 13 .i.b2 ~h8 14 e3 .i.e8 IS ~e2 and White stood comfortably better in Kosten- Coenen, San Sebastian 1995. b2) 8 ... .i.d6!? 9 Ji.xc6+!? bxc6 10 'iVa4 O-O! (an obscure position arises from 1O ... .i.d7 11 tbe4 .i.e7 12 tbd3 .i.h3 13 tbxeS ~dS 14 ~xc6+ ~xc6 IS tbxc6) 11 b3 (11 ~xc6 .i.h3 12 tbg2 tbe6 with an attack) 1l....i.h3 12 tbg2 tbe6 13 .i.a3!? tbd4 14l:!.adl 'iVe7 IS f3 fS 16 e3 (Tomashevsky-Khismatullin, Moscow 2006) 16 ... tbe6! 17 ~xc6 Ii.fd8 (or 17 .. Jbc8) is un- clear. b3) 8 ... .i.fS, preventing tbd3, is perhaps best met by 9 d3 with the idea f4. b4) 8 ... ~d6!? needs a look. Again, 9 d3 with the idea f4 is a reasoned response. Then 9 ... tbe6 10 tbc2 Ji.e7 11 tbe3! with the idea tbc4, and in some cases f4, is promising. bS) 8 ... hS 9 tbf3 (9 tbd3 h4! 10 Ji.xc6+?! bxc6 11 tbxeS? hxg3 12 hxg3? ~gS is win- ning; 9 f4 h4 10 d3 hxg3 11 hxg3 Ji.d6 gives Black great activity and White's king is ex- posed) 9 ... .i.e7 10 h4 Ji.g4 11 d3 ~d7 12 a4 O-O with approximate equality, Bricard-Bauer, French Ch, Val d'Isere 2002. b6) 8. .. Ji.g4 is considered the critical test: 9 Ji.xc6+ (9 tbd3? ~xd3! 10 f3 Ji.xf3 11 Ji.xf3 'iVd7 and White lacks enough compensation) 9 ... bxc6 10 ~a4 ~d7 11 tbd3 f6 12 f4!? (12 f3 Ji.fS 13 tbf2 .i.e7 14 d3 produces a completely unbalanced position; after 12 b3, l2 ... Ji.xe2!? is not forced, but play might go 13 tbxe2 ~xd3 14 ~xc6+ ~d7 IS ~xd7+ ~xd7 16 Ji.b2 Ji.d6 17 f4) l2 ... ~d4+ (12 ... tbdS 13 tbf2) 13 .l:!f2 'iVxa4 14 tbxa4 c4 IS tbdcS O-O-O (IS ... nb8 16 fxeS fxeS 17 d3 is again unclear) 16 b4 (16 fxeS!? fxeS 17 b4) l6 ... exf4 17 gxf4 with bal- anced play, Bergfalk-Larsson, correspondence game 1992. 8 .. Ji.e7 9 tbd2 (D)

Until you've studied this variation for some time (preferably in conjunction with the re- versed set-up in the Maroczy Bind Sicilian), you may wonder how White can possibly ne- glect his development in a position where he has already given up space and the centre. In fact, he will even move the knight a third time next move (to c4)! The first part of White's jus- tification is the easiest: he threatens 10 Ji.xc6+, after which his knight will be perfectly placed

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 293

on c4, and Black's pawns will be too weak. Thus Black must defend with a passive move. 9 .. i.d7 10 ttJc4 Now White gains another tempo with the threat of 11 i.xc6 and 12 ttJxe5. 10 ... f6 Black protects the e-pawn, albeit at the seem- ingly modest cost of loosening the light squares along the a2-g8 diagonal. With 1O ... f6, Black has agreed to contest the most popular line of the Rubinstein Variation, from which the top grandmasters have begun countless battles. I'm going to provide very selective analysis about the ingenious pawn sacrifice 1O ... O-O!? 11 i.xc6 i.xc6 12 ttJxe5 i.e8 (D), although it may deserve more. White has won a centre pawn and has no weaknesses! What is Black up to? It turns out that this position has its own idiosyncratic char- acter. He has two bishops, to be sure, but these are only truly effective in combination with the position of White's knight, which has no good retreat-square when attacked; for example, on c4 it can be pushed back by ... b5, and on f3, the al- ready dangerous move ... i.c6 gains in strength. When you add to that the fact that White has weak light squares around his king (with no light-squared bishop) and that his e-pawn can't move without creating a weakness on d3, you can see how Black dares to sacrifice the pawn. From White's point of view, he can take comfort in the fact that he has captured one of the most important pawns on the board. More- over, his remaining bishop is his 'good' one (unobstructed by his centre pawns), and for a move or two, Black's pieces will be passively placed. In the chess of the past few years, Black has been foregoing 10 ... O-O in favour of 1O ... f6; that may be a sort of conservatism, or it may re- flect some difficulties with 10 ... O-O. Here are two lines that might be considered problematic for Black: a) 13 e4 has been underrated, in my opinion. White develops his bishop at the cost of ceding the d4-square: 13 ... i.f6 14 ttJg4 i.d4 15 ttJe3 i.c6 16 ttJf5 ttJe6 (D). w 17 ii.e3!? (17 ttJxd4 ttJxd4 18 i.e3 looks smarter; Schussler-Donaldson, Malmo 1985 went 18 .. .f5 19 ii.xd4 ~xd4 20 ~b3+ 'it'h8 21 ttJe2 ~d7 22 f3 ii.b5 23 ttJf4 with a clear ad- vantage for White) 17 ... g6 18 ttJh6+!? (or 18 ttJh4) 18 ... 'it'h8?! (18 ... 'it'g7 appears better) 19 ~b3! ii.xe3 20 fxe3 'i!Vxd3 21 ttJg4 with the idea of J:1adl, Granda-de la Villa, Leon 1997. White has the upper hand in all lines; the game went 2l...'i!Vd8 22 ttJd5'i!VaS (versus ~c3+) 23 ttJe5! with a definite advantage. b) 13 'i!Vb3 is more abstract than 13 e4, in that the move is an annoyance as much as it is a plan. White peeks at b7, pins the f7-pawn and discourages ... ttJe6 in some lines because he can reply with either ttJd5 or ~d5. He is ready to develop his queen's bishop, and waits to see how his opponent will proceed. In Piket-Kaspa- rov, Internet 2000, Black attacked by 13 ... ii.f6 14 ttJg4 i.d4 (various analysts give 14 ... i.c6 15 ttJxf6+ 'i!Vxf6 16 i.e3 ttJe6 17 ttJe4 ~f5 18 f3 when White, still a pawn up, obviously has the better of it) 15 e3 (Franco says that 15 ~xb7 lIb8 16 ~xa7 is worthy of attention - then Black has serious attacking chances based upon the moves ... c4, ... i.c6 and .. .f5-f4, which is

294 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

frightening, but White is three pawns ahead, af- ter all! I would hate to have to assess this posi- tion after, say, 16 ... ttJe6; at any rate, I doubt that White stands worse) 15 ... i.xc3 16 ~xc3 b6 17 f3!? i.b5 (D). w 18 ttJf2?! (18 .i:.dl! f6 19 e4!) 18 ... ~d7?! (18 ... ttJe6!) 19 e4! (finally getting the bishop out; development trumps weaknesses in almost all of these notes) 19 ... ttJe6 20 i.e3 as 21l:!.adl :ad8. Here White is still a pawn up and Black doesn't appear to have enough compensation after 22 I!.fel, since 22 .. .f5 can be answered by 23 f4!. Naturally, these lines remain wide open to improvement.

11 f4 (D)

White seizes his chance to attack the keyeS point. I won't be looking at the preventive 11 a4; according to theory, Black holds the bal- ance.

[diagram]
11...exf4 12 i.xf4 gives White the chance to

put a piece on d6, which is all the worse when ... f6 has been played and moves such as ~b3 and ttJd5 would cause more harm than other- wise. 12 ttJe3 (D)

12 .. Jlc8 Black plays this more often than anything else. A critical alternative is 12 ... exf4 13 ttJf5!? b4 (13 ... fxg3?! 14 ttJxg7+! Rf7 15 ttJh5 gxh2+

16 Rxh2 has ideas of ttJe4 and getting a queen

to either b3 or h5) 14 ttJxe7 "fixe7 15 ttJe4 (Akopian-Leko, Ubeda 1997 saw the fairly promising alternative 15 i.xf4 bxc3 16 i.xc7 lIc8 17 i.f4 cxb2 18 nbl O-O 19 nxb2, when White's active bishops make up for his weak central pawn-structure) 15 ... ttJe6 (D). 16 gxf4 (with this move, White intends f5 and i.f4, but since he can't do that, 16 i.xf4! ttJxf4 17 lIxf4 may be best; then Black's c- pawn can be attacked, and White's pieces are

ASYMMETRICAL VARIATIONS 295

active) 16 .. .fS! 17 LtJg3 0-018 a31:!ab8 19 axb4 l':!xb4 20 na6 ~d6, Akopian-Ruck, European Ch, Ohrid 200 I. Out of the many factors to con- W sider, Black's strong central position carries a lot of weight, and should guarantee at least equality. 13a4 White initiates the standard break on the queenside: not only does it prepare the follow- ing intrusion into Black's position, but it also clears c4 for a knight. If White wants to conquer more territory on the kingside and secure the attractive e4-square for his other knight, he can advance his f-pawn. However, by so doing he permanently gives up any challenge to what is after all the bastion of Black's position, the pawn on eS. The game Smejkal-Suetin, Novi Sad 1982 saw Black equalize after 13 fS O-O 14 .Bd2 ttJd4 IS J::tc1 .Be8 (or IS ... Rh8 16 ttJe4 ttJa6 17 g4 .Bc6 18 nf2 ~b6, as given by Ribli) 16 ttJe4 LtJa6 17 ttJdS .ihS!. 13 ... b4 14 ttJb5 14 ttJcdS is also played, when neither theory nor practice has settled upon a verdict.

14. .. exf4 (D)

15 gxf4!? A fork in the road: a) According to Franco, theory favours White after IS ttJc4 fxg3 16 ttJbd6+ Rf8 17 ttJxc8 (L.Dominguez's suggestion of 17 hxg3l:!b8 18 ttJfS!? .ixfS 19 nxfS should be considered) 17 ... gxh2+ (D). The resulting position is as murky as any- thing else in this line. It appears to me that White's exchange won't mean much with his king potentially exposed and Black having ex- tra pawns. Camacho-Ramos, Match (game 2), Cuba 2003 continued 18 Whl ~xc8 19 .tf4 LtJd4 20 ttJd6 ~a6 21 LtJbS?! (21 LtJc4) 2l...ttJce6 22 .txh2, and here 22 ... b3 would negate White's main idea of e3 because of the fork on c2. Black stands somewhat better in that case. b) IS .Bxc6 fxe3! (IS ... .Bxc6?! is specula- tive, and too much so: 16 ttJxa7 .tb7 17 LtJxc8 fxe3 18 ttJb6! hS - the point, for better or worse - 19 .txe3 h4 20 Rf2 hxg3+ 21 hxg3 and Black's attack falters, Lputian-Perunovi6, Bos- nian Team Ch, Neum 2002) 16 .Be4 ttJxbS 17 axbS .txbS 18 ~xa7 O-O 19 .txe3 Rh8 20 ~al with equality, Aronian-Smimov, FIDE Knock- out, Tripoli 2004. In this line White has the more aggressive posture, and 20 lIfS! would have been a better way to scare up threats. 15. ttJxb5 16 axb5 ttJd4 17 .i:Ixa7 ttJxb5 18 .l:Ia6 (D)

The sequence of exchanges has resulted in a typical imbalance. White has the better outpost

296 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

on c4, but his centre is subject to attack down the open d- and e-files. It also turns out that Black's kingside can become vulnerable, a con- W sequence of the weakening ... f6.

18 . O-O (D)

w 19 f5?! This radical decision prevents Black from playing ... fS or putting a piece on that square; it also introduces the notion of a kingside attack by a rook-lift and 'iUf1-h3. The flip side is that White's knight is tied to defence of the pawn on fS. Black also gains eS for a bishop and, impor- tantly, a tempo for his central attack. With benefit of hindsight, I think that bring- ing the knight to an outpost by 19 tZ'lc4 was better. 19  tZ'ld4 20 J:l.f4! The idea is simply ..idS+, l:f.h4 and 'iVf1-h3. 20  ~h8 Or 20 ... ..ibS 21 ..idS+ ~h8 22 l:.h4 ..Bd6!; see the next note. 21 'iVn ..Bb5! (D)

22.l:.a7

22 ..idS can be met by 22 ... ..Bd6!, which con- tains the dual defensive ideas .. J:J.c7 and ... ..Bf4!. Then White's consistent move is 23 %:!'h4, when the computer-generated defence 23 ... ..Bf4!! 24 1:txf4 ..Bxa6 2S l:Ih4 h6 26 ~h3 ':c7 wins. The human being Leko gives 22 ... ..Bxa6 23 .l::th4 h6 24 'iVh3 'it>h7 2S tZ'lg4! 'iVxdS 26 J:l.xh6+ with a perpetual check. 22 c4! Now 23 J:l.xd4? 'iVxd4 24 J:l.xe7 runs into 24 ... cxd3 2S exd3 'iUcS!. The opening is over and Black holds all the cards, so I'll run through the moves and note only one tactical point. 23 dxc4 ..Bxc4 24 tZ'lxc4 .l::!.xc4 25 ..Be3 (D)

25 .. tZ'lc2! A pretty move, based upon 26 J:l.xc4 tZ'lxe3 27 ~c1 tZ'lxc4 28 'iUxc4 'iVb6+. 26 .l::ta8 J:l.xf4 27 ..Bxf4 'iVd4+ 28 'it>hl nxa8 29 ..Bxa8 'iUxb2 30 'iVdl b3 31 ..Be4 'iVd4 32 ~xd4 tZ'lxd4 33 ..Bc1 tZ'lxe2 34 ..Bb2 ..Bc5 35 ..Bd3 tZ'ld4 36 h3 tZ'lf3 37 ..Bc4 ..Bd4 0-1

10 The Hedgehog Variation

This chapter deals with a system sporting the odd name 'Hedgehog'. For those of you won- dering, the hedgehog is an animal covered by needle-like spines. In order to defend itself, the hedgehog curls into a ball, so that when an en- emy comes too close, it gets pricked by the spines. In chess, a similar concept is expressed by a position in which a player has little space to work with, but which is difficult for an oppo- nent to breach without encountering a sudden and sharp counterattack. Although the word 'hedgehog' had been floating around for years to describe various structures characterized by only second- and third-rank pawns, the name 'Hedgehog Variation' first came into widespread use (in several languages!) to describe specifi- cally the English Opening variation after 1 c4 c5 2 ttJf3 ttJf6 3 ttJc3 e64 g3 b6 5 iog2 i.b7 6 O-O i.e7 (or 6 ... a6 or 6 ... d6), usually with 7 d4 cxd4 8 'iVxd4 or 7 l:i.el followed by e4 and d4, with Black putting pawns on d6, b6 and a6. The diagram shows one of the main positions stem- ming from this move-order. w I use the name Hedgehog with a capital 'H' to refer to this English Opening variation, and the adjective hedgehog with a small 'h' to refer to black pawn-structures involving ... a6, ... b6, ... d6 and ... e6 that crop up in several other open- ings. In most hedgehog variations that we care about, Black's c-pawn has been exchanged, or is about to be. White's pawns can be on c4 and/or e4, as we have seen in the English Open- ing. That also occurs in many variations of the Sicilian Defence. In practice, the official Hedge- hog Variation of this chapter differs from oth- ers, in that White's bishop is always situated on g2. In most other English Opening variations and in the Sicilian Defence, it tends to be on e2, d3 or even c2. In Chapter 8, we see such a hedgehog formation in the Anti-Benoni system with 4 ... b6. The Hedgehog has been played a lot on the international circuit and at the grandmaster level of play, but not as much at lower levels. In the past 20 years it has gone from a rather eclec- tic set-up to a highly theoretical one, in the sense that top players engage in lines extending past move 20. Of course, this is hardly a unique situation in modern chess. Not only do grand- masters play lengthy theoretical lines in open- ings such as the Sicilian Najdorf, Botvinnik Semi-Slav, and main-line King's Indian, but we also see 'ordinary' players doing so in tour- naments and on the online playing sites. The difference is that the Hedgehog developed as an opening that primarily involved positional themes and not overtly forcing lines. The clar- ity of those themes has made it one of the most written-about variations in the English Open- ing. If you like positional manoeuvring, and are willing to put some time into learning a few tac- tical lines, the Hedgehog remains a fun and in- structive option from both sides of the board.

[diagram]
The question is: how does one get to the English Opening Hedgehog Variation? It's im- portant to realize that Black can't always play the Hedgehog, and see in what ways White can aim for or steer clear of it. Here are some major move-order possibilities: a) 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 (after 2 ... b6 3 ttJf3 i.b7, White can play 4 e3! and 5 d4 to claim a pleas- ant game) 3 g3. Now Black's best shot at a

298 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Hedgehog Variation is to play 3 ... e6 4 lbf3 (with the idea 4 ... d5 5 cxd5 exd5 6 d4; White doesn't usually want to permit 4 .i.g2 d5) 4 ... b6 5 .i.g2 .i.b7, etc., which is our main line. b) 2 lbc3 lbf6 3 lbf3 b6 (3 ... e6 4 d4 cxd4 5 lbxd4 is a standard position in which Black generally plays 5 ... lbc6, 5 ... .i.b4 or 5 ... a6, none of them leading to positions from this chapter)

4 d4 (4 g3 .i.b7 5 .i.g2 e6 is a Hedgehog Varia-

tion; White can also play 4 e4 .i.b7 5 e5, or here 5 .i.d3 with the idea .i.c2 and d4) 4 ... cxd4 5 lbxd4 .i.b7 (5 ... e6 6 e4) 6 f3 followed by e4 transposes to an Anti-Benoni hedgehog forma- tion from Chapter 8 (beginning with 4 ... b6). This differs greatly from the variation we are discussing in this chapter, because White's bishop will go to e2 instead of g2. 2  lbf6 (D) Once again, Black can play 2 ... b6 3 d4 (3 g3 .i.b74 .i.g2 lbf6 5 lbc3 e6 brings us back to the main line) 3 ... cxd4 4 lbxd4 .i.b7 5 lbc3 lbf6 6 f3 d6 7 e4 e6 and we have transposed to the Anti-Benoni from Chapter 8. w 3 lbc3 This is equivalent to 2 lbc3 lbf6 3 lbf3. Here, too, 3 d4 cxd4 4 lbxd4 prevents the Hedgehog proper. What this means, in conjunction with the last few notes, is that most of the time after I c4, it's White's choice whether to enter into the Hedgehog, and in reality, most players don't choose to do so. But that isn't the whole story. In fact, the popularity of the Hedgehog at the top levels comes primarily from games that begin with 1 lbf3. Then, as you can work out for yourself, the number of ways that Black has of getting to a Hedgehog becomes higher. For example, one common sequence is 1 lbf3 lbf6 2 c4 b6 3 g3 .i.b7 4 .i.g2 e6 5 O-O .i.e7 6 lbc3 c5. If you look at the entire set of lnfonnators, which are domi- nated by grandmaster play and have over 600 true Hedgehog games, you find that, depending upon the subvariation, from 60% to 90% of those games begin with 1 lbf3, often 80% or more. This strange situation goes back to the fact that a significant minority of leading play- ers don't want to play on the white side of 1 c4 e5, although they otherwise like playing the English Opening. So they play 1 lbf3 followed by 2 c4. Whether that is strictly logical or merely understandable depends upon your interpreta- tion of the first section of this book. It's true that a very large number of players answer 1 c4 with 1...e5, so from that point of view White might want to avoid it. If nothing else, bypass- ing 1...e5 cuts down on one's preparation time. On the other hand, playing against 1. .. e5 can be a lot of fun and give the kind of complex game that most players want. Finally, having pointed out that 1 c4 allows Black to dictate matters with 1...e5, I should say that 1 lbf3 also cuts down on your flexibility in crucial ways. To cite one example of many, White has to deal with 1...d5, when an English Opening is no lon- ger on the cards. In that situation we have possi- bilities including the Queen's Gambit and the Reti Opening, the latter to be discussed in the next volume. Having said all that, let's return to the Hedge- hog itself.

[diagram]
Again, 3 ... b6 can be used by those who don't mind playing against 4 d4 cxd4 5 lZJxd4 or 4 e4. This book won't deal with the Double Fianchetto line that combines ... g6 and ... b6.

4 g3 b6 5 .i.g2 .i.b7 6 O-O (D)

White can accelerate his Hedgehog set-up by 6 d4 cxd4 7 'ii'xd4, but this has the drawback that 7 ... lbc6 is better than similar lines below, because 8 ~f4 .i.b4 develops apace. Then the threat of ... .i.xc3+ and subsequent pressure along the c-file (already well underway) usu- ally leads to 9 .i.d2 O-O 10 O-O, and now the move 1O ... .i.e7! sets up a standard position in which White's bishop is quite misplaced on d2. In fact, it would be better off on c 1; for one thing, variations with ~f4 tend to go well with

THE HEDGEHOG VARIATION 299

b3 and i.b2. Don't worry if you find this con- fusing; as you might guess, it's a practical sum- mary which you might want to investigate by B studying the specifics.

[diagram]

Here White's knight looks at c6; this is a better version of the bishop exchange than White usually gets. Sorokin-Yudasin, USSR Ch, Moscow 1991 continued 1l...'iVc7 12 e3 a6 (early on in Hedgehog practice, it was deter- mined that endings after 12 ... ~7+ 13 ~f3 were difficult for Black to play, and provided him no positive prospects) 13 f4!? g6 (13 ... O-O 14 'iVf3 challenges Black' s light-square control, and after 14 ... l:.ac8 IS g4! liJcs 16 gSliJfd7 17 .:tadl l:tfe8 18 h4, White had space and better minor pieces in Andersson-A.Sokolov, Bilbao 1987) 14 'iUf3 l:.c8 IS g40-0 16 gS liJhS 17 .:tadl with a small but steady advantage for

300 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White. So 6 ... d6 has a few unique problems in- volving b3; a careful examination will reveal other issues. b) 6 ... a6 (D) used to be more popular. w Again, White sometimes plays b3, .tb2, e3 and an early d4, when ... a6 may not be so use- ful. But a more interesting line is 7 d4 (as men- tioned above, 7 l:!.el achieves 8 e4 more easily than after 6 ... .te7, that is, ... a6 would be virtu- ally a tempo-loss in lines where ... dS or ... ttJe4 might be contemplated) 7 ... cxd4 8 'iVxd4 d6 9 b3 (on the positive side, Black's choice of6 ... a6 rather than 6 ... .te7 means that after the popular idea 9 .tgS, 9 ... ttJbd7 prepares for ... ttJxf6 to be the answer to .txf6; compare the games below) 9 ... ttJbd7 (after 9 ... .te7 10 .ta3, Black already has problems with his d-pawn) 10 ttJgS (D).

This move pops up again and again, al- though it usually achieves nothing special ver- sus accurate play. In this position, however, the move-order seems to favour White, which may argue against playing ... a6 too early. The game M.Osborne-Cox, Coulsdon 200S contin- ued 1O ... .txg2 11 Rxg2 llc8?! (this idea of . .. .l:tc8-c6, to defend the d-pawn, works well in some positions, but not here; the best option is probably 11....te7; for example, 12 ttJge4 tiJcs 13 .tb2 O-O, but White still has the edge after 14 .lIadl, since 14 ... dS!? IS tiJxf6+ .txf6 16 ~g4 gives White pressure on dS) 12 tiJge4 .l':i.c6 13 .ta3! tiJcs (13 ... tiJxe4 14 tiJxe4 tiJcs IS l:tadl tiJxe4 16 'iVxe4 ~c7 17 f4! .te7 18 fS is positionally disastrous) 14 .txcS bxcS IS ttJxf6+ gxf6 16 'iV e4 .lIc 7; and here 17 .lIad 1! is strong, with the idea 17 ... fS 18 ~f3 .tg7 19 e4!. This shows how difficult it can be to coun- ter lines in which White targets d6. c) 6 ... tiJc6 is a very different system from the standard Hedgehog; Black wants to react to d4 with a trade of knights on that square. A po- tential irritation is caused by 7 d4 (7 e4 'iYb8 8 d4 cxd4 9 tiJxd4 tiJxd4 10 'iVxd4 is another nor- mal move-order) 7 ... tiJxd4 8 tiJxd4 .txg2 9 tiJxe6!? dxe6 (9 ... fxe6 10 ~xg2 dS was played in Delaune-de Firmian, Philadelphia 1987; then one attractive line is 11 .tf4 .te7 12 e4! dxe4 13 ~a4+ ~d7 14 ~xd7+ ~xd7 IS .lIfel with a positional advantage due to Black's weak pawn on e6) 10 ~xg2 .te7, Schandorff-Mortensen, Danish Ch, Alborg 2000, and now 11 e4 takes over more territory, with White having the better bishop. That may not be much, but it would be discouraging to play such a position with Black after only eleven moves. We return to 6 ... .te7 (D): w As was made clear by the discussion above, there are two main topics to consider here: the

THE HEDGEHOG VARIATION 301

standard Hedgehog lines following 7 d4 cxd4 S 'iWxd4, and White's alternative approach with 7 l::tel. w Traditional Line with 8 'iYxd4 7d4 White has played this way for many years; however, as we shall see in succeeding games,

[diagram]
d4, we'll look at games featuring the original territory-grabbing philosophy, and then ones in which White relies upon piece-play. 7  cxd4 (D) w 8 'iVxd4 Years ago, the Hedgehog suddenly gained in popularity when it became clear that S ttJxd4 i.xg2 9 ~xg2 didn't give White any advantage at all; for example, 9,,:~cS (9".a6 is slightly more flexible, perhaps holding out more win- ning chances, at the risk of undergoing a bind) 10 ~d3 ttJc6 11 b3 ttJeS 12 'iVe3 'iVb7+ 13 f3 ttJg6 (or 13".d6) 14 :dl (14 i.b2 hS! with the idea ".h4 is Carsten Hansen's suggestion) 14".O-O (this is another good time for 14".hS!, when the rook on hS supports the pawn) IS i.b2 hS!? (having castled, this timing is a little funny, but the flank attack is still useful) 16 'iVd3!? h4 17 e4 ttJhS threatening ".ttJhf4+, but also putting pressure on g3, Nei-Gurgenidze, USSR Ch, Kharkov 1967.

[diagram]
You might wonder why Black wouldn't be thrilled to win an immediate tempo via S".ttJc6

The basic problem with the move is rather technical. It stems from the fact that in hedge- hog formations, including ones in the Sicilian Defence, this knight has the most influence from a more flexible post on d7; in fact, Black will sometimes move a knight from c6 by means of ".ttJeS-d7, even at the cost of some time. In part this is because Black wants his bishop on b7 to have an unobstructed view; then, for ex- ample, it can attack a white pawn on e4, which can be further bothered by ".ttJcS. This ma- noeuvre ".ttJc6-eS-d7 arises in the Taimanov Sicilian when White plays ttJbS and c4, but in that variation White wastes a lot of time to get one knight to the mediocre a3-square, whereas in our current Hedgehog position, White doesn't commit to e4 until he sees where Black's pieces are going. That said, ".ttJc6 has some easily compre- hensible advantages: it gains a tempo, no small matter, and it contests the d4-square, denying White's minor pieces access to it without the possibility of exchange. Usually White is will- ing to exchange queens following 9 'iVf4 (9 'iVd3 is also played) 9".'iVbS (a standard idea, to contest d6; Black understands that in the static position after 9".d6, the knight will be some- what misplaced on c6, as just described) 10 ttJbS!? (10 b3 and 10 e4 are common alterna- tives) 10".O-O 11 ~xbS (11 ttJc7? eS! 12 ttJxeS "ilxc7 13 ttJxc6 i.d6!) 11....i:i.axbS 12 i.f4 :bdS

13 i.d6 (13 .l:i.fdl may be underrated; for ex- ample, 13".dS 14 ttJeS! ttJxeS IS i.xeS ttJg4!?, Barcza-Rossolimo, Vrsac 1969, and now the clever 16 i.d4! eS 17 i.c3 i.cS IS e3 would force Black to do something about the attack on

302 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

d5; White wins a pawn following 18 ... e4 19 b4 iLe7 20 cxdS and tiJxa7) 13 ... iLxd6 14 tiJxd6 iLa8 IS l:tfdl lib8 16 lId2 l:tfd8, Korchnoi- Barcza, Leningrad 1967. White stands mildly better after slow moves, but Mili6 suggests 17 tiJgS!, which ties Black down while White's centre can advance; for example, 17 ... l::tf8 18 e4 h6 19 tiJf3 libd8 20 liel tiJe8 21l:tedl with a healthy advantage. Hubner - Kasparov Tilburg 1981

[diagram]
iLb7 6 O-O iLe7 7 d4 cxd4 8 'ilVxd4 d6 (D) w Here's one of the key Hedgehog positions, and the starting point for the great majority of Hedgehog battles until about a decade ago. It is still the main line, followed closely by 7 .l:!.el. I want to show a few classic and modem games with 7 d4 containing the kind of ideas common to the Hedgehog. First, after 8 'ilVxd4 d6 what's going on? For one thing, White has more com- mand of space (all the more so after Black plays ... tiJbd7). He has potential pressure against Black's weak pawn on d6; this can be devel- oped via l:Idl, b3/iLa3, and tiJbS, tiJe4 or tiJg5- e4. White is also weakness-free. His plans are varied and fundamentally different: he can play for space with a 'Maroczy Bind' pair of pawns on c4 and e4, or he can stick to piece-play, with some combination of .l:tdl, iLgS, b3/iLb2, and tiJd4 (along with a variety of other piece de- ployments). For a while, the latter idea discour- aged Black, in the sense that it seemed difficult to scare up counterpJay when White didn't com- mit his e-pawn. Just to make it worse, White has long-term prospects of a kingside pawn ad- vance (f4/fS/g4/gS in some mix) or a queenside advance (a4/aS/b4/CS). The Hedgehog has been championed by nu- merous great players, so naturally Black's posi- tion can't be all that bad. It has, I think, fewer positive aspects than White's position, but more powerful ones. As in the Sicilian Defence (with the same weak d-pawn on an open d-file), Black has that most underrated of all advan- tages: the central pawn-majority. A central ma- jority not only has the potential to expand, but it covers more key squares than a single-pawn centre does. Here, for example, the hedgehog centre controls not only eS and dS, but also cS and fS. This makes it difficult for White to ad- vance in the centre, and even more difficult to plant a piece there. Also, notice Black's minor- ity attack with ... a6 and ... bS. "Wait a minute," you might say, "Why would achieving ... b5 mean anything? White can simply capture on bS and he has even gained the chance to cre- ate a passed pawn immediately with b3 and a4." There are two separate considerations here. First, a passed a-pawn in the opening or middle- game tends to be as much a liability as an asset; it will often become a target before it ever be- comes a threat. But in any event, what does the disappearance of White's c-pawn signify? That Black's central majority has a much better chance of advancing, creating positive oppor- tunities in all stages of the game. Black has other things going for him. Since his centre gives him a certain invulnerability, Black has a lot of time to get his pieces out and use them in both active and reactive ways. For

THE HEDGEHOG VARIATION 303

example, knights on cS and f6 in conjunction with a bishop on b7 exert pressure on e4, and rooks on squares like c8, d8 and e8 can assist in making central defence and offence more ef- fective. Last, but by no means least, experience has shown that Black's particular structure and piece placement have a surprising elasticity. With only three ranks to work with, they have as many or more options as do White's pieces with five ranks to operate on. This is best shown by example. 9b3 As suggested above, White has numerous moves here, such as 9 e4, 9 :dl and 9 ..tgS. In this game he sets up a c4/e4 pawn-structure.

9. .. O-O

Practice has shown that 9 ... ttJbd7?! 10 ttJbS! is very dangerous for Black, the tactical point being 1O ... ttJcS (lO ... dS 11 cxdS ..txdS 12 'iYf4 O-O 13 ..tb2 gives White good play down the d- file and/or c-file) 11l:!.d1 ttJfe4 12 ~xg7!? (12 b4 is also challenging, when Black might try 12 ... a6!?, or the unclear line 12 ... ..tf6 13 'iVe3 ..txa1 14 bxcS dS!) 12 ... ..tf6 13 'iYh6 ..txa1 14 ttJgS! ..teS? (14 .. :iH6! might hold on, accord- ing to analysis expanded upon by Kasparov), Korchnoi-Greenfeld, Beersheba 1990, and here Korchnoi demonstrated a win by IS ttJxe4! ..txe4 16 ..tgS! ~d7 (16 .. .f6 17 f4!) 17 f4 or 17 b4 ..txg2 18 bxcS.

10 e4 ttJbd7 (D)

w 11 ~e3 (D) White reorganizes his pieces in order to cen- tralize his knight on d4. The queen isn't doing much good on d4 at this stage, but it will remain in a position from where it can enforce the move eS as a response to dS. For example, 11 ... dS 12 cxdS exdS 13 eS, a sequence which is normally enough to establish a central superiority, and therefore to be remembered (if you're White, you always have to be ready to answer ... dS). Once White plays b3, with or without e4, the move ..ta3 in conjunction with :d1 can be a problem, because Black needs to shore up his vulnerable d6-pawn without making conces- sions. His move-order here with 1O ... ttJbd7 is specifically designed to meet that threat, since 11 ..ta3 ttJcS is very solid. In general, Black would like to answer the move ..ta3 in this way rather than by ... dS, which tends to be too loos- ening, or by a passive move such as ... ttJe8 (af- ter ... O-O).

11 .. a6 12 ttJd4 In the contests with 7 .lIel below, White plays e4 and d4, and when Black plays ... cxd4, White recaptures with the knight. That makes White's variation in this game seem inferior, because here his queen has to make two extra moves, to d4 and then e3 before the knight gets to d4. In addition, it can be argued that White's bishop stands better when centralized on e3 than on b2. That holds true in related openings, such as the Fianchetto Variation of the King's Indian Defence, where White operates with the same pawn-structure. Nevertheless, White might say that the tempo doesn't matter so much as long as Black can't enforce a freeing move; and in the meantime, White has avoided lines such as 7 .l:te1 dS and 7 lIel ttJe4. We'll talk more about these trade- offs in the next games. ... ~c713 ..tb2 lUeS! (D)

304 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Over the years this has become widely ac- cepted as the best square for Black's rook, for a variety of reasons. It increases Black's chance of playing ... d5 successfully, because after any exchange of pawns he will have an open e-file (vis-iI-vis the queen in the precise situation be- fore us). The rook is also well-placed to meet the idea f4-f5, attacking e6. White may even be able to reinforce that attack by .th3 at some point, so having the rook on e8 can be invalu- able. Finally, we already know that Black's pawn-breaks ... b5 and ... d5 are important, but the move ... e5 can be equally or more impor- tant. For example, a simple idea is ... e5, kicking White's knight off d4 and then playing ... b5. Also, in the many positions where White has a pawn on f4, ... e5 can lead to the opening of the e-file by Black's ... exf4, or by Black's recapture with a piece when White plays fxe5. In that case the rook on e8 exerts pressure down the e- file. All of which is not to say that White can't profit from the transaction as well, since he both gains access to d5 and f5, and opens the f- file for his rooks. Incidentally, ... lUe8 is also the most respected rook placement in the Scheveningen Sicilian, another variation with a hedgehog pawn-struc- ture, for many of the same reasons. 14h3!? This is a double-edged move. It stops ... ttJg4, which together with ... d5 and ... .ltc5 can cause trouble for White. However, although it's a rather obscure point at the moment, sometimes when White plays f4, the move h3 turns out to have weakened the g3-square, and by exten- sion, f4 itself. Thus the moves ... h5-h4 and ... ttJh5 are seen in games with this variation, and even ... d5, opening up the queen's view of f4 and g3 from its post on c7, followed by ... .td6. Karpov-Adams, Wijk aan Zee 1998 wasn't different in terms of structure but ended up with a different resolution of the tension: 14 l:!.ac1 l:tad8 15 .l:tfel 'iWb8 16 .l:te2 .tf8 (Black's last three moves have been played in many games: he gets the queen off the c-file, with .. :~a8 a possibility, and he prepares to give the bishop a more active role on g7) 17 h3 (notice that White is still able to answer 17 ... d5 with 18 e5, and Black's other potential break with ... b5 is under control for the moment) 17 ... g618l:!.cel!?(D).

A funny-looking position, but the tripling is a standard idea originally played by Uhlmann a few decades before. Karpov says that the func- tion of the rooks is "purely prophylactic ... to make the freeing advance ... d5 difficult for Black", that is, ... d5 will be answered by e5. The game continued 18 ... .tg7 19 ~d2 ttJc5 20 ~c2 'iVa8 21 a4 (versus ... b5) 2l....l:tc8 22 ttJf3 .l:ted8 23 ttJd2 (the knight has travelled from f3 to d4 to f3 to d2, and White is now ready to play moves like 'it>h2, b4 and f4, but Black acts just in time) 23 ... d5! (a mass exchange follows) 24 exd5 exd5 25 cxd5 ttJxd5 26 ttJxd5 .txd5 27 .txd5 ~xd5 28 .txg7 <tJxg7 29 ttJc4 ttJd3 30 .l:!.dl b5 31 axb5 axb5 32l:.ed2! bxc4 33 bxc4 1iVxc4 l/z-lh. 14 ... .tfS Black's plan proceeds along the lines of the game in the previous note.

15.t!.fel

15 f4 has been given a'?, due to 15 ... e5! 16

ttJf5 d5! and the ideas of ... .tc5 and ... d4 loom .

THE HEDGEHOG VARIATION 305

Nevertheless, 17 fxe5 il.c5 IS tiJd4 'i:Vxe5 19 tiJxd5 tiJxe4 20 l:tf4! (a computer-generated line) isn't so clear. 15 .. l:tadS 16l:te2 g6 17 l:tael The Uhlmann strategy. Watch how Kasparov treats it. 17 .. ~bS IS ~d2 il.g7 19 ~dl tiJc5 20 il.c1 This piece can't really go anywhere useful. 20 . l:tcS 21 il.g5 h6 22 il.c1l:tedS Black's rook has tracked the queen from the e-file to the d-file. 23 il.b2 (D) 23 ... b5! Finally Black breaks out with a one-two punch. In fact, 23 ... e5 24 tiJc2 b5 was a safer way to equalize, but less fun. 24 cxb5 d5! 25 exd5 If 25 e5? tiJfe4, there are issues with the e5- and c3-squares, but 26 tiJxe4 dxe4 would create a new problem: the outpost on d3. 25 ... tiJxd5 26 tiJxd5 il.xd5 27 b4! .ltxg2 2S 'iit>xg2 e5! 29 bxc5 exd4 (D) w

30 Itd2?

Not 30 bxa6? d3!, but Kasparov's pre-chess- engine note, "30 kIe7?! ~xc5! 31 'i:Vb3 l:.fS! 32 bxa6? .l:r.b5, winning", misses 33 ~f3! .u.xb2 34 a7 'i:VcS 35 lieS IheS 36 l:.xeS+ ~xeS 37 as'i:V, when only White can win. After 30 l:.d2, Black grabs the initiative, lead- ing to a great finishing attack.

30. .. l:.xc5 31 bxa6 'iVaS+ 32 'i:Vf3 'i:Vxa6 33

nedl lIf5 34 'i:Ve4 ~a4! 35 a3 1:teS 36 ~b7 lidS 37 kLd3?! h5 3Sl:tld2 'i:VeS! 39 ~n? .l:tbS 40 ~c7 1:txb2! 41l:txb2 'i:Ve4 42 ~c4 'i:Vhl+ 43 'it>e2 ~gl! 44 l:tbS+ ~h7 45 f4 h4! 46 ttb5 l:txb5 47 ~xb5 hxg3 4S ~g5 ~f2+ 49 ~dl ~n+O-l The end would be 50 'it>d2 (50 ~c2 ~e2+ 51 lId2 d3+ 52 ~c1llVel +) 50 ... g2 51ttg3 .lth6!. Larsen - Suba Las Palmas Interzonal 1982

[diagram]
il.b7 6 d3 This will become a Hedgehog soon. 6 . d6 7 i.g2 .lte7 S O-O O-O 9ttel a6 10 d4 cxd411 ~xd4 11 tiJxd4 would be the move these days, but White prefers to enter the type of game that we've just seen. 11 ... tiJbd7 12 b3 'i:Vc7 13 il.b2 l:tacS 14 h3 kLfdS 15 ~e3 .ltfS 16 tiJd4 OK, this is more-or-Iess normal. Both play- ers tack for a bit.

16. . J:teS 17 l:.e2 'i:VbS IS l:tdl g6 19 ~hl

.ltg7 (D) w 20 g4?!

306 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Often in this sort of position the players sim- ply shuffle back and forth for 20 moves or so until something appears (or doesn't). White's move and its follow-up make eminent sense; he just underestimates the dynamic potential bun- dled up in those pieces on the first few ranks. 20  h6 21 'ilVg3 tbc5 22 ..Ital?! e5! When neither ... b5 or ... dS is at your dis- posal, sometimes this move will do the trick. 23 tbc2 b5! 24 cxb5 tbcxe4 25 tbxe4 tbxe4 26 'iVd3?! 26 i.xe4 ..Itxe4+ 27 l:i.xe4 .l:!.xc2 is very good for Black; for example, 28 bxa6 'iWa8 29 'iVg2 l:txa2 30 ..Itc3 'i!Vxa6, etc. 26 ... tbc5 27 ~xd6?? l:ted8 0-1 The position was losing anyway. Naturally Black didn't win all the games in the systems with e4 and c4, but White began to look for lines based upon piece-play and offering fewer targets. Kramnik - Carlsen Wijk aan Zee 2008 1 tbf3 tbf6 2 c4 e6 3 tbc3 c5 4 g3 b6 5 ..Itg2 ..Itb7 6 O-O ..Ite7 7 d4 cxd4 8 'ilVxd4 d6 9l:tdl (D)

White plays a straightforward and flexible move that aims at the d6-pawn and coordinates well with an attack by pieces. White retains op- tions of ..Itg5, tbg5, b3 with either ..Itb2 or ..Ita3, and even e4. In general he wants to see which way Black plays next ( ... a6, ... O-O, ... tbbd7 or ... tbc6) before he commits to a formation. 9 ... a610 tbg5 This is one of the 'piece-play' approaches. White's first goal with this move, which is played in several related positions (see the note about 6 ... a6 in the chapter introduction), is to exchange off the light-squared bishops. This may seem odd, because White played 8 'iVxd4 in large part to avoid this exchange. However, because of the particular move-order that both sides have chosen, White wants to win the e4square in or- der to bring a knight there and exploit Black's lightly-protected d6-pawn in some lines. .... .Itxg211 ~xg2 tbc6 a) Timing is very delicate in the Hedgehog; for example, 11 ... l:ta7? is a good idea in general (see the next note), but very badly timed here, due to another combination of White's moves: 12 ..Ite3! tbbd7 (the threat on b6 compels Black to occupy the d7-square that his rook was sup- posed to use; as a result, the d-pawn can't be defended) 13 tbge4 O-O 14 tbxd6 'iVa8+ 15 f3 .l:!.d8 16 tbde4 and White keeps his extra pawn, Wojtkiewicz-Jurek, Bern 1993. b) Another strategy for Black is to fight back with ... d5; for example, 11...O-O 12 tbce4 d5, but White can put pressure on Black's d-pawn by the sharp 13 tbxf6+ ..Itxf6 14 'iVg4!, when 14 ... l:ta7 is met by 15 e4! l:td7 16 exd5 exd5 17 cxd5 .l:txd5?? 18 'iVe4. 12 'ilVf4 (D)

... O-O

An important manoeuvre in many Hedgehog positions is ... .l:ta7 with the idea of ... .l:.d7 (to protect d6) and .. :tWa8; the latter move gives Black activity on the diagonal, but also watches over his other potential weakness on c6. In- deed, 12 .. J:ta7 seems adequate to level things: a) 13 tbce4 lld7!? allows a cute trick, but one which leads to a theoretically satisfactory

THE HEDGEHOG VARIATION 307

game for Black: 14 lbxf6+ .llxf6 IS lbxh7! fLxh7 16 ~e4 (fork) 16 .. JIhS 17 ~xc6l:!.cS 18 ~a4. White wins a pawn, but Black can get counterplayby the accurate 18 ... ~a8+! 19 'it>gl ~c6!, as in Ribli-Wahls, Bundesliga 1988/9. b) 13 lbge4 fLd7 14 .lle3 lbeS! looks like a mistake due to IS lbxf6+ .llxf6 16 lba4, but in Kasparov-Ribli, Skellefteil. 1989, Black showed that 16 ... ~a8+! 17 'it>gl "iVc6 18 lbxb6 .l:i.b7 19 cS dxcS 20 lbc4 lbxc4 21 "iVxc4 .llxb2 22 fLabl O-O 23 ~xcS "iVa4! is completely equal. 13 lbce4 (D)

13 . lbe8! Simplification helps White in most varia- tions of the Hedgehog because it reduces the possibility of dynamic counterplay by Black, after which White can use his space advantage to concentrate upon Black's weaknesses. For example, after 13 ... lbxe4? 14 ~xe4 .llxgS IS .llxgS "iVc7 16 .llf4, Black can look forward to a lengthy stretch of passive defence.

14 b3 fLa7

In response to the radical counterattack by 14 ... bS!?, White can maintain control of dS with IS .lla3! (rather than giving up the centre by IS cxbS?), letting his pawn be isolated on c4 in or- der to exploit his quicker piece development. Af- ter IS ... bxc4 16 bxc4, Black saves his d-pawn by 16 .. :~a5!, hitting the knight on gS, but White still controls more space after 17 .llb2 h6 18 lbf3, when 18 .. .fS? is met by 19 lbxd6! lbxd620 fLxd6 eS 21 ~d2 .llxd6 22 "iVxd6 and White will win a second pawn for the exchange. IS .llb2 fLd7 16 fLacl lbc7! In many games before this one, Black had played 16 .. :ii'a8, generally leading to a small edge for White. 16 ... lbc7 defends e6 and thus threatens ... fS, winning a piece. Notice, too, that the knight controls the key squares d5 and bS. 17 lbf3 fS! This is concretely what Black is after: king- side expansion, with the objective of driving White's pieces back. 18 lbc3 gS! (D) w 19 'ii'd2! Carlsen offers the line 19 "iVe3 g4 20 lbd2 .llgS! 21 'ilt'xb6 'ilt'a8 22 f3 .l:Ib8 23 'ilt'f2 lbeS, which gives Black obvious compensation. 19 . g4 20 lbe1 .llgS 21 e3 The opening can be assessed as equal. Black played 21...Itff7 with the idea ... lbe8-f6, which was fine, and the more obvious 21..:ii'a8 22 'it>gl 'ii'b7 is also satisfactory. Kramnik - Aronian Rapid match (game 3), Erevan 2007 1 lbf3 lbf6 2 c4 e6 3 lbc3 cS 4 g3 b6 S .llg2 .ltb7 6 O-O .lle7 7 d4 cxd4 8 'ilt'xd4 d6 By another typical move-order we have reached the initial position of the main line. 9 .llgS (D) As in the previous game, White uses his pieces to develop quickly and attack the d6- pawn. His first plan is .llxf6 followed by bring- ing a knight to e4. 9 ... a6 If Black had the move ... a6 already in, he could play ... lbbd7 without any trepidation, planning to recapture on f6 with a knight. If he plays 9 ... lbbd7 now, however, he invites 10

308 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lLlbS; for example, W. .. dS 11 cxdS i.xdS 12 lLlc3 i.c6 13 .tIfdl h6 14 i.f4. Such a position is no fun to play. 10 i.xf6 This will temporarily divert Black's bishop from the defence of d6. Another line that has been played a fair amount is 10 .l:.fdl lLlbd7 11 ~d2, the main idea of which is to retreat White's bishop from gS to f4, undertaking to force a concession on Black's part: either ... eS or ... lLle8, in the latter case agreeing to White's expansion by e4. Theory holds that Black can level the play.

10.  i.xf6 (D)

11 ~f4 Thus we have the main starting position of the i.gS system. The play is highly technical and theoretical, but I'll try to show the basic ideas for both sides. 11 ~d3 also targets d6, but strangely, isn't used much any more. In Sulava-Pelletier, French Team Ch, Evry 2004, Black used the idea of the rook transfer we saw above: Il..J:ta7 12 l:tadl i.e7 13lLld4 i.xg2 14 ~xg2 'ii'c8 IS f4! (White wants to break down or at least expose Black's centre pawns by fS, so Black has to re- spond quickly) Is ... lLlc6 16 fSlLleS! 17 'ii'e40-0 18 fxe6 fxe6 19 .l:txf8+ i.xf8 20 lLlf3 (other- wise it's hard to get at Black's position, because the knight on eS is so strong) 20 ... lLlxf3! 21 exf3 J::.c7 (finally! Black levels the game with this counterattack) 22 .l:tel!? .J:!.xc4 23 ~xe6+ ~xe6 24 .J:!.xe6 .J:!.d4 with ... ~f7 next, equalizing.

11 .. O-O

Black used to play 11 ... i.xf3 12 'ii'xf3 .J:!.a7 more often, with the idea ... .J:!.d7. Then White has a small edge because of his greater com- mand of territory and targets in the enemy camp. Nevertheless, if Black is patient and de- fends accurately, he should come out all right. 12 .:tfdl i.e7 13 lLle4 i.xe4 14 'ii'xe4 .l:ta7 IslLld4 (D)

Is . JIVe8 Black attacks White's c-pawn and prepares ... l:tc7 and ... J::.d8 , as needed. Another popular defence is IS .. J::tc7 16 b3 .J:!.cS! (an active move that plans ... Wic7). Black has the idea of ... bS, so there follows 17 a4 'ikc7 and now the main the- oretical move is 18 'ikbl I?~ This looks a little crazy, but for one thing, the queen now escapes attacks that come from ... dS. In addition, before White doubles rooks, he wants to protect his back rank, again in anticipation of ... dS or even a timely ... bS. White has done well in such posi- tions; whether he has any objective advantage is another question. 16 b31Ie8 The earlier move 16 ... i.f6 may be easier to handle. For example, Anand-Adams, Sofia 200S

THE HEDGEHOG VARIATION 309

went 17 e31Id8 18 ~g4, and Adams suggests 18 ... lIc7! 19 .l:td2 ttJd7 20 l:f.adl ttJe5, equaliz- ing.

17 a4 ~c5 18 .l:ta2 ~h5

Black deviates from well-known theory at this point, perhaps more to create new prob- lems than out of dissatisfaction with the estab- lished lines. Kasparov put his queen on h5 versus Karpov in a similar position over 25 years earlier: 18 ... i.f6 (after 18 ... .l:td7, perhaps 19 a5!? bxa5 20 e3 is worth a try) 19 .i:tad2l:tc7 20 ~bl! i.e7?! 21 b4! 'iVh5 (21...~xc4?? 22 .l:tc2), Karpov-Kasparov, Moscow 1981, and Karpov says that he should have played 22 b5! (a later game saw 22 i.f3 ~e5 23 b5) 22 ... a5 23 ttJc6 i.f8, when White obviously stands better. 19 i.f3 ~e5 20 e3 .l:tc8 21 'iVbl This is similar to the previous note, but White has no b4 trick, and the game is level. Modern Line with 7 l:.e 1 Sarno - Shipov CappeUe la Grande 1995

[diagram]
i.b7 6 O-O i.e7 7 .l:tel (D)

[diagram]
Normally 7 ... d6 will transpose after 8 e4 a6 9 d4 cxd4, etc. Black has two conventional ways to avoid the hedgehog structure: a) 7 ... d5 was one ofthe main reasons why 7 .l:tel didn't catch on for so many years. Indeed, the rook move seems to have little role in this position. On the other hand, it can be argued that ... .i.b7 and ... d5 often don't go that well to- gether throughout the Queen's Indian/Bogo- IndianlNimzo-Indian complex, so that White can hope for a pull by playing normal moves. At any rate, here are two high-level recent ex- amples: al) Topalov-Carlsen, MorelialLinares 2007 saw 8 d4!? dxc4 9 dxc5 i.xc5 10 'iVa4+ ttJbd7 11 ~xc4 O-O 12 .l:tdl l:tc8 13 'iVh4 i.e7, and here White found the creative idea 14 'iVh3! 'iVe8 15 ttJd4 i.xg2 16 ~xg2 with modest pressure based upon the long diagonal and c6- square. a2) 8 cxd5 and now: a21) 8 ... exd5 9 d4 is clearly playable for Black, but more comfortable for White to play. You might want to look at Queen's Indian De- fence theory, including lines beginning with I d4 ttJf6 2 c4 e6 3 ttJf3 b6 4 a3 i.b7 5 ttJc3 d5 6 cxd5 exd5 7 g3, etc. The main line there reaches this position, but with White's pawn on a3 and no rook on el. a22) 8 ... ttJxd5 9 d4 (D) (9 e4 can be an- swered by 9 ... ttJxc3 10 bxc3, with a big centre for White, or by 9 ... ttJb4 10 d4 cxd4 11 ttJxd4 ttJ8c6 12 ttJxc6 'iVxdl 13 l:f.xdl i.xc6 with rough equality, though this last position takes accurate play and may not thrill Black; 9 ttJxd5 exd5 10 d4 O-O with ideas of ... ttJa6 and ... .l:te8 is equal and leads to a more exciting game).

9 ... ttJxc3 (or 9 ... cxd4 10 'iVa4+!? ttJd7 11 ttJxd5 .i.xd5 12 ttJxd4 i.xg2 13 ~xg2 O-O 14 ttJc6 ttJc5 15 ~b5 ~d7 16 .i.e3 ~h8 17 ttJd4 with equality, Aronian-Yakovenko, FIDE World Cup, Khanty-Mansiisk 2007) 10 bxc3 i.e4!? (this is an idea that you also see in the Queen's

310 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Indian Defence and Catalan Opening; Black prevents 'iVc2 or Vid3 followed by e4) 11 ttJeS! .i.xg2 12 ~xg2 O-O 13 e4 Vic8 14 ~g4 .i.f6?! (Black should challenge the powerful knight right away by 14 ... ttJc6 IS .i.h6 .i.f6 16 ttJxc6 Vixc6, although White still has a small edge af- ter 17 'it>gl eS!? 18 dS) IS ttJf3 'it>h8 16 h4! (with his possession of the centre, White is looking forward to exchanging some pieces) 16 ... ttJc6?! (White stands better in any case) 17 .i.gS! cxd4 (Black is trying to steer clear of 17 ... .i.e7? 18 dS! exdS 19 'iVxc8l:Iaxc8 20 exdS .i.xgS 21 hxgS, when White's passed pawn and rooks are much too strong; on the other hand, 17 ... .i.xgS 18 hxgS followed by taking over the h-file looks just as bad) 18 iLxf6 gxf6, Carlsen-Aronian, Candidates match (game 3), Elista 2007, and now 19 'iVf4! 'iVd8 20 cxd4 would have favoured White by a large margin (20 ... ttJxd4? 21l:tedl eS 22 ttJxeS!). b) 7 ... ttJe4 is another move resembling the Queen's Indian Defence. White can take the centre by 8 ttJxe4 .i.xe4 9 d3 .i.b7 10 e4 O-O 11 d4 cxd4 12 ttJxd4 with the hedgehog structure again. With a pair of minor pieces off the board I would give White the nod. As you can see, it will be easier for him to fend off radical pawn-breaks in this situation. Nevertheless, some players won't mind defending Black's position, which is still resilient.

8 e4 d6 9 d4 cxd410 ttJxd4 (D)

This is the point of 7 l:tel. White gets the customary Hedgehog position, but he has his knight on d4 and rook on el. Both of these can be considered improvements over the 'iVxd4 Hedgehog lines in which White plays e4. 10  :ilVc7 Watch out for 1O ... O-O? 11 eS!, winning ma- terial, based upon ll...dxeS 12 .i.xb7 l:ta7 13 ttJc6. 11 .i.e3 O-O 12 llc1 (D)

... ttJbd7 Delaying or foregoing this knight develop- ment in favour of 12 ... :e8 and perhaps 13 ... i.f8 involves some distinctions that are not critical to understanding the position, but you might want to revisit that move-order after reading this sec- tion. 13 f4llfe8 (D) We examine 13 ... hS!? in the next game. w 14g4 This threatens gS, winning the knight on f6. 14 fS also looks good, with the idea 14 ... eS IS ttJdS, when lS .. :ilVd8 is playable but a bit de- pressing. The natural answer 14 ... i.f8 leaves e6 vulnerable to IS fxe6 fxe6 16 .i.h3. And 14 ... .i.d8 IS fxe6 fxe6 16 .i.h3 ttJf8 17 J::tn!

THE HEDGEHOG VARIATION 311

causes real problems; for example, 17 ... ltJxe4?! exposes Black's pawns to attack following 18 ltJxe4 .Bxe419 'iWg4 .Bg6 (19 ... .Bb7? 20 ltJxe6! ltJxe6?? 21 iVxe6+) 20 1:I.xf8+ 'it>xf8 21ltJxe6+ 1:I.xe6 22 'iWxe6. In this line, best seems 17 ... 'iff7 ! 18 1:I.c2 'iWg6 19 1:I.cf2 .Bc7, although 20 .l:tf4! gives White significant attacking chances. Then Black must abstain from 20 ... eS? 211:1.xf6 gxf6 22 ltJfS, when the knight is worth a rook and .Bg4-hS threatens.

14.  ltJc5

14 ... h6?! has been played in several games, but comes up short: IS gS! hxgS 16 fxgSltJh7

17 g6 ltJhf8 18 gxf7+ 'it>xf7. Now 19 ltJdS!

seems to be the clearest way to obtain the better position. Ruck-Markus, Calvia Olympiad 2004 continued 19 ... iVd8 (Franco analyses 19 ... exdS 20 cxdS ~b8 21 ltJc6 .Bxc6 22 dxc6 ltJeS 23 'iWdS+ ltJe6 24 1:I.fl + .Bf6 2S c7 to a clear ad- vantage) 20 ltJxe7 iVxe7 21 ltJf3! ltJh7 22 ltJgS+! ltJxgS 23 'iWhS+ g6 24 'iVxgS l::tg8 2S 'iWxe7+ ~xe7 26 .igS+ 'it>e8 27 .l:tcdl, winning material and the game. 15 .Bf2 (D)

Re-introducing the threat of gS followed by

M.

15 ... g6 This prepares to meet gS with ... ltJhS. Here Black has tried several moves, none satisfac- tory. One of the most thematic is IS ... h6, when Khaetsky-Belichev, Kharkov 1998 continued

16 M1:I.ad8! 17 gS hxgS 18 fxgS ltJh7 19 g6!

ltJf6 20 gxf7+ 'it>xf7 21 ltJdS!, with the idea

21...exdS 22 cxdS .Bf8 23 bxcS dxcS 24.Bg3.

After IS ... g6, the game continued 16 M!? 1:I.ad8! 17 'iVe2 ltJcd7, and here 18 .Bg3! eS 19 ltJdS! gives a limited positional advantage. However, White can improve upon all this with 16 eS!, leading to 16 ... dxeS 17 fxeS ltJfd7 18 M .Bxg2 19 'it>xg2 with the idea 19 ... ltJb7 (19 ... ltJxeS 20 bxcS bxcS 21ltJf3ltJxg4 22 .Bg3 favours White's active pieces) 20 ltJdS! exdS 21 cxdS and the queen can't retreat due to ltJc6, but otherwise White gets his piece back with monstrous centre pawns . In general, as indicated by the notes above, White's attacking and positional opportunities in this variation seem to outweigh Black's solid defence. Banikas - Aroshidze Kavala 2005 IltJf3 c5 2 c4ltJf6 3 g3 b6 4 .Bg2 .Bb7 5 O-O e6 6ltJc3 d6 7 l:tel a6 8 e4 .Be7 9 d4 cxd4 10 ltJxd4 "V/iic7 11 .Be3 O-O 12 l::tc1ltJbd7 13 f4 Here we have the same position as in the previous game, in which 13 .. .I:tfe8 14 g4 fol- lowed. 13 ... h5!? (D) w This move appears quite a bit in modem Sicil- ian Defence variations. Here Black cuts across White's automatic attacking methods from the last game. Advancing the rook's pawn serves multiple purposes. First and foremost, it stops g4. Secondly, it creates the threat of 14 ... ltJg4, when White's bishop on e3 has no healthy move. Thirdly, the move ... h4 can create some weak- nesses in White's camp. As always, there are disadvantages to 13 ... hS. It uses a tempo (which might have been devoted to a move like .. J~.fe8), the h-pawn itself may

312 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

become a target, and Black's kingside defences are theoretically weakened. 14h3 Black can feel good about having provoked this move because now .Bh3 can't assist in an attack on e6, and White has to defend the h2-b8 diagonal in some lines after ... h4. White can try to avoid these problems by two means: a) 14 ~hl makes room at gl for the bishop if Black persists in ... tbg4. A sample line is 14 ... tbc5 15 .igl h416 b4 (16 g4?! h3 17.Bf3 allows the typical Sicilian-like dark-square grab with 17 ... g5! 18 fxg5!? tbh7 19 b4 tbd7 20 g6 tbg5! 21 gxf7+ ~xf7 and White has too many weaknesses) 16 ... h3! 17 .Bf3 tbcd7 (17 ... .l:.ad8, to answer 18 bxc5 with 18 ... dxc5, is dubious because of 18 ~e2 tbcd7 19 tbd5! exd5 20 cxd5 tbc5 21 bxc5 and White plays Win and Wixh3 next) 18 g4!? with an unclear attack. White has to be wary because the area around his king is loose, but g5 and tbd5 can create de- fensive problems for Black. b) By keeping h3 free for the bishop, White makes 14 f5!? an important candidate, even if it means giving up his dark-squared bishop; for example, 14 ... tbg4 (14 ... e5? 15 tbd5) 15 Wie2!? (15 fxe6 tbxe3 16 .l:txe3 .Bg5) 15 ... tbxe3 16 ~xe3 ~c5 (16 ... tbe5 17 fxe6 tbg4 18 tbd5!) 17 b4! (17 fxe6?? .Bg5 18 ~f2 fxe6) 17 ... Wie5 18 .Bh3, which is utterly unclear. 14  JUe81S .Bf2 (D) White can argue that 15 g4 hxg4 16 hxg4 weakens Black's kingside as much as his own, but then 16 ... tbc5 17 .Bf2 d5 18 e5 tbfe4 gives Black a nice outpost, and White won't like 18 exd5 ~xf4 either. This is an example of how the trade-off ... h5/h3 can benefit Black.

IS  .Bf8! 15 ... g6 was played in the game LJohannes- sen-Schmaltz, Athens 2003. It supports h5 but is rather loosening; the game saw the standard sacrifice 16 tbd5!? exd5 17 cxd5 tbc5 (Franco gives 17 ... ~d8 18 tbc6 .Bxc6 19 dxc6 tbc5 20 b4 tbe6 21 f5!? as unclear, but this will be diffi- cult for Black after 2l...tbc7 22 i.xb6) 18 b4 .l:.ad8, and now 19 f5! looks strong, as fxg6 next threatens to win e6 and denude Black's king; at the same time, 19 ... g5 20 bxc5 bxc5 21 tbc6! i.xc6 22 dxc6 is clearly good for White. 16 tbdS!? (D) Again this thematic sacrifice. White almost always gets his piece back, yet the assessment depends upon how Black can reorganize in the meantime. Upon 16 ~e2, threatening e5, Black has 16 ... e5 (remember that if this is played when White has a pawn on f4 and knight on d4, it at least grants Black open lines, because ... exf4 can follow a knight move) 17 tbd5 'iVd8 18 fxe5 tbxe5. Black's outpost and e-file make up for White's dominating knight on d5 and his own dubious-looking pawn on h5.

16  exdS 17 cxdS ~d8 18 tbc6 .Bxc6 19 dxc6 tbcS 20 c7 'ilixc7 Black has to return the piece. 20 ... 'iVc8? is much worse: 21 e5 dxe5 22 fxe5 tbfd7 23 .Bxa8 ~xa8 24 e6! with the idea 24 .. .fxe6 25 b4. 21 b4l:!.ab8 22 bxcS bxcS 23 .Bd4!? tbd7!? 24 ~xhS White has two bishops but his queenside is loose. Both sides have potential issues with their kings. From this point, the game went back and forth and was eventually drawn. The ... h5 idea is worth filing away for future use.

11 Mikenas Attack and

Nimzo-Engl ish

1 c4 ttJf6 (D)

w Black uses 1... ttJf6 if he intends to playa so- called 'Indian System', that is, one with the moves ... g6 or ... e6, in this case omitting or de- laying ... c5 and ... e5. By doing so, he keeps the possibility of a mainstream d4 opening alive. That is, if White plays 2 d4, Black may play 2 ... g6 and transpose into a King's Indian De- fence with 3 ... j.g7 or into a Griinfeld Defence after 3 ... d5. Or he might choose to answer 2 d4 with 2 ... e6 and transpose to one of several open- ings such as a Nimzo-Indian Defence (3 ttJc3 j.b4), or a Queen's Indian Defence (3 ttJf3 b6), or a Queen's Gambit Declined (3 ... d5). In this book I'm concerned with positions that belong to the English Opening proper, that is, not involving transpositions to a 1 d4 open- ing. In particular, White can go his own way versus standard Indian Defence set-ups. After 1 c4 ttJf6 2 ttJc3 g6 3 g3 j.g7 4 j.g2, for example, White may choose to forego d4 by an early e4, or by a combination of ttJf3 and d3. Those op- tions are discussed in Chapter 12. Following the moves 1 c4 ttJf6 2 ttJc3 e6, White can abstain from d4 by playing 3 e4, when Black's natural replies are 3 ... d5 or 3 ... c5. He can also play 3 ttJf3, when Black's most in- dependent move is 3 ... j.b4. Those are the varia- tions under consideration in this chapter. Other lines can arise when Black sets up with ... e6, but I've limited myself to these as the most common and, I think, the most instructive in a broader sense. Before moving on to specific positions, I need to make a few points regarding transpositions into other variations or openings. For example, after 1 c4 ttJf6, both 2 ttJc3 and 2 ttJf3 have their advantages and drawbacks. Both allow 2 ... c5, of course, with a Symmetrical English. 2 ttJc3 gives Black the extra choice of 2 ... e5, transpos- ing to a normal 1 c4 e5 English. But if Black an- swers 2 ttJc3 with 2 ... e6, White can control the direction of the play himself by using 3 e4 (dis- cussed in this chapter), whereas after 3 ttJf3, Black has the choices; for example, 3 ... j.b4, 3 ... c5, or 3 ... d5 (the latter provoking 4 d4 with a Queen's Gambit Declined). If White wants to eliminate that possibility of 2 ... e5, he can play 2 ttJf3; then, however, Black may be more inclined to respond with 2 ... e6 and 3 ... d5, because many players prefer to defend the Queen's Gambit Declined only when White is already committed to the move ttJf3. Finally, I should mention that White's third most natural response to 1...ttJf6 (apart from 2 d4), which is 2 g3. Then 2 ... e5 is possible, transposing to Chapter 4, but the sequence 2 ... e6 and 3 ... d5 will probably lead to a Cata- lan (for example, after 3 ttJf3 d5 4 d4), and the move 2 ... c5 enters a line of the Symmetrical English in which White is committed to g3. You mayor may not be happy with these pos- sibilities; it's mostly a matter of taste. There are more such issues, but I find the above the most meaningful points for the 1 c4 player.

314 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Mikenas Attack: Introduction

1 c4 tZ:lf6 2 tZ:lc3 e6 3 e4 (D)

As indicated above, when Black plays 2 ... e6, he shows his willingness to transpose to one of several queen' s pawn openings in the event of 3 d4. For example, 3 ... d5 is a Queen's Gambit Declined, 3 ... ~b4 is a Nimzo-Indian Defence, and 3 ... cS often turns into a Benoni after 4 dS. The only effective way that White can guar- antee that the game continues in English Open- ing channels is 3 e4, an aggressive move called the Mikenas Attack.

Thus we can appreciate the appeal of 3 e4 in a purely practical sense: White makes the ini- tial choice as to the course of the game, and in so doing he limits the theory he needs to mas- ter. In addition, White usually gets to play the aggressor in what are inherently double-edged positions. Right away, he has a threat of 4 eS followed by S d4, and it turns out that Black's reasonable defences all admit of exciting play.

3 e4 also comes with disadvantages, of course,

which become evident as we focus on Black's counter-strategies. Central Challenge with 3 ... d5 3 ... d5 Ivanchuk - P.H. Nielsen Skanderborg 2003 Black directly challenges the centre in classi- cal fashion. Let's walk through the early moves of this line and discuss the reasoning behind them. First, why doesn't Black choose moves other than 3 ... dS and 3 ... cS (analysed in the next sec- tion)? Here are two others: a) 3 ... ~b4? lets White play 4 eS, which is obviously advantageous after the more-or-Iess forced reply 4 ... tZ:lg8; for example, S 'iWg4 (or S d4, or S tZ:lf3) S. .. 'it>f8 (after S. .. g6 6 tZ:lf3, Black has major problems on the dark squares) 6 tZ:lf3 tZ:lc67 d4. Black can't even castle. b) 3 ... eS!? 4 tZ:lf3 tZ:lc6 (D) (3 ... tZ:lc6 4 tZ:lf3 eS transposes). w A funny situation, in which Black wastes a move with ... e6-eS, but contends that c4 is not a desirable move for White in this position. Remarkably, he is willing to enter into the Nimzowitsch Four Knights line (I c4 eS 2 tZ:lc3 tZ:lf6 3 tZ:lf3 tZ:lc6 4 e4) with an extra tempo for White. White has several possible answers: bl) S d4 exd4 6 tZ:lxd4 ~b4 has done accept- ably for Black in several games, even though it may objectively favour White somewhat. b2) After S ~e2!?, S ... ~cS?! 6 tZ:lxeS! is strong, so S ... ~b4 6 d3 d6 7 O-O O-O 8 tZ:ldS might follow. This option could be slightly an- noying to Black. b3) S a3!? is a good choice, preventing ... ~b4 and anticipating S ... ~cS?! (S ... d6 is prob- ably best, when White grabs some central terri- tory with 6 d4) 6 tZ:lxeS! tZ:lxeS 7 d4; here Black would normally play ... ~b4, but White's extra move a3 stops him from doing that. We now return to 3 ... dS (D):

MIKENAS ArrACK AND NIMZO-ENGLISH 315

w 4 e5 White has to respond to the threats of ... dxe4 and ... d4. a) As a rule, he doesn't want to free Black's c8-bishop without gaining some compensating advantage, so 4 exd5 exd5 isn't seen that much. In fact, 5 d4 transposes into a rarely-played French Defence position, i.e., 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 exd5 exd5 4 c4 ttJf6 5 ttJc3, in which Black has few difficulties. White can also head for unique positions via 5 cxd5 ttJxd5. Then 6 d4 .1i.M! is attractive because White has to take an extra move to defend c3. Instead, 6 ttJf3 is a possible way to escape theory; we're getting rather far afield, but an intriguing continuation would be 6 ... ttJb4 (6 ... ttJc6 7 .1i.b5) 7 d4 .1i.f5 8 .1i.b5+ c6 9 i.a4 ttJd3+ 10 ~f1. b) 4 cxd5 exd5 5 e5 is quite rare these days, although it provides White some new ideas and isn't yet completely worked out. The main line is 5 ... ttJe4! 6 ttJf3 (White shouldn't accept the pawn sacrifice: 6 ttJxe4 dxe4 7 'iVa4+ ttJc6 8 ~xe4 'ilkd4! 9 ~xd4 ttJxd4 10 ~dl .1i.f5 11 d3 O-O-O with a substantial advantage for Black) 6 ... ttJc67 i.b5 .1i.e7 8 'ilka4 (8 .1i.xc6+!? bxc6 9 'ilka4 wins a pawn, although 9 .. :iVd7! 10 ttJxe4 dxe4 11 'ilkxe40-0 12 d4 .1i.a6 gives Black good compensation) 8 ... .1i.d7 9 ttJxe4 a6! 10 ttJf6+?! (10 i.e2 ttJxe5 11 'ilkc2 ttJxf3+ 12 .1i.xf3 dxe4 13 .1i.xe4 is about equal) 1O ... gxf6 11 .1i.xc6 .1i.xc6 and Black is in good shape. After 12 'ilkf4 (Korchnoi-P.H.Nielsen, Drammen 2005), 12 ... d4! opens the diagonals for the bishops; for example, 13 ttJxd4 .1i.xg2 14 l:tgl 'ilkd5 15 exf6 .1i.d6!. We return to 4 e5 (D).

[diagram]
a) One of several forgotten lines in the Mik- enas Attack is 4 ... ttJfd7, which has a 'French Defence' look. It used to be played and ana- lysed a fair amount, but the influential game Smyslov-I.Farago, Hastings 197617 discouraged further research: 5 cxd5 exd5 6 d4 c5!? 7 ttJf3 ttJc6 (perhaps 7 ... cxd4 8 ~xd4 ttJb6 is better, but either 9 .1i.b5+ or 9 .1i.g5! keeps an advan- tage) 8 .1i.b5! (8 dxc5 .1i.xc5! 9 'iVxd5 O-O!? isn't as clear) 8 ... a6 (8 ... cxd4? 9 ttJxd4 ttJdxe5 10 ~e2 and White is on the verge of winning) 9 .1i.xc6 bxc6 10 O-O .1i.e7 11 dxc5!? (or 11 l:f.el) ll...ttJxc5 12 ttJd4 llYb6? (12 ... .1i.d7 13 f4! ~b8!?) 13 .1i.e3 O-O?? 14l:Ic1 Itd8 15 M! ttJe4 16 ttJa4 'iVb7 17 ttJxc6 1-0. b) 4 ... ttJe4 is respectable and unrefuted. A beautiful and profound game Topalov-Rozen- talis, European Team Ch, Batumi 1999 went 5 ttJf3 .1i.e7 6 h4! (D).

This hypermodern move does several things. It prevents ... ttJg5, one of Black's standard moves in this position, intending to eliminate

316 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White's important knight on f3. The h-pawn can also support a piece on gS, advance to at- tack the kingside, or prepare l:!h3-g3. The game continued 6 ... liJxc3 (6 ... O-O 7 ~c2liJc6 8liJxe4 liJb4 9 'i!Vb1 dxe4 10 'ii'xe4 1i.d7 11 liJgS!) 7 dxc3 dxc4 8 'ii'a4+ 1i.d7 9 'tiVxc4 1i.c6 10 'ii'g4 1i.xf3 11 gxf3! 1i.f8?! (ll...g6 12 hS ~d5 13 hxg6 'ii'xeS+ 141i.e3 fxg6 {14 ... hxg61S 'tiVe4!} 15 f4! 'iVfS 16 'iVxfS exfS 17 1i.d4) 12 f4 liJd7 13 1i.e3 c6 140-O-O 'ii'a5 IS fS!!. White leaves pawns on a2 and eS hanging without regard for defence. The rest of the game is a pleasure to watch: lS .. :i1kxa2 (15 ... liJxeS 16 'tiVe4 exf5 17 'iVxf5 threatens f4 and Black has no playable solution) 16 fxe6 ~xe6 17 'ii'f4! (now the bish- ops stream into activity) 17 ... l:!d8 (17 ... ~xe5? 181i.h3!) 181i.c4 'iVe719 l:Ihel hS 20'tiVg3 (or 20 e6! fxe6 21 1i.xe6) 20 ... liJxe5 21 J:t.xd8+ '>t>xd8 22 1i.f4 liJxc4 23 l:i.xe7 '>t>xe7 24 'tiVd3! 1-0. S exf6 dxc3 6 bxc3 White gets nothing out of 6 fxg7 cxd2+ 7 1i.xd2 1i.xg7 8 'iVc2 liJc6!. 6 .. ~xf6 7 liJf3 Perhaps not the best move-order. The tradi- tional move is 7 d4, when 7 ... eS !? (D) has been the most popular choice at the top levels for at least IS years (we'll see 7 ... c5 in the next game). w Black reasons that any time he can establish a central presence and simultaneously open a diagonal for his queen's bishop, he should do so. Now 8 liJf3 transposes to our main game. Instead, 8 ~e2?! wins a pawn, but 8 ... 1i.e7! 9 ~xeS (9 dxe5 'ii'c6 gives Black at least enough for a pawn; White has the weak c-pawns and will have to untangle his pieces to get castled) 9 .. :iVxe5+ 10 dxe5 liJc6 11 f4 f6! opens the position to White's great detriment. Notice White's bishops, blocked by their own pawns; and once the centre is demolished, he will have horrible internal weaknesses on e3 and d3. Although I won't go into detail, I should also say that 7 d4 has a special advantage over 7 liJf3, in that it allows White to answer 7 ... b6 with 8 1i.e2 1i.b7 9 1i.f3, which is probably somewhat favourable for him. Of course, 8liJf3 is also possible, transposing to the next note. 7 ... eS A reasonable alternative is 7 ... b6!? 8 d41i.b7, when 9 1i.e2 1i.d6 10 O-O O-O gives Black fair prospects. White can play more ambitiously by 91i.d3!? (D).

Here's a trick that you may have seen in other openings: 9 ... 1i.d6? 10 1i.g5! 1i.xf3 11 ~d2!, trapping Black's queen! Then 1l...1l.f4! 121i.xf4 threatens 1i.g5 again, so 12 ... 1i.xg2 13 l:!gl1i.b7 is practically forced, when 14l:tg3 re- news the threat with 1i.e5. This trap reappears below. So the main line is 9 ... 1i.xf3 10 gxf3, when White has two sets of doubled pawns and a total of four isolated pawns, but he also has two bishops and a potential attack on Black's light squares, beginning with the move 1i.e4. We now return to 7 ... e5 (D): 8d4 For some time, 8 1i.d3 was popular, with the idea O-O, 1i.e4/c2 and d4. Since solutions have been found, I'll skip over this option, except to show one fun game that is typical of the Mike- nas, in that White gets the bishop-pair and an attack, while at the same time he takes on

MIKENAS ATTACK AND NIMZO-ENGLISH 317

serious weaknesses. Tactics are key to the re- sult: 8 ... liJa6 9 O-O ..td6 10 ..tc2 ..tg4 11 d4 ..txf3 12 'iVxf3 'iVxf3 13 gxf3 O-O-O (13 ... exd4 14 .l:!.e 1+ 'Ot>d8 is also playable) 14 cS ..tf8 IS c6! exd4! 16 cxb7+ 'it>b8 17 cxd4liJb4! (with White having so many weak pawns, Black sim- ply wants to stabilize the position; of course, White doesn't let him) 18 ..te4liJdS 19.1:!.bl!? (an amazing exchange sacrifice) 19 ... liJc3 20 ..tgS f6!? (20 .. Jhd4 is a good option) 21 ..te3 liJxbl 22 ~xbl ~d6! 23 ..tf4! l:!b6 24 ..txc7+! rJ;xc7 2S ~c1 + ..tcS! 26 J:txcS+ ~b8 (26 ... ~d7? loses to 27 ..tfS+ ~e7 28 ~c7+ 'it>d6 29 nc8) 27 ..tc6 ~d8 28 dS .l:!.xb7 (bailing out) 29 ..txb7 'Ot>xb7 30 'it>g2, Khalifman-Leitao, FIDE Knock- out, New Delhi 2000, and here Black should take the draw by 30 ... 'Ot>b6 31 l:i.c6+ 'it>b7 32 ~e6 rJ;c7. My feeling is that 8 ..td3 should lead to equality with accurate play. 8 . exd49 ..tg5! By attacking Black's queen, White is not only trying to win a tempo. His problem is that the natural 9 cxd4 ..tb4+ 10 ..td2 ..txd2+ 11 'iVxd20-0 12 ..te2 cS! breaks up White's centre and creates an isolated c-pawn after ... cxd4. Thus White drives Black's queen off the al-h8 diagonal first; in doing so, he also has a specific tactical idea. 9 .. JWe6+ 10 ..te2 (D) 10 .. ..te7 To play otherwise can be disastrous: a) 1O ... d3? lets White develop too quickly af- ter the tricky 11 O-O! ..tcS (l1...dxe2?? 12 'iVd8#; 1l...'iWxe2 12 ~el; l1...f6 12 ..txd3) 12 ..txd3 O-O 13 ~el 'iVa6 14liJd4!. Black's kingside is under severe attack and almost indefensible. Kosten-Gregoire, Cap d' Agde 2003 continued

14 ... h6 IS ~S! .Bxd4 16 cxd4 liJd7 17 .Be7 .l:.e8 18.Bh4 'u'f8 (18 ... .l:.xel+ 19 'u'xelliJf8 20 h3 ..td7 21'u'e7 ..te8 22 'tiVeS! is killing) 19~f3 'tlVaS 20 cS 'iVa4 21 ~e4 fS 22 'iVdS+ ~h8 23 .Be7liJf6 24 'iVc4 1-0. b) 1O ... f6 was played for years until the wonderful game Ni Hua-Aleksandrov, Calcutta 2004: 11liJxd4 'iVf7 12 ..th6!! (D) (heretofore, 12 .Bf4 .icS had equalized) .

12 ... cS?! (12 ... gxh6?? 13 .ihS; 12 ... g6 is best, but very awkward for Black after 13 ~d2!) 13 liJbS ..tfS! (this prevents ..thS from winning di- rectly, as it does after 13 ... liJc6? 14 ..txg7!, and 14 ... ..txg7 IS liJd6+ or 14 ... 'tiVxg7 IS ..thS+ 'it>e7 16 'iVd6#) 14 O-O ~d7 (14 ... gxh6? IS ..thS .Bg6 16l::tel + ..te7 17 liJd6+) IS ..tf4liJa6 16 nel! 'it>f7 (16 ... O-O-O? 17liJxa7#) 17 ..tB ~d8 18 ..txb7 gS 19 ..tg3 liJb8 20 'tiVhS+ 'Ot>g7 21 ~adl 'iVxb7 22 :xd8liJc6 23 .l:!.dS ..tg6 24 ~g4 hS 2S ~d7+ 'it>h6 26 ~e6 ~a8 27 'iVxf6 ..te7 1-0. Fantastic. 11 cxd4 ..txg5 12 liJxg5 (D)

318 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

12  Wle7 a) 12 ... Wlf6 13 ttJe4! Wlg6 14 ttJg3 O-O IS O-O frees White to use his mobile centre pawns. In the meantime, he is ahead in development and has discouraged Black's queen's bishop from getting out. Pelletier-Ribli, Tegernsee 2003 saw IS ... :d8 16:c1 Wlf6 17 dS ttJa6 18 ttJhS! WleS 19 ..tf3 ttJcS 20 :el Wld6 21 Wld4 with a pleasant advantage. b) 12 ... Wlg6 is a reasonable alternative: 13 f4!? (threatening ..thS) 13 ... O-O 14 O-O. Now Black needs to get his pieces out before White's centre gets moving: bl) 14 ... ..tfS?! IS g4! ..tc2 16 Wld2 h6 17 l1ac1 hxgS? (but 17 ... ..ta4 18 ..td3 Wid6 19 ttJf3 leaves White with an advantage in space and development) 18 :xc2 gxf4 19 l:r.b2 with the idea 19 ... b6 20 ..tf3 c6 21 Wlxf4 ttJd7 22 ..te4 Wlf6 23 ..tfS! :ad8 24 gS Wle7 2S nb3 and Black is getting slaughtered. Even without this attack, White's d-pawn can always advance to good effect in positions of this type. b2) 14 ... ttJc6! doesn't fully equalize, but it limits Black's problems: IS dS (or IS ..td3 ..tfS 16 ..txfS WlxfS 17 dS) lS ... ttJe7, Mulyar-Gorlin, Saint Paul 2000, and now 16..tf3 ..tfS 17 'iVd4 gives White something to work with.

13 Wld2 ttJc6

Black threatens 14 ... ttJxd4. 14 dS ttJeS 15 O-O O-O 16 nfel Now White intends ..td3. ... ..tfS! 17 Wlf4 Wlf618 ttJf3 :fe8 (D) This position has been contested many times. The following technical manoeuvring is important for the fate of the whole main line be- ginning with 7 ... eS. 19 ttJh4! w A new move at the time of this game. Previ- ously, 19 ttJd4 ttJg6! 20 WlxfS Wlxd4 had been played, equalizing. ... ttJg6 20 WlxfS Wlxh4 Compare the previous note. It turns out that the queen on h4 is distinctly inferior to the cen- tralized one on d4!

21..tfl (D)

21 ..tg4 also deserves consideration, since Black's queen doesn't get back to d4. The plan would be g3 and h4-hS.

21 ... 'iVd4 This is still a good move, even if White has gained time for infiltration into the enemy posi- tion. Black tried something different in Bruzon- Zarnicki, Santo Domingo 2003: 2l...b6 22 g3 (with the idea h4-hS; perhaps 22 .l:tadl was still better, preventing ... Wld4 once and for all) 22 .. :~d8 (22 ... Wld4!?), and here Kosten recom- mends 23 ne4! :xe4 24 Wlxe4 'iVd6 2S l:r.el, when h4-hS and ..th3 will follow.

22 Wld711xe123 :xe1 Wlcs 24 h4! (D)

MIKENAS ATTACK AND NIMZO-ENGUSH 319

A fantastic move. Black can't safely capture the pawn, so his knight is driven into passivity. 24 ... ~fS Not 24 ... liJxh4? 2S ne7 !lf8 26 'fixc7 and the d-pawn will triumph. 25 "iif5 Now White threatens hS to win the h7-pawn. A later game Steingrimsson-Kiilaots, Tallinn 2006 saw what is probably an even better move in 2S .ltd3, with the same idea of winning the h7-pawn. Black replied 2s .. :iVd6 (2S ... liJxh4?! 26 "iih3!) 26 'fifS 'fif4 (26 ... ~g8 27 hSliJf8 28 ~gS compares well with the main game) 27 'fihS ~g8 28 ne3!? (or 28 g3!) 28 ... b6 29 g3! ~d6, and now White would have a clear superi- ority after 30 ~g S! or 30 'fie2!. 25 . ~gS 26 h5liJfS 27 ~g5! ~d6 2S g3 h6 29 ~e7 liJd7 30 .lth3 liJc5! 31 .ltf5! .l:lbS 32 ~eS+!? ~fS (D) White wins after 32 ... nxe8?? 33 nxe8+ ~f8

34.lth7+.

w 33 'fie7? Now that Black's knight is so well-posted on cS, the ending probably isn't winning. 33 'fie3! is better, intending to bring the king a little closer to the centre before exchanging. 33  "iixe7 34 .l:Ixe7 'it>fS? Kosten points out that 34 ... liJa6 offers good drawing chances. 35 l:!xc7 liJa6 36 d6! Now it's over. 36. lIdS 37 c5 b6 3S c6! liJbS 39 .lte4 !lxd6 40 l:tcS+ 1-0 Miles - Sosonko Tilburg 1977 1 c4liJf6 2liJc3 e63 e4 d5 4 e5 d4 5 exf6 dxc3 6 bxc3 ~xf6 7 d4 c5 w Black attacks the centre from the other side. SliJf3 cxd4 (D)

9 Si.g5!

This bishop will retreat shortly, but wants to displace the queen first. By comparison, 9 cxd4 .ltb4+ 10 Si.d2 .ltxd2+ 11 ~xd2 makes life eas- ier for Black, whose queen on f6 controls d4 and won't lose a tempo to .ltd3; for example,

11...O-O 12 .ltd3 (12 Si.e2 ~d8 13 ~e3 liJc6 14

.l:!.dl b6) 12 ... liJc6 13 O-O .l:!d8 14 .l:lfdl g6 (threatening ... liJxd4) IS .lte4 liJxd4! 16 liJxd4 eS 17 .ltdS exd4 18 'iYxd4 ~xd4 19 .l:!.xd4 Si.e6 with an even game. 9  :~f5 10 cxd4 (D) Now White's .ltd3 will come with tempo.

10. . .lii.b4+

1O ... liJc6 is infrequently played and subtle, intending to answer 11 .ltd3 with 11.. .. ltb4+, forcing White's king to move. In this way

320 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black tries to induce White into the somewhat passive 11 i.e2 (when the valuable idea i.e4 won't be possible, for one thing). Probably White should play 11 a3!, when Tukmakov suggests 11...i.e7!?, citing 12 i.xe7 r:JJxe7 and ... l:i.d8; however, 12 i.d3! "iVaS+ 13 i.d2 ~d8 14 i.c3 looks nice for White. 11 i.d2 White has enough central control that he can claim a significant advantage. 11 ... liJc6!?

11..."iVaS may be the best way to get to the

game position: 12 i.d3liJc6 13 .i:tb1 i.xd2+ 14 ~xd2, etc. 12 i.xb4liJxb413 J::tbl! (D)

13 .. ~a5 Heading towards a queenless middlegame. The alternatives are inferior: a) 13 .. .'~Jc2+? doesn't work after 14 'it'd2 ltJa3 IS .l:tb3 ~aS+ 16 ~e3! with the idea of winning the trapped knight by ~c1 or "iVd3. Then after 16 ... bS 17 cxbS a6 18 b6 i.b7 19 "iVc1liJbS 20 'iVcS! White wins another pawn and the game. b) White stands better in every positional respect following 13 ... ltJc6 14 i.d3 'iVf6 IS i.e4 O-O 16 O-O .l:f.d8 17 i.xc6 bxc6 18 "iVa4, Tal-Sosonko, Wijk aan Zee 1976. 14 ~d2liJc6 15 i.d3 'iVxd2+ White also has the upper hand after lS ... r:JJe7 16 i.e4 or 16 dS!? 'iVxd2+ 17 'iii>xd2liJaS 18 l:!he1 :d8 19 ~c3!, Reshko-Klaman, Lenin- grad 1967. 16 'iii>xd2 b617 .l:f.hc1?! A little too modest. 17 i.e4 i.b7 18 liJeS! works positionally and tactically: 18 ... liJxeS (18 ... .l:.c8 19 cS!) 19 i.xb7 .l:f.b8 (19 ... .l:f.d8 20 'iii>c3!) 20 i.a6 and the bishop is much better than the knight. 17  i.a6? 17 ... i.b7! is correct; for example, 18 cS!? (18 dS!? liJe7) 18 ... O-O 19 i.e4 fS 20 i.d3 .l:f.fd8 with near equality. 18 i.e4! i.b7 Miles gives 18 ... .l:f.c8 19 cS! liJaS 20 cxb6 axb6 21 Ihc8+ i.xc8 22 'iii>c3 with obvious su- periority.

19 c5 f5 20 i.xc6+ i.xc6 21 cxb6 i.xf3 22

b7! r:JJd7 23 bxa8~ i.xa8 24 .l:f.c5 i.xg2 25 :gl i.e4 26 .l:f.xg7+ ~d6 27 .l:f.a5 and White won in short order. Tomashevsky - Gelfand Cheboksary 2006

[diagram]
dxc3 6 bxc3 ~xf6 7 d4 c5 8liJf3 h6 This is a useful move, preventing i.gS. It comes at the cost of a tempo and a slight king- side weakness. 9 i.d3 (D) White must be aggressive or Black will sim- ply develop and bring his pieces to the centre. 9 .. cxd4 A key decision. Black decides to liquidate White's weaknesses in order to develop at maxi- mum speed. Unfortunately, nothing else is truly satisfactory for him. Briefly: a) The sequence 9 ... i.d6 10 O-O O-O? is very risky after 11 "iVe2!; for example, 11....l:f.d8? 12 ~e4 'iVfS (12 ... liJc6 13 ~h7+ 'iii>f8 14liJd2! is equally bad for Black, with the unstoppable idea liJe4) 13 ~h4 'iVf6 14 'iVxf6 gxf6 IS i.xh6,

MIKENAS ArrACK AND NIMZO-ENGLISH 321

Dvoretsky-Langeweg, Wijk aan Zee 1976.

11...liJc6 also falls short after 12 g4! (threaten-

ing gS; this is an idea to remember; the immedi- ate 12 "iVe4 accomplishes nothing in view of 12 ... 'iVfS!); for example, 12 ... gS 13 h4! .i.f4 14 'iVe4 'iVg6 IS hxgS 'iVxe4 16 .i.xe4 and White will emerge with material and the better posi- tion. b) White can enjoy his greater control of territory after 9 ... liJc6 10 .i.e4 (safely defend- ing d4 and supporting a dS advance; the gam- bit 10 O-O!? is also promising) 1O ... .i.d7?! (a slow move; more to the point is 10 ... .i.d6 11 O-O O-O 12 .i.e3 WIIe7, even if Black is on the defen- sive) 11 O-O cxd4?! 12 cxd4 .i.e7 13 l:tbllIb8 14 dS! (suddenly White's attack is very power- ful) 14 ... exdS IS cxdSliJeS 16 .l:te1liJxf3+ 17 i.xf3 0-018 .i.b2 'iVgS 19 .i.eS and White won shortly in Ghaem Maghami-Lubos, Dresden

200S.

10 exd4 .i.b4+ (D) w ll.i.d2 The alternative 11 'it>f1!? is entertaining: l1...liJc6 (11....i.c3?! 12 lIbl .i.xd4 13 liJxd4 'ii'xd4 14 .i.b2 and IS .i.xg7) 12 .i.b2 .i.cs 13 .i.c2 (13 .i.e4!? O-O 14 ~d2) 13 ... O-O 14 'iVd3 l:td8 IS ~dl! 'iit'f8 16"iVe4 .i.d6 and now 17 h4!? gave White an ongoing attack in Seirawan- Korchnoi, Wijk aan Zee 1980; probably 17 g3!, with the idea of castling by hand via 'it>g2 and bringing the king's rook to el, is even better. 1l . .i.xd2+ 12 ~xd2 liJe6 13 'iVe3 O-O 14 O-O .i.d7 15 l:tfet .l:tfd8 16 .i.e4! .i.e8?! It's hard to do anything useful. Perhaps 16 .. J:tac8 improves, with the idea of ... liJaS. Then after 17 .l:tacl, 17 ... b6! prepares to meet 18 dS!? (not necessary) with 18 ... exdS 19 cxdS liJe7. In the game, White simply marches his passed d-pawn down the board. 17 l:tadl l:td6 18 d5! exd5 19 exd5 liJe7 20 liJe5 .i.b5?! 21 WIIe5 Itb6 22 d6liJg6 23 i.xg6 fxg6 24 d7 .l:i.d8 25 a4 i.a6 26 liJxg6! 'it>h7 White's point is 26 ... 'iWxg6 27 'iWc8!. 27 liJe5l:te6 28 'iWd5l:!.e7 29 h3 b6 30 "iVe4+ 'it>g8 31liJg4! 1-0 Gambit Line with 3 ... c5 w Michalik - Petrik Slovakian Ch, Banska Stiavnica 2006 1 e4liJf6 2liJe3 e63 e4 e5 (D) Black tries another approach entirely. He ex- ploits the hole on d4 but allows White to drive back his knight. The result is that White gains in development at the cost of exposing his pawn to attack on eS.

322 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

4eS 4 ttJf3 is a rare alternative. Then 4 ... ttJc6 S iLe2 (S d4 cxd4 6 ttJxd4 iLb4 is a Taimanov Si- cilian) S ... dS!? can lead to 6 cxdS exdS 7 eS ttJg48 iLbS. This exact position is analysed in Chapter 8, but with colours reversed and the same tempi because of White's extra move iLe2-bS. Instead of 6 cxdS, 6 exdS exdS 7 d4 is sometimes played. We examined this via a dif- ferent move-order on page 230 - see Ivan- chuk-Anand. 4 .. ttJgS (D) w S ttJf3 S d4 cxd4 6 ~xd4 ttJc6 7 ~e4 is an older line that allows Black to catch up in develop- ment while White is trying to establish superior piece-play. Black can equalize by 7 ... d6 (or 7 ... iLb4 8 iLd2 d6 9 ttJf3 dxeS 10 ttJxeS ttJf6 with the idea 11 ttJxc6? ~xd2+!) 8 ttJf3 dxeS (8 .. :iVaS is also played) 9 ttJxeS ii.d7 10 ttJxd7 "iUxd7 11 iLgS iLb4 12 .l::tdl ~c7 13 ii.e2 ttJf6 14 ii.xf6 gxf6. S ttJc6 After S ... d6 6 exd6 ttJc6 7 d4 cxd4 8 ttJxd4 ttJxd4 9 "iUxd4 ~xd6 10 ii.e3, White's develop- ment gives him the nod. 6 d4! White offers a gambit. Without this move, his d-pawn remains backwards and Black can develop smoothly with an attack on eS. 6  cxd47 ttJxd4 ttJxeS (D) Declining the gambit generally doesn't help because White's pawn on eS can then seriously restrict Black's pieces. Perhaps the best method of doing so is to delay acceptance by 7 ... ~c7 8 ii.f4!? (8 f4 a6 9 iLe3 should be considered) 8 ... ttJxeS; for example, 9 iLg3 (9 ttJdbS ttJd3+! 10 iLxd3 ~xf4, a common theme) 9 ... a6 10 ~a4! with the ideas O-O-O and f4-fS followed by fxe6. This line is wide open to improvement. w S ttJdbS! In contemporary practice, White uses this move almost exclusively. He aims the knight directly at d6 in order to exchange off Black's good bishop. The earlier tries 8 iLf4 and 8 ~a4 didn't succeed in stirring up enough chances versus proper defence; the interested reader may have to dig around in older books for that rather obscure material. S. a6 It may seem odd to force White into doing what he wants to do anyway, but 9 iLf4 was now a major threat. Others: a) 8 .. .f6 (to clear out f7 for a knight and guard d6) at best transposes to the main line fol- lowing 9 iLe3 (a unique possibility is 9 f4 ttJf7 10 fS! with the idea 1O ... a6 11 'iVa4) 9 ... a6 10 ttJd6+ ii.xd6 11 ~xd6. b) 8 ... d6? would be ideal, but runs into the typical dark-square take-over 9 cS!. Black can't capture the pawn: 9 ... dxcS? (or 9 ... dS? 10 iLf4; otherwise 10 cxd6 or 10 ttJxd6+ follows) 10 iLf4 f6 11 iLxeS fxeS 12 ~hS+ g6 13 'iVxeS and Black's position collapses. 9 ttJd6+ iLxd610 "iUxd6 (D) You can see why this position might attract White. For the cost of a mere pawn, he has control of the dark squares, Black's pieces are stuck on the first rank, and d6 and b6 are ideal spots upon which to place pieces. In addition, he's gaining more time by attacking the knight on eS.

MIKENAS ArrACK AND NIMZO-ENGUSH 323

Black hasn't captured just any pawn, how- ever. It's a centre pawn, and we know how strong a central majority can be in defence, be- cause centre pawns potentially defend the most important attacking squares. Black's first task is to expel the queen. 10 ... f6 Preparing ..,ti:Jf7. 1O ... lbg6 11 JiLe3 Wile7 12 lbe4! illustrates the kind of dark-square exploi- tation that White is aiming for: 12 .. .tZ'lf6 13 ~xe7+ ~xe7 14 JiLc5+ ~d8 15 lbd6 .l:tf8 16 JiLb6+ ~e7 17 O-O-O, and Black is horribly cramped.

11 JiLe3 lbe7!

At first glance this looks like a blunder! The immediate l1...lbf7 anticipates returning the pawn: 12 'iUg3 (12 'iUb4 is possibly better: 12 ... lbe7 13 O-O-O lbc6 14 Wila3) 12 ... lbe7!? (12 ... g6 13 ~h4!) 13 'Wixg7lbf5 14 'iUg4lbxe3 15 fxe3 'iUb6 16 O-O-O!? 'iUxe3+!? 17 'it>bl and Black's position is rather loose.

12 JiLb6lbf5 (D)

Black must contest the dark squares. w 13 'iVc5 In the initial days with this variation, White did well with 13 JiLxd8 lbxd6 14 ~c7 ~e7 15 c5 lbe8 16 JiLb6. Eventually it was shown that in some forced lines after 16 ... d5, Black could return the pawn and defend successfully, in some cases gaining a small edge. But as far as I know, 13 Wilb4!? is unex- plored. The idea would be 13 ... lbc6 (13 .. :iVe7 14 'iUxe7+ is the next note) 14 'iVc5 d6 15 JiLxd8 dxc5 16 JiLb6. Given some of the limitations of the main line, this bears consideration. 13. d6! Bacrot-Dorfman, French Ch, Marseilles 2001 went 13 .. :iVe7 14 Wilxe7+ (14 'iVa5 transposes to the note to Black's 14th move if he plays 14 ... d6) 14 .. .'.he7 (14 ... lbxe7 15 c5! O-O 16 O-O-O leaves Black completely cramped; how will his queen's bishop and queen's rook get out?) 15 f4 lbg6 16 g3 d6 and now 17 JiLh3 should have been met by 17 ... e5! 18lbd5+ 'it>f7 with unclear prospects. Instead, 17 JiLd3! seems to favour White; then 17 ... lbh6 180-O-O JiLd7 19 .l:!.hel threatens c5, as well as lbd5+ fol- lowed by lbc7 and JiLe4. 14 'Wia5 (D)

14. .. 'iVd7!

These moves all come from a lot of real- world tests. Black wants to get his queen to c6, from where it hits c4 and e4, controls the long diagonal, and prepares to threaten the bishop on b6. There's nothing clearly wrong with 14 ... 'Wie7, but White has tended to do well in practice; for example, 150-O-O JiLd7 16 f4lbc6?! (16 ... lbg6) 17 'iVa3l:tc8 18 JiLd3, Ramesa-Lju- biCic, Omis 2006. Between the dangerous open

324 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

e-file, White's active pieces, and the vulnerable d6- and e6-pawns, the situation has deterio- rated for Black. IS f4 liJc6 16 'iVa3 liJce7! 17 O-O-O 'iVc6!

(D)

w 18cS White has good alternatives in 18 'iVb3 and 18 'iVa5 0-019 ngl, when the only fair thing to say about the resulting positions is that they are dynamically balanced, with no obvious edge for either party. 18 .. ~f7!? 18 ... d5 is attractive if only because Black can still castle when appropriate. Then 19 .te2 with the idea g4 is a suggestion from Cummings, since 19 .tb5? axb5 20 'iVxa8 d4! 21liJe2liJd5! 22 ~a5 e5! is just about resignable for White. White can also consider 19 .td3 followed by nhel. 19 .te2 (D)

19. .. .td7

Getting pieces out. Riskier, but totally un- clear, is 19 ... liJe3 20 :td2liJ3d5 (20 ... liJ7d5 21 liJxd5 liJxd5 is a more accurate order of moves) 2lliJxd5? (21 .tf3!) 21...liJxd5 22 ~blliJxf4!? (22 ... liJxb6 23 cxb6 :td8) 23 .tf3! d5 24 :thdl and the game is up for grabs, Hodgson-Barsov, York 2000. 20 .tf3 dS 21 .l:ld2liJe3! Threatening ... liJc4. 22 b3liJ3fS 23 !1elliJh4!? Black wants to be able to play ... liJc8. Still, his knight isn't very effective out there away from the crucial central squares. 23 ... h5! is a good, solid move. Then White has the bishops, but Black has an extra pawn. 24 .thS+ g6 2S .tdl liJc8 26 .taS b6 27 cxb6 llb8!? 28l:tc2 ~d6?! 28 ... liJxb6 is safe enough because of the trick 29 liJe4liJc4!. 29 ~xd6 liJxd6 After this, White probably stands better, but the game went back and forth and I think it's best to stop here. As a whole, this variation ap- pears to be almost precisely balanced. There will obviously be many more games before anyone knows what's really going on. Nimzo-English Variation: I ntrod uction

1 c4 liJf6 2 liJc3 e6 3 liJf3 .tb4 (D)

w When played against 1 d4, 2 c4 and 3 liJc3, the combination of moves 1...liJf6, 2 ... e6 and 3 ... .tb4 is called the Nimzo-Indian. Hence,

MIKENAS ATTACK AND NIMZO-ENGLISH 325

when played against the English Opening, it may be called the Nimzo-English (well, that was my excuse for inventing the name some decades ago). A fundamental difference be- tween the two is that in our line, Black cannot freely occupy e4 without taking White's move d3 into account. Beyond that, Black isn't so much trying to pin the knight, but either to ex- change it or threaten to exchange it. Why would he want to? Because 3 ... .i.b4 allows him to get his pieces out and castle rapidly, while ex- changing on c3 rids White of a valuable piece that is fighting for the crucial dS- and e4- squares. Furthermore, if White doesn't play ei- ther Wic2 or Wib3, the exchange ... .i.xc3 dou- bles his pawns, which can greatly affect their mobility. In fact, Black will seldom exchange without being forced to do so, so White must normally spend a tempo if he wants to compel that exchange, usually by using the non-devel- oping move a3. By the time White gets orga- nized, it's possible to have a situation in which Black has already castled and played ... b6 (or ... cS or ... dS), before White has developed any other piece besides his queen on c3 and knight on f3, and before he has moved a central pawn! For all that, the notion that White simply must have a small advantage in the Nirnzo-English persisted for years. It wasn't until the 1970s that 3 ... .i.b4 well and truly became mainstream, and even then the early theoreticians spoke cau- tiously about it, showing variations largely in fa- vour of White. After all, the reasoning goes, White is normally pleased to reach a position in which he has two bishops, no weaknesses, and no targets of attack for his opponent. What's more, he has the flexibility to play d4 whenever it seems appropriate, or to hold back while pur- suing other aims. In fact, the ultimate assess- ment of a slight advantage for White may still have validity. But to whatever extent that may be true, if any, it is not enough to deter the world's best players from adopting the black pieces, some using 3 ... .i.b4 as their main weapon and others reserving it for occasional use. Backing off for a moment, why is White play- ing some sequence of the moves c4, ttJc3 and ttJf3 in the first place? Unfortunately, that brings us back to the land of move-orders. First, it turns out that a high percentage of Nimzo-English games arise after 1 ttJf3 and 2 c4. In those cases, there are a couple of other options that make sense after, say 1 ttJf3 ttJf6 2 c4 e6. One is 3 g3, if one wants to allow a Catalan Opening follow- ing 3 ... d5 4 d4, or permit a Symmetrical English (with White committed to g3) after 3 ... cS, or of course head towards a Queen's Indian-like posi- tion following 3 ... b6. All of these are avoidable if one plays 3 ttJc3. White can of course revert to

3 d4 and play versus a Queen's Gambit, Queen's

Indian Defence or Nimzo-Indian Defence, but those aren't to everyone's taste. Turning to a player who uses the English Opening move-order 1 c4 ttJf6 2 ttJc3 e6, 3 ttJf3 is first of all a way of avoiding the Nimzo- Indian proper (3 d4 .i.b4).1t may also be based upon a distrust or aversion to 3 e4, which we ex- amined above. The move 3 g3, seldom played, transposes after 3 ... dS 4 d4 to a Catalan where White's queen's knight has been committed rather early to c3, normally an undesirable situ- ation. Looking at move-orders from the other side of the board, we can surmise that Black is probably a Nimzo-Indian player; after all, he is allowing White to play 4 d4, which trans- poses to a main line of that opening. At any rate, having committed to 1...ttJf6 and 2 ... e6, he prefers 3 ... .i.b4 to the Queen's Gambit that might arise after 3 ... dS 4 d4, or the Symmetri- cal English that results from 3 ... cS. Finally, Black can choose 3 ... b6, a relatively rare move which I won't be examining. The most interesting non-transpositional line is 4 e4 (4 d4 is a Queen's Indian Defence, and 4 g3 .i.b7 S .i.g2 will either head that way or into a Hedgehog, if Black plays ... cS) 4 ... .i.b7 S .i.d3! d6 (S ... cS 6 O-O ttJc6 7 eS! ttJg4 8 .i.e4 gives White a small advantage) 6 .i.c2 cS 7 d4 cxd4 8 ttJxd4, when White has a Maroczy Bind set-up that promises some advantage. Classical 4 'iVc2 Variation Langeweg - Korchnoi Amsterdam 1976 1 ttJf3 ttJf6 2 c4 e6 3 ttJc3 .i.b4 4 'iVc2 This and 4 g4 (in the games below) are played in the vast majority of games today. A few com- ments on others:

326 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) 4 a3 is simply too cooperative, losing a tempo to force Black into 4 ... i..xc3, the move he wants to play anyway. b) The fianchetto 4 g3 has more of a history behind it. A traditional solution is 4 ... O-O (there are several otherrespectable moves, but 4 ... dS S a3! i..xc3 6 dxc3 is not ideal for Black, because typically he wants to combine the doubling of pawns after ... i..xc3 with the structure ... d6/ ... eS) S i..g2 cS 60-0 tLlc6. One example of this line is 7 tLla4 "Wie7 8 a3 i..aS 9 d3 d6 10 l1bl i..d7 11 i..d2 i..xd2 12 "Wixd2 .l:.ab8 13 b4 cxb4 14 axb4 bS with equality. c) 4 "Wib3 (D) is used more often than White's other rare 4th moves, but I'm going to give it only a glance, partly because it doesn't have many unique features from the standpoint of strategy or instruction. The most popular response is 4 ... cS, when Topalov-Kramnik, Dortmund 2001 continued S g3 tLlc6 6 a3 i..aS 7 i..g2 O-O 8 O-O dS (8 ... d6 and 8 ... a6 are frequently played, the latter with the idea ... l1b8 and ... bS) 9 d3 h6!? 10 i..f4 .l:.e8 11 tLla4!? b6 (Kramnik mentions 11.. .eS 12 cxdS tLld4!) 12 tLleS i..d7! 13 e3 (13 tLlc3 is safer) 13 ... gS! 14 tLlxc6 i..xc6 IS .ieS tLlg4 16 i..c3 i..xc3 17 tLlxc3 dxc4 18 dxc4 i..xg2 19 ~xg2 Wie7 and the play was roughly balanced. We now return to 4 Wic2:

4 ... O-O

One of the main lines of the modem Nimzo- English is 4 ... cS S a3 i..aS 6 g3 tLlc6 7 i..g2 O-O

[diagram]
a) In Tal-Polugaevsky, USSR Ch, Erevan 1975, Black played 8 ... "ie7, which is generally held in low regard, but may not be such a bad

move: 9 d3 d6 10 rIb 1 h6 11 tLla2 dS!? (1l...eS

12 b4 i..b6 also appears satisfactory) 12 b4

i..b613 cxdS (13 e3 dxc4 14 dxc4 eS equalizes; for example, IS tLlc3 i..e6! 16 bS tLlaS 17 tLlxeS :l.ad8 18 tLla4 tLld7 19 tLlxd7 rIxd7 20 tLlb2 l1fd8; saving the extra pawn wasn't worth it) 13 ... exdS 14 i..b2 cxb41S tLlxb4 tLlxb4 16 axb4 i..g4 with equality. White can be more ambi- tious with 9 .l:!.dl intending 10 d4. Then Tal sug- gests 9 ... i..xc3 with the point 10 'iVxc3 eS 11 d3 dS!, an excellent solution, since 12 cxdS tLlxdS 13 "ic2 i..g4 must be fine. Upon 10 dxc3 in- stead, a good set-up is 1O ... h6 11 b4!? eS!? 12 bS tLlaS; for example, 13 'iVa4 b6 14 tLlh4 .tb7 IS tLlfS?! "Wie6 16 tLld6 i..xg2 17 'it>xg2 tLle8, etc., and the forward c-pawn will eventually fall. b) In contemporary chess, 8 ... d6 is almost exclusively played, with heaps of theory. I'll show a couple of games without any pretence of being thorough: bl) 9 e3 eS 10 d4 (10 b3!?) 1O ... i..xc3 11 "Wixc3 e4 12 tLld2 cxd4 13 exd4 dS (D).

MIKENAS ATTACK AND NIMZO-ENGLISH 327

This kind of position is almost always satis- factory for Black, because White's bishop-pair lacks range and his centre can't advance. Pant- sulaia-Gustafsson, Turin Olympiad 2006 con- tinued 14 c5 as 15 b3 b6 16 i..b2 i..a6 17 .l:i.fc1 bxc5 18'ii'xc5 ttJe7 19 b4 i..e2 20 i..c3 ~d7 21 i.b2 'ilVe6 22 'ilVc3 a4 1/2-1/2. b2) 9 d3 h6!? (both 9 ... a6 and 9 ... i..d7 are playable) 10 e3 e5 11 ttJd2 a6 12 lIb 1 i..d7 13 ttJa2 b5 (Palliser's 13 .. :~c8 may be an improve- ment) 14 b4 cxb4 15 axb4 i..b6 16 ttJc3 nc8, Nyback-Agrest, European Team Ch, Plovdiv 2003; now 17 'ii'b3! i..f5 18 ttJd5 ttJxd5?! 19 cxd5 ttJe7 20 lIal lIa8 21 i..b2 gives White a large advantage. w S a3 i..xc3 6 'ilVxc3 b6 7 g3 The next game features 7 e3. 7 . i..b7 8 i..g2 dS (D) The Nimzo-English can go in innumerable directions and we'll see just a few of them. I've picked out this variation because it typi- fies the kind of light -square strategy that is one possible justification of 3 ... i..b4, and resem- bles variations in the Queen's Indian, Catalan and Nimzo-Indian. That is, Black aims every piece and pawn at d5, e4 and associated light squares such as c4. His approach has been used through the years as a dynamic alterna- tive to ... c5/ ... d6/ ... e6 structures. 9d4 This is the main move, and for a reason. If White plays more slowly, Black's pawn on d5 can cause some problems: a) 9 b4 d4! 10 'ii'b2 e5 11 O-O ttJbd7 12 d3 lIe8 with double-edged play, Gabriel-Dautov, Bad Worishofen 1997. b) 9 O-O? is a mistake due to 9 ... dxc4! with the idea 10 ~xc4 (after other moves, Black will save his c-pawn) 1O ... i..a6. c) 9 cxd5 exd5 (or 9 ... ttJxd5 10 'ilVc2 c5) 10 O-O lIe8 11 lIel c5 12 d4 ttJe4 is easy for Black: 13 ~c2 ttJc6 14 dxc5 (14 i..e3 c4!; apart from the eventual power of Black's queenside majority, White has some problems with ... ttJaS) 14 ... bxc5 15 b3 'iVb6 16 e3 lIab8 17 lIbl!? i..a8!? 18 i..d2 a5 19 l:!.edl d4!, Speelman- Seirawan, Candidates match (game 6), Saint John 1988. 9 ... dxc410 'iVxc4 i..dS (D) w 11 ~c3 Hracek-Dautov, Bad Homburg 1997, a game similar to our main contest, went 11 'iVd3 i..e4 12 'iVc3 ttJbd7 13 b4?! (13 i..g5 nc8 140-0 c5 15 dxc5 lIxc5 is equal) 13 ... a5 14 b5 c6! 15 bxc6 l:.c8 16 O-O lIxc6 17 ~b3 'iVa8! with excellent light-square control. After 18 i..g5, Black should have played 18 ... lIc2!' 11 ... ttJbd7 (D)

328 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Planning ... c5. 12 b4?! Not exactly a blunder, but it weakens a few queenside light squares and opens the way for Black's next freeing move. White's best hope for a slight advantage (based upon his bishop- pair) was something along the lines of 12 O-O c5 13 .Bf4 :Lc8 14l:tfcl. 12  a5! 13 b5 13 a-a?! ttJe4 14 'iib2 axb4 15 axb4 :Lxa116 'ii'xal 'iVe7! intends ... l:.a8 and perhaps ... c5, when Black stands somewhat better. 13  c6 14 bxc6 :Lc8 15 O-O I1xc6 16 'iie3 'iia8! 17 .Bd2 b5 (D) w Now Black would like to occupy some queen- side outposts by ... ttJb6 and ... ttJc4 or ... ttJa4. 18 .l:!.tbl?! J:.b8 19 ttJel .Bxg2 20 ttJxg2 ttJe4! 21 "iVd3 Not 21 'iVxe4? .l:tc1+, and 21 .i.xa5 ttJxf2! will also favour Black. 21  l1d6! 22 .Be3 ttJe5 23 'iVc2 !tc8! 24 'VWb3 ttJc4 25 .l:.c1 l:tdc6 (D) w Black controls all the light squares. Proba- bly White needed to exchange rooks at some point. 26 "iVxb5 ttJxa3 27 'iWa4? A blunder. Still, Black's a-pawn is free to roam following 27 'iWh5 l:.xc 1+ 28 l:.xc 1 ttJc2. 27 . ttJc2! 28 l:.abll:.c4 0-1 After most queen moves, ... ttJxe3 wins a piece, and if 29 'iWb3, Black can win by either 29 ... a4 or 29 ... ttJxe3 30 'ii'xe3 ttJc3. Kramnik - Anand Dortmund 2000 1 ttJf3 ttJf6 2 c4 e6 3 ttJc3 .Bb4 4 'iWc2 O-O 5 a3 .Bxc3 6 "iVxc3 b6 7 e3 (D)

7  .Bb7 8 .Be2 d6 8 ... ttJe4 9 'iWc2 f5 looks a little silly, but the idea is to play ... ttJg5 when attacked by d3; for example, 10 b3 d6 11 .Bb2 ttJd7 12 d3 ttJg5!? 13 a-a-a?! (13 h4 ttJxf3+ 14 gxf3) 13 .. .f4! 14 l:thgl e5 15 d4 exd4?! (15 .. .fxe3! 16 fxe3 .Be4!) 16 exd4 .Be4 17 .Bd3! d5, Vallejo Pons-Papai- oannou, Calvia Olympiad 2004; here 18 .Bxe4 ttJxe4 19 ttJe5! looks advantageous, but overall this line shows promise for Black.

9 O-O ttJbd7 10 b4 a5!?

Here, too, 1O ... ttJe4!? 11 'iVc2 ttJg5 might be worth a shot. 1O ... c5 11 .Bb2 J::l.c8 (or Il..J:te8) is also a known option. 11 .i.b2 "iVe7 12 d4 axb4 There have been many games with 12 ... ttJe4 13 'iVd3 f5, when Black would love to get in moves like ... l1f6-h6, but 14 ttJd2 is supposed to give White a modest plus. 13 axb4 :!:tfc8

MIKENAS ATTACK AND NIMZO-ENGUSH 329

White's bishops and queen cooperate well after Kramnik's 13 .. J'ha1 14 .l:!.xa1 .l:!.a8 15 l'ha8+ .lixa8 16 'ii'a3 (16 d5!?) 16 ... 'ii'e8 17 B lbd2, with a clear advantage for White. 14 .l:!.xaS! .l:!.xaS 15 d5! lbfS 16 .l:!.dl .lieS?! 17lbd4 (D)

17 e5 Having constrained Black's minor pieces, it's time for the bishops to take over, and 17 ... .lid7? 18 dxe6! fxe6 19 .lif3 is a picture of their poten- tial. IS lbb3 .lid7 19 f3 'ii'dS 20 lbd2 lbg6 21 i.f1! h6 22 e4!? lbh7?! Black really should get some counterplay by 22 ... lbh5!. 23e5! Finally this move, opening lines on the queenside. 23 ... bxe5 24 bxe5 f5 25 .lia3 .l:!.eS?! Now, instead of 26 cxd6?, Kramnik suggests that White stands clearly better after 26lbc4!?, and decisively so after 26 'ii'e3! dxc5 27 exf5 .lixf5 28 lbc4. The 4 g4 Flank Attack Ilbf3lbf6 2 e4 e6 3lbc3.lib4 4 g4!? (D) This a fascinating move that attempts quite simply to attack on the flank without any prepa- ratory development, and in particular to drive Black's knight from the centre. The flank- before-centre strategy is a ubiquitous facet of modem chess that I haven't dealt with at length in these volumes, in part because the chosen variations are meant to be accessible to a general audience and tend to have a classical bent. Early flank moves are seen in almost every opening now, notably g4, h4, ... gS, ... hS and ... b5, but also in a two-step process such as a3 & b4, ... a6 & ... bS, h3 & g4, and ... h6 & ... gS. 4 g4 in the Nimzo-English has had a remarkably successful stretch from its introduction in the second half of the 1990s up to the present; it is the most important line for those who like orig- inal positions.

4 g4 is clearly an aggressive move, but its po-

sitional aspects also contribute to its viability. While a lot of the action will initially take place on the kingside, the centre becomes key in most variations. Inherent in the ... lbf6/ ... e6/ ... .lib4 set-up is Black's temporary abandonment of dark squares, notably d4 (as in the Nimzo-In- dian and Queen's Indian), all the more so when ... b6 and ... .lib7 are played. Since White has opened with the central move c4, he need only successfully dispute the e4-square in order to have a preponderance of the centre. That is nor- mally difficult in Nimzo/QID-style positions, but part of the strategy of driving off the f6- knight (or pinning it) is precisely to enhance White's control of e4. Also, to prevent ... .lixc3 from being effective, White's queen will very often be placed on c2. To quote Krasenkow, the most dedicated exponent of this system: "Gen- erally, the classical approach of the old theory is that flank attacks are only possible when the situation in the centre is stable (the centre is closed or seized by the attacker). That is not quite correct. Yes, a counterattack in the centre is the most effective reaction to the flank attack - but then everything depends on the steadiness of the centre. According to Nimzowitsch, even

330 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a small but solid centre justifies a flank attack ... A battle of these two concepts (a flank attack vs a central counterattack) forms the strategic con- tents of a wide range of opening systems." In specific terms, 4 g4 targets Black's king- side dark squares, namely, the points f6 and g7. Therefore in many lines White will play b3 and .Bb2; in other positions, if ... h6 has been played, White will sometimes effect the advance gS anyway. Given time, he can combine further ideas such as tbe4 and h4-hS-h6. Black has a few ideas of his own to counter this complex of White's intentions. He can ex- pand in the centre, and it's amazing how many of Black's wins (and draws) include ... dS-d4. That not only interferes with White's pieces (especially if he places a bishop on b2), but it also increases the influence of Black's own pieces in the centre, typically a bishop on b7, a knight on c6, or a rook on d8. Achieving ... O-O-O is more difficult than might be imagined, but castling away from White's attack will often render it less effective. Black can also exploit the looseness of White's kingside position by aiming his pieces in that direction. A bishop on b7 can probe squares along the hl-a8 diagonal, especially f3, a queen on c7 and knight on g4 can target f4 and h2, and if Black plays ... h6 be- fore gS comes, his rook will often sit on an open h-file. Let's tum to a few games (with key examples in their notes) to see how this plays out. Krasenkow - Spoelman Wijk aan Zee 2007 1 tbf3 tbf6 2 c4 e6 3 tbc3 .Bb4 4 g4 This common move-order is equivalent to I c4 tbf6 2 tbc3 e6 3 tbf3 .Bb4 4 g4. 4 ... h6 A very popular move. Black prepares to meet gS on any of the next few moves with ... hxgS, when his h-file control will be a valuable asset. Furthermore, White's h4 and gS combination (so as to recapture with a pawn on gS) takes one more move to prepare (usually l:!.gl) because of the pin along the h-file. Here are some important alternatives to in- troduce you to the ideas: a) 4 ... tbxg4?! is almost never seen, because after Sl:!.gl, White's rook gets to g7 and severely weakens Black's kingside (for example, S. .. tbh6 6l:.i.xg7 tbfS 7 l:.i.gl or S. . .fS 6 h3 tbf6 7 l:.i.xg7). b) To my mind, the sign that 4 g4 is a play- able and logical move stems from the fact that the wholly natural response 4 ... dS, themati- cally answering a flank advance with a central one, isn't very effective; in fact, leading grand- masters seem to have given up on it entirely. After S gS (D), Black has two main continua- tions.

bl) S. .. .Bxc3 6 bxc3 (Krasenkow feels that 6 dxc3 tbe4 7 .Bg2 is also better for White; this looks clear enough, with bishops, space and easy development) 6 ... tbe4. Now White can en- ter the forcing sequence 7 d3! tbxc3 8 'ifb3! d4 9 tbxd4 ~xd4 10 .Bb2 ~f4 11 ~xc3 ~xgS 12 h4 ~h6, and while 13 ~xg7 ~xg7 14 .Bxg7 l:!.g8 IS J::tgl! gave White a positional advantage in Popov-Orlov, St Petersburg 1999, 13l:.i.gl! is better still; for example, 13 ... ng8 14 .iel!? ~xh4 ISl:hg7. b2) S. .. tbe4 6 h4 (6 ~a4+ tbc6 7 tbeS is also bothersome) 6 ... tbc6 7 ~c2 fS 8 gxf6!? (8 d3! tbxc3 9 bxc3 .Bd6 10 cxdS exdS 11 ~b3! eyes dS and b7, when after 11...~e7, both 12 .i.g2 .i.d7 13 l:.i.bl and 12 hS are better for White, and easier for him to play) 8. .. tbxf6 9 a3 .i.xc3 10 dxc3 "fiIe7 (White has an unobstructed bishop-pair after 1O ... dxc4 11 e4) 11 .igS .Bd7 (l1...dxc4!? 120-O-O eS may be best, when 13 hS!? is an aggressive alternative to 13 "fiIa4) and here instead of 12 O-O-O dxc4! (Zviagintsev- Piket, Tilburg 1998), White has 12 cxdS! exdS

13 O-O-O, reducing his opponent's counterplay.

Very likely the options on moves 6 and 8 are the main reasons why Black has given up on 4 ... dS.

MIKENAS ArrACK AND NIMZO-ENGLISH 331

c) An example of central emphasis by Black is 4 ... .Jixc3 S dxc3 d6 6 gS liJfd7 7 .Jie3 'iie7 (7 ... b6?! allows 8 'iid4! O-O 9 ~e4 c6 10 O-O-O B dS 11 ~c2) 8 .Jig2 eS. At this point Black's pawn-structure is arguably superior; however, he still has a problem with his retarded develop- ment. Cornette-Adams, French Team Ch, Bor- deaux 2003 continued 9 'ii'c2liJc6 (D). w 10 h4liJb6 11 b3 g6 12liJd2 (heading for e4 and f6) 12 ... .JifS 13 .Jie4 (Krasenkow queries this, suggesting 13liJe4! with the point 13 ... dS? 14 .Jixb6 dxe4 IS .Jie3) 13 .. :~e6, and here both 14 hS and 140-0-00-O-O IS .Jixb6 axb6 16 hS Rb8 17 'it'b2 .Jixe4 18 'iixe4 give White an edge. d) In Ilyin-Aseev, Russian Ch, Krasnoiarsk 2003, Black played too passively and White's initiative came logically from his opening strat- egy: 4 ... d6 S gS liJfd7 6 'iVc2liJc6 7 a3 .Jixc3 8 'iVxc3 eS 9 b4 f6 (9 ... O-O 10 d3 'ii'e7 11 .Jig2 or 11 1.tgl looks more like a traditional English Opening structure) 10 bSliJe7 11 d4 a6 12 gxf6 gxf6131.tgl axbS 14 cxbS c6!? IS .Jid2 'iVb616 e4 cxbS 17 ~b3 exd4 18 .JixbS ~d8 19 l;Ig7 with greater activity and attacking chances. After all these fine examples, we return to 4 ... h6 and the main game: 5 ~c2 (D) White's primary idea here is to cover the e4- square, both as a matter of general principle and in order to discourage a knight from landing there. In fact, S 1.tg 1 is more common, because White doesn't fear S. .. .Jixc3 6 dxc3. 5 . b6 Now S. .. dS!? doesn't work well due to 6 a3 .JiLf8 (6 ... .Jie7 7 d4 is a Queen's Gambit with accelerated kingside play for White) 7 d4liJxg4 8 .l:.g 1 liJf6 9 e4 with superb compensation in the form of space, superior development, and greater possession of the centre. 6a3 Mamedyarov-Naiditsch, Lausanne 2003 con- tinued 6 .l:tgl .Jib7 7 a3 i.f8 8 d4 d6 9 e4liJbd7 10 i.e3 a6 11 O-O-O (the big centre must give White the advantage) ll...cS 12 dS eS 13 h4 g6 14 gS! hxgS IS hxgS liJhS 16 .Jih3! i.g7 17 tlhl and White has the upper hand; one of Black's difficulties is that he can be attacked on the queenside if he goes that way. 6 ... i.e7 7 e4 i.b7 8 d4 It's true that Black's knight still watches over e4, but his bishop is no longer on b4 to help contest that square. Now Black challenges the centre, but it's a bit late. 8 ... d5 9 cxd5 exd510 e5liJe4 (D) w 11 i.b5+?! White would be in charge after 11 .i.d3!; for example, ll...liJgS!? 12 i.xgS hxgS 13 e6!,

332 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

intending 13 ... fxe6 14 tbeS!. The alternative

11...tbxc3 12 bxc3 strengthens White's centre,

after which Black's mode of development is unclear; for example, 12 ... O-O 13 J:tgl tbc6 14 gS hS IS g6 with the idea IS .. .f6? 16 ~e2!. Thus White wins the theoretical battle. 1l . c6 12 tbxe4 cxb5 13 tbg3 tbc6 14 iLd2 ~d7 15 h3!? b4 IS ... g6! would hold the fort.

16 O-O!? ii.a6 17 :Uel bxa3 18 bxa3?!

Here 18 tbfS! poses very serious problems, because 18 ... O-O?? loses to 19 'iJr'xc6 (a conse- quence of 16 ... iLa6), and 18 ... 'ilo>f8 19 tbxe7 tbxe7 20 l:txa3! iLbS 21 e6! fxe6 22 tbeS has ideas like ii.b4, .l:.c3-c7 and other obvious at- tacking moves. After the less incisive 18 bxa3, White nev- ertheless launches a strong attack, which I'll show without notes: 18 O-O 19 iLxh6 gxh6 20 e6 'iJr'c8 21.l:tac1?! ii.c4?! 22 tbf5 iLf6 23 exf7+ 'ilo>h8 24 tbd6 Wlic7 25 'iig6 ii.g7 26 tbg5 iLd3 27 tbf5 iLxf5 28 gxf51-0 Kosten - C. Balogh Austrian Team Ch, Velden 200314

1 c4 e6 2 tbc3 ii.b4 3 tbf3 tbf6 4 g4 O-O

This is Black's most fundamental response: bring the pieces out, castle, create no weakness, and let White's gS-pawn sit out there looking lonely. Nevertheless, it cooperates with White's basic idea when playing g4-gS, which is to chase the knight from control of central squares in order to gain time to pursue his flank attack with pawns.

5 g5 tbe8 (D)

w 6 'iJr'c2 c5 6 ... dS is a natural test of the g4-gSriVc2 set up. A fascinating game Krasenkow-Roman- ishin, Lvov 2000 continued 7 b3 ii.e7 (with the double idea of attacking gS and bringing a piece to a defensive function; also, Black wants to play ... cS and not cut the bishop off from the kingside) 8 .l:tgl cS (with the idea of ... d4; against the other means of enforcing that move, 8 ... tbc6, Krasenkow gives 9 e3 d4 10 exd4 tbxd4 11 tbxd4 'iixd4 12 ii.b2) 9 e3 tbc6 10 iLd3 fS (the pawn on gS interferes with Black's defensive options; a radical solution is 1O ... tbb4 11 ii.xh7+ 'ilo>h8 12 'iibl d4, but then 13 'iVe4! is extremely strong, with the idea 13 ... dxc3 14 'iYh4) 11 gxf6 tbxf6 12 a3 'iVe8 13 ii.b2 (D).

White has carried out his strategy of opening the g-file and aiming his bishops at the enemy king, whereas Black has managed to advance his c- and d-pawns and has the superior centre. The assessment here isn't made clear by the course of the game, as both sides had their chances: 13 ... 'iJr'hS 14 iLe2 d4 IS tbxd4! tbxd4 16 exd4 'iJr'xh2 17 O-O-O cxd4 18 tbe4 'iWf4 (18 ... tbxe4 19 'iJr'xe4 .l:txf2? {19 ... .l:tf4!} 20 ii.xd4! ii.xa3+ 21 'ilo>c2 .l:tf7 22 .l:tdfl and White wins) 19 ii.d3 tbxe4!? 20 ii.xe4 h6 21 iLxd4 iLf6? (this was Black's opportunity; Ftacnik analyses 2l...iLxa3+! 22 'ilo>bl eS with the idea 23 ii.e3!? 'tWxe4! 24 'tWxe4 ii.fS 2S 'iiVxfS .l:txfS 26 iLxh6 :f7 27 ii.e3 and White has chances, but they probably won't add up to much more than equal- ity versus careful defence) 22 ii.e3 'iJr'd6 23 cS 'tWa6 24 a4 'tWaS 2S iLxh6 'tWb4 26 ~xg7+! (D). A lovely way to finish the game; the initial ambitions of the ngl & ii.b2 plan are realized:

MIKENAS ATTACK AND NIMZO-ENGLISH 333

26 ... .Bxg7 27 .Bh7+ 'it>h8 28 .Bxg7+ ~xg7 29 ~g6+ 'it>h8 30 ~hS .l:i.xf2 (there's nothing to be done) 31 .Be4+ 'it>g7 32l:tgl+ ~f8 33 'iVh6+ <3;;e7 34 .l:i.g7+ nf7 3S ~gS+ 'it>e8 36 J:Ig8+ 1-0.

[diagram]
In view of the course of the game, 7 ... .Bxc3 should be considered, having in mind 8 'iVxc3 (8 dxc3!? is also promising) 8 ... b6; then 9 b4 gives White an edge because of his bishop-pair. SlL'le4!? The knight attacks cS and also looks towards the kingside. 8 e3 is a good, perhaps even ob- jectively better, alternative. S  b69b4! An impressive idea: White sacrifices a pawn, but is able to play .Bb2 a tempo while Black's bishop on as is stranded far from defence of his king. As they say, however, a pawn is a pawn, and 9 b3 was certainly a reasonable option.

9 ... cxb410 .Bb2 (D) The threat is l:tgl and lL'lf6+. 10 .. .Bb7 Kosten analyses 1O ... dS!? 11 lL'lf6+ gxf6?! (after 11 ... lL'lxf6! 12 gxf6 g6, the dark squares around Black's king are terribly weak, but an advantage for White would have to be proven) 12 gxf6 lL'lxf6 13 ~gl+ ~h8 14 lL'lgS d4 IS .Bg2 winning the rook in the comer, because of IS ... h6 16 axM .Bxb4 17 h4!.

11 J:Igl b3!

At least Black disrupts the harmony of White's queenside pawn-structure and hits d2, although the bishop on as is still only margin- ally involved. 12 ~d3 (D)

....Bxe4 Here 12 ... dS!? 13 .Bxg7! Rxg7 14 ~d4+ ~ g8 IS lL'lf6+ lL'lxf6 16 gxf6+ 'it>h8 17 lL'lgS! forces 17 ... .Bxd2+ 18 ~xd2 lL'ld7 19 lL'lxh7! dxc4 20 ~el lL'lxf6 21 ~c3! and White will come out on top. 13 ~xe4 (D)

...l L'lc6!

334 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

A simple positional edge for White follows l3 ... dS?! 14 cxdS ~xdS IsliVxdS exdS 16lbd4, whereas l3 ... lba6 14l:[g3lbcS? fails to IsliVh4 h6 16l:[h3 with the idea 'ii'hS. 14l:[g3 f5!? Kosten analyses 14 ... lbd6! IS 'ilt'g4 (or IS 'ilt'd3) IS .. Jle8 16 :th3 eS 17 ~hS lbxc4 18 ~xh7+ ~f8 19 l::tbllbxb2 20 ':'xb2 e4, which will probably end in perpetual check. In gen- eral, the opening has been balanced, although 8 e3 should be looked into. 15 gxf6lbxf616'i1t'd3 'ilt'e717 .Bg2?! 'ilt'c5?! 18 l:tg5 'ii'e7 190-O-O d5 20 cxd5 exd5 21lbh4 From now on, White's attack flows smoothly; once again we see how the rook on the g-file and bishop on b2 collaborate in attack. 21  .l:.ae8?! 22 .Bxd5+ ~h8 23 .Bxb3! ~xe2 24lbg6+! hxg6 25 'ii'xg6 1-0 White wins after 2S ... l:te7 26 .Bxf6 I1xf6 27 I1hS+ iVxhS 28liVxhS+. Now let's see a more successful example from Black's point of view. Agrest - Ivanchuk Swedish Team Ch, Gothenburg 2004 Ilbf3lbf6 2 c4 e6 3lbc3 .Bb4 4 g4 O-O 5 g5 lbe8 6 lIgl!? As opposed to 6 iVc2 of the previous game. 6  b6 7 iVc2 .Bb7 (D)

[diagram]
This looks normal, but we've seen how gS and .l:lgl go well with pieces that look towards the kingside, so 10 b4 is more appropriate. That also discourages ... dS, since cS would be hang- ing.

[diagram]
11 d4 would be interesting.

11  d4! Black cramps White's game, extends the range of his own bishop, and blocks the al-h8 diagonal that White likes so much. 12 'ilt'c2 ~c7 13 .Bd2 lbd7 14 O-O-O lbd6!

(D)

Another centralized piece; this knight sup- ports potential ... bS and ... eS-e4 breaks, and can also go to fS. 15 .Bf4l:!.fe8 16lbe5?! .Bxg2 17lbxd7 17 .l:.xg2? loses to 17 ... lbfS 18lbxd7 ~xf4+ 19 ~d2 'ii'd6 and the knight is lost. 17 . J1Vxd7 18 .Bxd6 ~xd6 19 .l:lxg2 .l:lab8 20 .l:.d2 b5 21 e3 b4! 22 axb4 .l:lxb4 23 exd4 cxd4 Black has the attack and the superior central position, while White's pieces are all passive. The rest is easy to follow: 24 l:!.g4 'ilt'xh2 25 f4 liVhl + 26 liVdl liVb7 27 l:!.h4 Itb8 28 :thh2 ~a6 29 ~c2 e5 30 fxe5 .1:ta4 31 'it>dll:!.al+ 32 'it>e2 WVe6 33 'it>f3liVf5+ 34 'it>g3 Iii'xg5+ 0-1

12 King's Indian Variations

The majority of grandmasters who open the game with I c4 or 1 lLlf3 are happy to transpose into the 1 d4 version of the King's Indian De- fence if their opponents play the King's Indian moves ... lLlf6, ... g6, ... i..g7, ... d6 and ... O-O. Why? I) There are a wealth of interesting systems to play against the King's Indian Defence. 2) There is no Reti Opening set-up (lLlf3, c4 and double fianchetto) that promises a seri- ous advantage versus the King's Indian. Nevertheless, not everyone wants to face the preparation of a dedicated King's Indian player, and I want to address two versions of the King's Indian Defence that remain in the domain of the English Opening. One is the Botvinnik System versus the King's Indian, consisting of c4, lLlc3, g3, i..g2 and e4 in some sequence. This admit- tedly won't be available to White after I lLlf3, but is used by various players via the English Opening proper. For example, I mentioned 1 c4 eS 2 lLlc3 lLlc6 3 g3 g6 4 i..g2 i..g7 S e4 lLlf6 in the chapter on the Closed English and shall look at it here. Moreover, opening sequences like 1 c4 g6 2 lLlc3 i..g7 3 g3 eS 4 i..g2 d6 might encourage White to play S e4 and face S. .. lLlf6, or S. .. lLlc6 6 lLlge2 lLlf6. Another anti-King's Indian variation is espe- cially relevant to those who employ I lLlf3 with an early c4; for example, 1 lLlf3 lLlf6 2 c4 g6 3 lLlc3 i..g7 4 g3 d6 S i..g2 O-O 6 O-O eS. Now White holds back from d4 by using the modest 7 d3. Whether or not this achieves an advan- tage, it has been played and analysed for many years and is useful for both sides to understand. Botvinnik Variation vs the King's Indian The majority of English Opening players who like the Botvinnik set-up would rather use it against a King's Indian Defence than any other. That arises naturally after 1 c4 lLlf6 2 lLlc3 g6 3 g3 i..g7 4 i..g2 O-O S e4 d6 6 lLlge2 (D):

Here 6 ... eS completes the King's Indian structure that we'll be looking at in this chapter, but take a look at the first note in the following game to clarify what the move-order issues are. Petrosian - Bertok Zagreb 1965

[diagram]
e5 This game actually began with 1 c4 eS, but I've adjusted the move-order to make an impor- tant point. Regardless of which sequence of moves White picks, it's difficult for him to avoid a Symmetrical English should his oppo- nent so choose; that is, Black can abstain from playing ... eS until White has already committed to e4 and a Botvinnik formation. Then, once e4 is played, Black can set up with ... cS instead of ... eS. For example, at this point in our game, the sequence S ... cS 6 lLlge2 lLlc6 enters the Sym- metrical Botvinnik lines (see Chapter 7). Simi- larly, with the conventional move-order' 1 c4 lLlf6 2 lLlc3 g6 3 g3 i..g7 4 .i.g2 O-O S e4, Black can play S ... cS. White needs to take this into ac- count because he either has to have a system

336 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

prepared versus ... cS variations, or he has to limit himself to playing the Botvinnik System only when Black has committed to an early B ... eS. Of course, that covers a lot of territory. Finally, Black can play ... c6 without ... eS, but these lines are less well-defined and for rea- sons of space I've concentrated upon ones that overlap with l...eS variations. 6lbge2lbc6 This is arguably the most important move, because it can occur via a number of move- orders. Instead, 6 ... O-O 7 O-O lbbd7 (or 7 ... c6 8 d3 lbbd7) places Black's knight more flexibly in return for reduced control over d4. One of his most common ideas is to play for ... bS; for ex- ample, 8 d3 (8 f4 c6 9 h3 bS! 10 cxbS cxbS has ideas of ... b4, ... Jlb7 and/or ... dS) 8 ... c6 9 h3 (9 f4 bS! gains a tempo for attack due to the b- pawn defence by .. .'iVb6+) 9 ... a6 (9 ... aS!? 10 Jle3l:tb8 has a similar look: 11 f4 bS 12 fS bxc4 13 dxc4 lbb6 14 b3 gxfS IS .i.gS dS 16 exdS cxdS 17 cxdS ~d6 18 ~h2 Jld7 19 "iVd2 a4 20 bxa4 lIa8 21 l:.abl lbxa4 22 lbxa4 .l:i.xa4 with chances for both sides, Kotov-Geller, Lenin- grad 19S6) 10 Jle3 (10 a4, to prevent ... bS, has the drawback that 1O ... aS! secures cS as an outpost for Black's knight) 1O ... bS 11 ~d2 .i.b7 12 f4 exf4 13 gxf4 .l:.e8 14lbg3 lbb6 IS a4 b4 16lbce2 as 17 b3 cS 18l:tadl 'fie7 with dynamic equality, Lein-Vasiukov, USSR Ch, Tbilisi 196617. These lines with ... c6 are impos- sible to reduce to general ideas, and most games stemming from them will take on a unique char- acter. 7 d3

7 O-O O-O 8 f4 (D) is a common way to try to

get fS in before Black has time to block the f- pawn by moving his knight from f6 and playing .. .fS. Black has to act quickly: a) He can try to compromise White's big centre by 8 ... exf4 9 gxf4 Jlg4 10 d4 lbhS, but after 11 Jle3, he can't quite seem to break it down, because 11...fS 12 eS dxeS leaves White with a clear positional plus following 13 dxeS! (and not 13 fxeS? f4!). b) In Bilek-Liptay, Hungarian Ch, Budapest 1963, 8 ... Jle6 9 d3 ~d7 10 ~hl :tab8 11 i.e3 lbg4 12 .i.gl (one of the points ofWhl) 12 ... fS 13 exfS gxfS 14 'fid2 resulted in a static posi- tion for Black. A good course of action after Black's 14 ... a6 would have been IS lbdS 'i!Vf7 16l:tabl or here 16 l::tac1 with the idea b4. c) 8 ... lbd4! may well be best, with the idea ... Jlg4, if only because 9 lbxd4? exd4 10 lbe2 d3! is rather embarrassing; e.g., l1lbc3 c6 12 ~f3 ~b6+ 13 ~hl 'i!Vd4. 7  0-080-0 lbd4!? 9lbxd4 exd4 10 lbe2 c5?! This renders Black's centre immobile and gives White a free hand. A better treatment was 1O ... lbe8 11 h3 c612 b4 as! 13 bS cxbS 14 cxbS a4! IS ~d2 'fib6 liz-liz Prusikin-Schunk, Altenkirchen 200S. Black's d-pawn is obvi- ously not an issue for a long while, and he has some real pressure on the b-pawn after ... lbc7 and ... Jld7. Of course White can improve upon this.

11 b4 (D)

1O ... cS has its consequences, because in this position White can work around the d-pawn to attack on either or both wings: 11  lbd7 12 bxc5 dxc5 13 f4 f6 14 a4

KING'S INDIAN VARIATIONS 337

White makes sure that Black won't get ... bS in. 14. a515 g4 Creeping forward. White could also attack with the f-pawn; for example, IS i.d2l:te8 16 .l:Ibl .l:Ib8 17 fS! tDeS 18 tDf4! with the idea 18 ... gS 19 tDdS tDxd3 20 i.xgS!. 15  tDb8 Here 16 fS! would have been very strong, es- pecially since Black's knight is now two moves from the outpost square on eS. There might fol- low 16 ... tDc6 17 tDf4 gS 18 tDdS and if Black tries to exchange off the dominant knight by 18 ... tDe7, he gets hit with 19 eS! tDxdS 20 i.xdS+ ~h8 21 e6. Motwani - Apicella Noyon 2005

[diagram]
O-O

Black can try to save a tempo by delaying castling, and he might also reason that White's standard kingside plans aren't so impressive if there's no king over there: S. .. eS 6 tDge2 tDc6 7 d3 tDd7!? and then: a) 8 i.e3 is the natural reaction to ... tDd7, both because ... tDg4 is no longer possible and because it supports the move d4. Then 8 ... tDcS

9 O-O tDe6 prevents d4. Maybe White can try 9

d4!? exd4 10 tDxd4, when Black would proba- bly respond 1O ... tDeS 11 b3 tDcd3+ 12 Wfl tDcS, preventing White from castling. b) 8 tDdS tDcs 9 h4 h6 10 i.e3 tDe6 (D). w By not castling, Black has restrained d4 and is ready to occupy it: 11 'iVd2 tDcd4 12 i.xd4 exd4 13 tDdf4 tDcs 14 tDc1 c6 IS tDb3 tDe6 16 tDxe6 i.xe6, L.Karlsson-Ciocaltea, Nis 1981. It's a little hard for either side to find a produc- tive plan, so we can call this equal. 6 tDge2 e5 7 O-O (D)

7  i.e6 This is a flexible move that doesn't commit the queen's knight, which can still come to c6, d7 or a6. In the last two cases the move ... c6 will be available. The main point is that by attacking c4, he forces a reaction and has time to prevent h3 by getting .. .'.\~'d7 in. Without the move h3, it's more difficult for White to play i.e3 due to ... tDg4. In addition, Black's defensive move ... i.g4 can come in handy. Not surprisingly, White has his own advan- tages in this formation. If he gets either d4 or f4 in and Black captures the pawn, then tDxd4 or tDxf4 will attack Black's bishop on e6. Also, if White plays f4, he can play fS with a gain of time, even as a pawn sacrifice. Finally, the move tDdS can sometimes be answered by ... tDxdS, but that will now come with loss of tempo due to the attack on e6. Black can play the same idea with his knight already committed to c6 (for example, from a Closed English move-order), but this doesn't seem as effective: 7 ... tDc6 8 d3 (or 8 f4; com- pare the notes in the previous game) 8 ... i.e6 (instead of 8 ... tDe8 and ... fS) 9 h3 tDe8 (9 .. :~d7 10 'iii>h2 tDhS 11 tDdS tDd8?!, Averbakh-Traj- kovic, Dresden 19S6, and now Marin suggests 12 g4! tDf613 f4) 10 lIbl as 11 a3 ~d7 12 'iii>h2 fS 13 exfS gxfS 14 f4 (D). This is Bilek-G.Horvath, Hungarian Ch, Bu- dapest 1973. Here White has constructed the

338 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

standard blockade of Black's f-pawn, which re- stricts the mobility of his pieces. We've seen versions of this position in many variations. The exchange ... exf4 would isolate Black's f- pawn after White recaptures with a piece, and ... e4 will lose material. So Black is best off maintaining the status quo in the centre and looking to improve the position of his pieces. White stands better, but his advantage is lim- ited. 8d3

8 b3 is another possibility, when White's new

idea is to prepare d4. One solution is 8 ... liJc6 9 d3 liJd7!? 10 .i.e3, and now 1O ... f5 11 exf5 .i.xf5 is only slightly better for White. Black can also try the daring idea 1O ... liJd4!? 11 ~xd4 exd4 12liJb5 c6!? 13 liJbxd4 .i.g4 14 f3 'ii'b6 15 fxg4 .i.xd4+ 16liJxd4 'ilt'xd4+ 17 'ii;>hlliJe5. This remains unclear, only because of White's horrible bishop on g2; for example, 18 ~e2 'tli'xd3 19 'ii'xd3 liJxd3 20 l:.adl liJe5 21 .u.xd6 l:tad8. 8  JWd7 (D) w 9f4 Here are two thematic alternatives: a) Biocanin-Rankov, Belgrade 2005 went 9 liJd5liJxd5?! (Black should be fine after 9 ... c6! 10 liJxf6+ .i.xf6) 10 cxd5 .i.h3, and here we have a recurring situation in which White can make Black regret the bishop trade by 11 f4!, threatening f5. If Black retreats, White sacri- fices a pawn for control of the light squares fol- lowing 1l....i.g4 12 f5! gxf5 13 h3! .i.xe2 14 'ii'xe2 fxe4 15 dxe4 with the idea l:tf5; then 15 .. .f5 16 exf5 l:txf5 17 .i.e3 exploits Black's poor development and bad bishop. Play through that one; it's instructive! b) 9 .i.e3 c6! is a good solution, with the simple idea of ... d5; for example, 10 f3 d5 11 cxd5 cxd5 12 f4!? liJg4 (12 ... dxe4 13 liJxe4 liJxe4 14 dxe4liJc6 is equal) 13 .i.cl (13 .tc5 d4 14 .i.xf8 liJe3) 13 ... dxe4 14 liJxe4 exf4 15 l:txf4 liJc6 . 9 . .i.h3?! 10 f5!? A standard plan. White wants to advance on the kingside by h3, g4 and g5. Nevertheless, the preparatory 10 .i.e3! might be preferable. Apart from f5, d4 would then become an idea. w 10  .i.xg2 11 'ii;>xg2liJc6?!

11...c6! is better.

12 h3 gxf5? (D)

13l:.xf5! The f5 outpost and kingside light squares will keep Black busy from now on.

13. . liJe714 .tIf2 'ii;>h815 g4 b516liJg3 b4?!

Giving White has a free hand on the king- side, but the situation was bad anyway. 17 liJce2 c6 18 .tg5 liJfg8 19 liJh5 f6 20 .i.d2 a5 21 liJeg3 d5 22 'ii'c2 l:tad8 23 l:tafl

KING'S INDIAN VARIATIONS 339

dxc4 24 dxc4 'iUd4 25 'ii'c1! ltJg6 26 ltJxg7 ltJh4+ 27 ~hl ~xg7 Now instead of28 i..e3, White had an imme- diate win with 28 i..gS!, because i..xh4 and ltJhS+ are both threatened, and Black loses af- ter 28 .. .fxgS 29 'ii'xgS+ ltJg6 30 ltJfS+ ~xfS 31 exfS, etc. The Closed Engl ish Formation Shatskes - L. Muchnik Moscow (Central Chess Club Ch) 1966 1 c4ltJf6 2ltJc3 d6 3 g3 e5 4 i..g2 ltJc6 5 d3 g6 6 ltJf3 i..g7 7 O-O O-O Sl:tbl (D)

8 e4 is mentioned in the next game.

This position has been the starting point for a remarkable number of master games over the years. White sets up as he often does in the Closed English (Chapter 6). He has in mind b4-bS, in a sense 'extending' the effective reach of his favourite bishop on g2 by controlling squares along that diagonal. 8l:tbl has the addi- tional advantage of removing the rook from po- tential attacks by the g7-bishop. We looked at this type of position in the Closed English chapter at some length, but with Black's pawn on fS. I think it's fair to say that, although there are always trade-offs, the position with ... fS in is more difficult for White to fight against be- cause Black's pawn attack is well underway. One way of looking at it is that, in our variation, Black will move his knight from f6 and play .. .fS, which raises the question of whether he has not somehow lost a tempo in doing so. Naturally it's not so easy. It's true that there are many variations in which Black moves his knight and plays ... fS, but doesn't mean that those are the best variations, or that ... fS can't sometimes be a weakening move. Indeed, over the years, leading players have turned towards defending Black's queenside with pieces, and in the main lines he plays ... ltJf6-d7. Then it can be argued that Black has saved a tempo by not playing .. .fS! Which way is better? It all de- pends upon which plan you think is appropri- ate, and which you feel more comfortable with. Finally, I should note that I haven't allocated space to variations with an early ... c6; for exam- ple, 1 c4 ltJf6 2 ltJc3 g6 3 g3 i..g7 4 i..g2 d6 S ltJf3 O-O 6 O-O eS 7 d3 c6, or here 7 ... l:te8, or 7 ... h6 8l:tbl as 9 a3 .l:Ie8. In each case, Black's first, direct idea is simply ... c6 and ... dS, which is usually prefaced by protecting the e-pawn. Such lines are extremely difficult to analyse precisely, but they are respectable and involve less theory, which is perhaps an advantage in some players' minds. S  i..d7!? This old move is hardly used any more, al- though it really hasn't been refuted. Black wants to play .. :~c8 and ... i..h3, exchanging White's bishop on g2 and initiating an attack on the kingside. With 8 ... i..d7, he wants to save the time spent on ... h6, as in the main lines 8 ... h6 9 b4 i..e6 and 8 ... aS 9 a3 h6. Without ... h6, a bishop on e6 can be harassed by ltJgS. Of course, 8 ... i..d7 is rather passive, and a queen on c8 is less effectively placed than on d7. If Black inserts the moves 8 ... aS 9 a3 before playing 9 ... i..d7, his queen on c8 makes it diffi- cult to contest the a-file after 10 b4 axb4 11 axb4 'iUc8 12 bS ltJe7 13 i..b2 i..h3 14l:tal.

9 b4 'iVcs 10 b5ltJe7 lll:tel (D)

This classic game illustrates some fundamen- tal themes. First, we see in its most direct form the plan with ~bl and b4-bS that typifies so many variations in the English Opening. Then we see White trying to save his bishop from ex- change by playing l1l:tel, so that when Black plays ... i..h3, White can retreat his bishop to hI without losing the exchange to ... i..xfl. This costs a tempo and weakens f2, so Black's usual response will be to launch a kingside attack.

340 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1l  il.h3 12 il.hlttJg4? A mistake, although it doesn't change the natural course of the game because White fails to seize upon its tactical shortcoming. The ac- curate move is 12 ... h6, when 13 ~c2 ttJg4 transposes to the game. Whether ... ttJg4 is su- perior to other plans is another matter; one drawback is that it reduces control of the centre. 13 'ii'c2? A sound move, but missing the tactic 13 ttJgS!, which attacks the bishop on h3. Then 13 ... ttJf6 14 il.xb7! 'ii'xb7 lSttJxh3 isn't a very effective gambit for Black. Apart from this technicality, White's choice of c2 for the queen is noteworthy. It would seem that b3 is a better square, guarding dS and sup- porting the potential attack by cS and b6. In fact, that's where the queen usually goes in the games below. 13. h614ttJd5! ttJxd515 cxd5 (D)

This is the point. Black's only weakness is at c7, and now White's queen faces it directly. 15. f5 lS ... ttJf6 16 ~c4 .:te8, with the idea ... .:te7 and if necessary ... ttJe8, would be an admission that his kingside action was premature. Still, it would be interesting to see how White would make progress in that case. 16 il.d2 f4 Black is hoping that something will happen on that weak f2-square.

17 J:1ec1 .:tf7 18 .:tb4!

The star move. This rook not only prepares to go to c4 and further pile up on the weak pawn, but it also plays a role in defending the kingside along the 4th rank. 18 ttJf6! Black retreats in order to attack dS, but the more so to defend c7 with his next move. 19l:tc4 (D)

A classical picture of the English Opening queenside assault. White has tripled on the c- file, and an advance by a4-aS and b6 is on the cards. Black's plan is less obvious, because af- ter his next move he has only a couple of pieces in the attack. 19 ttJe8 Not 19 ... ttJxdS? 20 ttJxeS!, and either dS or f7 falls.

20 a4 g5 21 il.el

White's pieces coordinate well. His bishop move protects the kingside (especially the sen- sitive f2), and prepares ttJd2-e4. Nevertheless, he needs a concrete way to proceed, and his pieces are mostly cut off from the kingside. Since Black's bishop on h3 has turned into a monster, 21 il.g2 was a sensible option. 21  il.f6?!

KING'S INDIAN VARIATIONS 341

2l...'iVg4! 22 liJd2 'iVh5 looks satisfactory, with enough danger to White's king that he has to pay attention. 22 liJd2 i.d8? This is completely unnecessary and permits White to finally open a second front: in the cen- tre. 23 d4! i.f5 24 'iVb3!? exd4 25l:.xd4 i.f6 26 l:.dc4 'iVd8 27 liJe4 i.e5 28 i.c3 'iVe7 29 'iVb2 All White's pieces have tremendous scope, and he went on to win. Dedes - Grivas lraklion 1992 lliJf3liJf6 2 g3 g6 3 i.g2 i.g7 4 O-O O-O 5 c4 d6 6 liJc3 e5 7 d3 liJc6 8l:.bl

8 e4 is usually frowned upon with this dispo-

sition of pieces. White has constructed a Bot- vinnik System pawn-structure, but his knight on f3 blocks his f-pawn (as opposed to having it on the normal e2-square). That really isn't such an awful circumstance, but since Black can move his knight and be ready to play .. .f5 him- self, he can equalize rather easily. Giinthner- Uhlmann, German Ch, Bad Wildbad 1993 pro- ceeded 8 ... liJh5 9 i.g5! f6 (9 ... i.f6 is a sound alternative) 10 i.e3 i.e6 11 h3 liJe7 (reintro- ducing the idea of ... c6 and ... d5) 12liJd5 c6 13 liJxe7+ 'iVxe7 14liJel 'iVf7 with a level game. In this line, 8 ... a6 with the idea ... b5 is also attractive, because White's usual counterbreak with f4 isn't on hand.

[diagram]
Black plays this move far more often than not, and it goes well with the defensive system that he chooses for this game. 9a3 White naturally tries to enforce b4. 9 .. liJd4 (D) 9 ... h6 is the focus of the next game. Throughout the years, this knight incursion has proven frustrating to White. It eliminates some of the force of White's queenside attack and prepares central expansion with ... c6 and ... d5. The possibility of ... c6 is also useful in preventing White's knight from becoming set- tled on d5. Finally, if White exchanges the knight on d4, Black hopes to use his open e-file in conjunction with ... i.g4 to cause White some problems. As for White, he can take some comfort in the fact that the attack by ... f5 is put on hold, which means that he can shift his forces to the queenside and centre without fear. Black has expended a tempo on ... liJd4, so that gives White some extra time to expand on the queenside. Be- cause of the simplification that ... liJd4 promises, he can also play i.g5 followed by i.xf6, hoping to simplify the game and reduce Black's control over the crucial e4- and d5-squares. This makes the assumption that his knights will be better than Black's passive dark-squared bishop. How- ever, that kind of imbalance tends to be only a temporary advantage. 10b4 a) It might seem natural to kick the black knight by 10 e3 liJxf3+ 11 i.xf3, but after

11...c6, there's no stopping ... d5 without con-

cessions; for example, 12 b4 (12 e4 i.e6 13 b4 axb4 14 axb4 d5) 12 ... axb4 13 axb4 d5 14 b5 i.e6 15 'iVe2 ~d7 16 i.b2l:.fe8 and, because of her greater central control, Black was slightly better in Schoenberger-Dworakowska, Krynica 1995. b) 10 liJxd4 has proven harmless; for exam- ple, 1O ... exd4 11 liJb5 (White doesn't achieve anything by llliJd5 c6 {11.. .a4!? has also been played, to hold up White on the queenside} 12 liJxf6+ i.xf6 13 e4 dxe3 14 fxe3 a4 with a dull equality, Norwood-Iten, Zug 1987) ll...liJg4 (or ll...liJe8 with the idea ... c6) 12 h3 c6 13 hxg4 i.xg4 14liJxd4 i.xd4 15 'iVd2 ~d7 16 b4 axb4 17 l:txb4 l:tfe8 18 e3 i.g7 19 i.b2 and nothing special was going on in Christiansen- Smyslov, Lone Pine 1976. c) 10 i.g5 (D) is the most important alterna- tive.

342 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black's advantage of two bishops will be set against White's attack on the queenside. Razu- vaev-Ikonnikov, Geneva 1994 continued 1O ... h6 (10 ... liJe6 11 .i.xf6 i.xf6 is also possible) 11 i.xf6 i.xf6 12 b4 axb4 13 axb4 i.g7 (there doesn't seem to be any hurry about this, be- cause ... fS isn't in Black's plans for a while, so 13 .. J:ta3 or 13 ... i.g4 is probably better) 14 bS i.g4 IS liJxd4 (Razuvaev gives the clever vari- ation IS e3 1:ta3! 16 .i::tc1?? i.xf3 17 i.xf3 liJxf3+ 18 ~xf3 l:txc3! 19l:txc3 e4) IS ... exd4 16liJdS .l::ta2?! (16 ... 'iVd7 improves) 17 .ti.el ILe8 18 i.f3! .i.xf3 19 exf31:txel+ 20 ~xel :a8?! 21 nal (21 ~e4! was extremely strong, threat- ening liJe7+ and nel, as well as f4-fS) 21...:xal 22 'iVxal c6 23 bxc6 bxc6 24liJb4 ~b6 2S ~a4 i.f8 26 'It>g2 cS 27 liJdS and White's knight thoroughly dominates the bishop. 10 ... axb411 axb4 c612 b5 i.g4 (D) 13liJxd4?! The course of the game demonstrates how the timing of this move is slightly flawed. But Black has probably already equalized. There are two main options: a) 13 bxc6 bxc6 and now 14 liJxd4?! still doesn't inspire following 14 ... exd4 IS liJe4 liJxe4 16 i.xe4 'iVd7 with the idea ... dS, as in Anikaev-Tal, Minsk 1979. 14l:!.el and 14 e3 would be better tries. b) A particularly interesting variation from a positional point of view comes from the game that initially made the i.gS plan popu- lar: 13 i.gS i.xf3 14 i.xf3 h6!? (not bad, but 14 .. J~.a3! would equalize after IS ~c1 ~aS16 :tal .l:ta8, and here ISliJe4liJxf3+ 16 exf3 dS gives Black the larger share of the centre) IS i.xf6 liJxf3+ 16 exf3 i.xf6 17 bxc6 bxc6 18 lIb7 (D).

This is White's idea: light-square control combined with possession of open queenside files, with a good knight versus a (tempo- rarily) bad bishop. Still, Black's mobile centre is a countervailing factor and White has long- term weaknesses. Andersson-Nunn, Johannes- burg 1981 continued 18 .. Jh3! 19~c2 dS (both Bagirov and Grivas like 19 ... ~a8 20 !lfbl .l:i.a7, when after 21 'iVb3!, both 21...i.g7 and 21...!Id8 22 liJe4 i.e7 are at least satisfactory) 20 cxdS cxdS 21 liJbS 1:taS?! (Andersson mentions

21...1:ta6!, and Grivas suggests 21...~a8 22 .ti.d7

naS! 23liJd6 .l:i.a7; here 22liJd6 improves, but Black can place his bishop out of range by 22 ... i.g7 and be perfectly happy; there are rea- sonable alternatives for both sides, but nothing that strays too dramatically from equality) 22 ~c6 iLg7 23 .i:tbl I:ta2? (the wrong square; it may still be possible to go slowly, since liJd6 can be answered by ... ~f6; White is better, to

KING'S INDIAN VARIATIONS 343

be sure, and will probably pick up a pawn, but his own pawns are of limited use in an end- game) 24lbd6! e4? 25lbxf7! 1-0.

13.  exd4 14lbe4

White can sacrifice a piece by 14 bxc6!? dxc3 (14 ... bxc6 transposes to the previous note) 15 cxb7l:tb8 16 ~e3. This is unclear, but l6. .. ~a5 makes it hard to justify his investment fully. 14  lbxe4 15 ~xe4 d5! 16 cxd5 cxd5 17 ~f3 ~xf318 exf3llt'd7 (D) Black suddenly stands much better. As Gri- vas points out, his doubled pawns control im- portant central squares, unlike White's doubled f-pawns. White's other difficulty is that Black has two files upon which to invade on the queenside. 19l:tell:tfc8 20 'iVe2l:te8!? 21 llt'd2 h5! As so often, it takes action on a second front to expand one's advantage. Here ... h4 and per- haps ... h3 followed by ... ~f5 threatens to ha- rass White's weakened kingside. 22 h4l:tac8! 23l:txe8+ 'iVxe8! (D) 24 'It>g2l:tc3 25 ~g5? ~el! With the major threat of ... .:tc2. 26 ~d2 ~xd2 27 ~xd2 ':'xd3 28 ~b4 ~f8! After the exchange of bishops, Black's passed d-pawns prove a major advantage; in what fol- lows, he gives up one in order to gain time in support of the other. White should now try 29 b6. 29 f4? i.xb4 30 ::'xb4 ~f8 31 'It>f1 Re7 32 ~e2 ':'a3 33 l:.xd4 'iitd6 34 ~b4 f5 35 l:.b2 d4

36 Rd2 Rd5 0-1

Donaldson - Eisen Philadelphia 1997 1 lbf3 lbf6 2 c4 g6 3 lbc3 ~g7 4 g3 O-O 5 i.g2 d6 6 O-O e5 7 d3lbc6 8 :bl a5 9 a3 h6 10 b4 axb4 11 axb4 i.e6 12 b5 lbe7 (D) w We've arrived at the main line of the anti- King's Indian Variation with lbf3. It has been contested for at least half a century, but still produces lively battles. 13~b3 In contemporary chess this has become the main move, on the grounds that placing White's bishop on a3 to threaten c5 is more pointed than the older approach 13 ~b2. With the latter move, White tries to get l:.al in as fast as possi- ble. One line that has occurred in a number of games is 13 ... 'iVd714.l::.el ~h315~hllbg416 d4!? (in these positions, White often tries to di- vert Black from his kingside attack by striking in the centre), but Black has a fairly simple so- lution in 16. .. exd4 17lbxd4 c6 (or even the dull 17 ... :fb8) 18lba4 "VJJIc7 with a balanced posi- tion.

13. . Ji'd7

344 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Here are two of the several alternatives: a) 13 ... c6 14 i.a3l:te8. Black removes him- self from the potential pin from the bishop on a3, in part because he would like to play ... dS in certain lines; if he can do so and White is un- able to break down the centre, there's no reason to think Black hasn't equalized. Black also has the idea of ... lDfS and perhaps ... lDd4. Bareev- Bacrot, Sarajevo 2000 continued ISlIfc1! (the natural IS lDd2 allows IS ... dS!, because eS is no longer attacked) IS ... gS?! (a bit odd; simply IS ... ~d7100ks better) 16 e3 i.fS 17lDel (head- ing for b4 to place yet another piece aiming at c6 anddS) 17 ... i.e618lDc2dS?! (awfully risky) 19 i.xe7 l:txe7 20 lDb4! (White has four pieces and three pawns working on the long diagonal!) 20 ... dxc4 21 dxc4 cxbS 22 lDbdS! i.xdS 23 lDxdS lDxdS 24 cxdS e4? (Bareev suggests 24 ... l:ta5! to slow down White's incursion; still, 2S l:tcS results in a positional superiority) 2S l:tcSlIc8 26l:txbSl:teS 27 l:tdll:tc7 28 i.h3 'iNf6

29 d6 and White's passed pawn is too strong.

b) 13 ... lDd7 is generally considered the saf- est move: 14 i.a3 fS (l4 ... b6! IS lDel! l:!a7 16 lDc2 lDcs 17 ~b4 ~d7 is equal; the immedi- ate 14 ... lDcS?!, however, falls short after IS i.xcs dxcS 16lDd2l:.b8 17 b6!) ISlDdS!? (IS lDd21,Ib8) IS ... 'it>h7 (IS ... i.xdS!? 16 cxdS b6 is another way to play it; White will aim for a well-timed d4) 16lDd2l:!.a7!? 17 b6lDxb6 18 lDxb6 cxb6 19 'tWb4lDc8 20 i.b2.l:tf7 21 l::tal l:ta6, Deze-Vukic, Novi Sad 1976. Neither side can claim much advantage, but perhaps White should play 22 l:tfcl, since his 22 l:!.a3?! was met by 22 ... dS!. Let's return to 13 ... 'iNd7 (D): 14l:tdl White has d4 in mind. After the normal 14 nel, Black seems to be doing all right after 14 ... i.h3 IS i.hl c6. The natural 14 i.a3 i.h3 (l4 ... b6) IS cS is another way to play it. 14.. lDf5 15 i.b2 h5 Black foregoes the conventional ... fS strat- egy to attack with pieces and a flank thrust. 16 :i.al i.h6? Donaldson suggests 16 ... .l:Ifd8, to watch over the crucial central sector. Indeed, ... i.h6 takes a w piece away from the prevention of White's moved4. 17lDe4! lDh7 18l:txa8 .l:txa8 19 d4! exd420 lDxd4lDxd4 21 i.xd4l:tc8?! Donaldson analyses 2l...i.h3 22 i.f3 'iVe6 23 lDc3, when White's bishops and knight are terrifically strong. 22 i.b2 'iVe7 23 ~c3 f6 24 c5! The game is effectively over; look at the comparative power of each side's pieces. Now 24 ... dxcS 2slDxcs c6 26lDxe6 ~xe6 27 'iVc2! ~f7 28 bxc6 bxc6 29l:tal is horrible for Black, so he ditches his pawn on d6 for counterplay. 24 . i.g7 25 cxd6 cxd6 26 'iVd3 i.c4 27 ~xd6 'iVxd6 28 lDxd6 :i.d8 29 i.xb7 i.f8 30 lDxc4!? Easier was 30 .l:tcl! i.e6 31lDe4. 30. Jlxdl+ 31 'it>g2 i.c5 32 i.e4 l:td8 33 .Bxg6 l:tb8 34 i.xh5 l:txb5 35 i.g6 lDf8 36 i.d3 i.e7 37 i.d4l:tb8 38lDe3 i.d8 39 f4 i.b6 40 i.c4+ 'it>h7 41 i.xb6 .l:txb6 42 g41-0 Three pawns for the exchange is a bit much, especially with White's kingside pawns advanc- ing and his forthcoming occupation of the pow- erful fS-square. White's system with c4, lDc3, lDf3, g3, i.g2 and d3 provides a way to avoid the King's In- dian Defence proper (that is, lines which nor- mally arise from 1 d4), and it can be played against the Closed English as well. If White hasn't committed to lDf3, then the Botvinnik System is a worthwhile alternative. Index of Variations A: I c4e5 B: I c4 c5 C: I c4 lLlf6 D: Other openings referred to in the text

A)

I c4 e515 Now: AI: 2 g3 A2: 2 lLlc3 Or: 2 e4?! 16 2 d4?! 18 2 e317

[diagram]
a3 g6 S b422 2 lLlf3 23 2 ... e4 3 lLld4: 3 ... lLlf6 24; 3 ... lLlc6 26

AI)

[diagram]
6...~e7 997 lLlc3 lLlf6 8 e3

lLlbd7 9 lLlge2 O-O 10 O-O J:!.e8

A2)

[diagram]
A21)

[diagram]
5... lLlf6

[diagram]
A22)

[diagram]
A23)

2 lLlc6 3 g3 3 lLlf3 139: a) 3 ... lLlf6 - 2 ... lLlj6 3 lLlj3 lLlc6 b) 3 ... fS 141 c) 3 ... g6 1394 d4 exd4 S lLlxd4 .i.g7 6 lLlxc6 bxc6 7 g3:

346 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENlNGS

c1) 7 . ..tiJe7140 e2) 7...ltJf6 140 3 g6 3 ... ltJf64 i.g2 i.eS!? 152 3 ... fS 153

3...i.eS 153

3 ... d64 i.g2 i.e6 153 4 i.g2 i.g7 144 5 e4164 Or: a) S d3 d6 6ltJf3 fS 70-0145 b) S J:!.bl!? 148 and then: bl) S. .. d6 6 b4 fS 7 e3 154 b2) S. .. aS 6 d3 d6 7 e3 fS 8 ltJge2157 b3) S. .. fS 6 b4 a6!? 7 a4!? ltJf6 8 bS axbS 9 axbSltJe7 10 ~b3!? d6 11 d3 O-O 12ltJf3 149 e) sltJf3 145 and now: c1) S. .. d6 6 O-O ltJf6: 7 d3 339;

7 d4 O-O - King's Indian

e2) S .. .fS 14560-0 d6 7 d3ltJf6

8 J:!.bl 145 (8ltJdS 149) and

here: e21) 8 ... 0-09 b4 h6 10 bSltJe7 e22) 8...aS 150 9 a3 O-O 10 b4 axb4 11 axb4 150 l1...h6 12 bS ltJe7 13 i.b2 150 d) S e3 154 and now: dl) S ... fS 154 6 ltJge2ltJf6 7 d3 0-080-0 d6 9 J:!.bl 155 d2) S. .. d6 6ltJge2 158 (6 J:!.bl as 7ltJge2 hS!? 161) and then: d21) 6 ... fS 7 J:!.bl as 8 d3ltJf6 9 b3157 d22) 6 ... i.e6 158 d23) 6 ... ltJge7: d231) 70-00-08 d4158 (8 d3 160) d232) 7 d3 O-O 160 d24) 6 ... hS 161 7 d4 162: 7 ... exd4163; 7 ... h4 163 5 d6 6 ltJge2

[diagram]
ltJee2! ltJe6! 172 6 ltJge7165 6 .. .fS 1697 d3ltJf6 8 O-O O-O 6 ... hS!? 173

7 d3 O-O

8 O-O

Now: 8 ... ltJd4!? 168 8 ... i.e6 9 ltJdS ~d7 10 i.e3 fS 11 ~d2166 8 ... fS 9ltJdS h6 (9 ... i.e6 10 i.e3 166) 10 i.e3 gS!? 168

A24)

[diagram]
115)

[diagram]
a) 3 ... dS 69 b) 3 ... e684: bI) 4 i.g2 85 b2) 4 d4 86 b3) 4ltJf3 88 e) 3 ... i.b470: c1) 4ltJf3 71 e2) 4 i.g2 O-O 75 and now: e21) S '*'Ib3!? 75 e22) S d3 76 e23) S ltJf3 77 e24) S e4 79 S. .. i.xe3 81 (S ... ltJe680): e241) 6 bxe3 81 e242) 6 dxe3 83 3 ltJc6106 3 ... e4?! 106 3 ... d6106 4 g3120 4 b3107

[diagram]
4 e3 115: 4 ... dS S exdS ltJxdS

[diagram]
i.gS h6 7 i.h4 i.xe3+ 8 bxe3 ltJeS 113 and now: a) ge3113 b) 9 f4 113 4  .tb4123 4 ... i.eS 120 4 ... dS 133 S exdS ltJxdS 6 i.g2 ltJb6 (6 ... i.e6 134) 7 O-O i.e7 134: a) 8 J:!.bl 134 b) 8 a4134 e) 8 a3 137 d) 8 d3 O-O 135 and now: dl) 9 i.e3 135 d2) 9 a3 i.e6 10 b4 136 and here: d21) 1O ... ltJd4!? 136 d22) 1O ... f6 II J:!.b I 138 d23) 10 ... aS II bS ll'ld4 12 J:!.bl f6138 5 i.g2 O-O 6 0-0123 6 e4126 6 ... J:!.e8124 Now (after 6 ... e4): a) 7 ll'lel 126 7 ... i.xe3 8 dxe3 h6 9ltJe2 126: al) 9 ... l:!e8126 a2) 9 ... b6126 b) 7ltJgS 129

B)

[diagram]
Now: Bl: 2ltJc3 B2: 2ltJf3

B1)

[diagram]
<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 4 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2010)
FILENAME: 6. Mastering the Chess Openings Vol 4 - John Watson - (1st ed, 2010)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 6
SHA256: 65ba797f93da7e490ffab18bb96da2b43cb3cf6af65ee7510af725ec39fa861c
BYTES: 877894
INTRODUCTION 11

'universal' systems associated with 1...d6 and 1...tDc6, to which considerable attention has been devoted in recent years. The ideas expressed are also 'universal', in the sense that both the struc- tures and strategies strongly overlap with those of mainstream openings. In the first two volumes of this series, my general approach was to give broad and instructive ex- amples without becoming too entwined in details. For many of the currently contested English Opening systems in Volume 3, however, I made extensive theoretical investigations, and was able to contribute much that was new. In this volume, I find that the existing theory on many of the lesser-played variations is strange and limited, so it has been easy add my own suggestions, correc- tions and analysis throughout. The reader can do the same, that is, expand upon theory and find new paths through these little-explored regions. That's where the fun comes in. As in previous volumes, I've focused upon move-order issues to a greater extent than most open- ing book authors do. In my own and my students' playing experience, their neglect has caused a lot offrustration and sometimes inferior results. You're probably familiar with the experience of head- ing for your favourite opening, when suddenly your opponent exploits a tricky move-order and di- verts you into a line with which you're unfamiliar and/or uncomfortable. I'd rather bore the reader with tiresome details than allow those moments to occur too frequently. At some point, you actually have to decide which openings to choose, and what to do with them. I've devoted a lengthy chapter to opening selection, preparation and study, with concrete methods of improving your opening play. In my experience, how to go about these things depends upon your playing level, something that isn't always taken into account. Hopefully my many years as a chess teacher will be helpful in that regard. I've tried to reach a very broad audience, from the developing student to the relatively sophisti- cated and experienced player looking for new ideas and analysis. I hope there is enough of value here to assist both of them in becoming better players.

1 Reti: Open and Closed Variations

tlbf3(D)

We begin this last volume by exploring the move I lbf3 and the Reti Opening. Right off, I lbf3 develops a piece towards the centre and prevents 1.. .eS. It resembles I c4 in that it leaves open major decisions about what kind of centre White wants to build; for example, he can still play c4, d4 and e4 in any combination. This gives him the choice of transposing into other openings depending upon what Black does. For instance, by playing I lbf3 White may simply be side-stepping I c4 eS while heading for an English Opening via 1 lbf3 cS 2 c4. In other cases, he may be preparing to enter

[diagram]
lbf3 lbf6 2 d4, leading to a number of other d4 openings. 1 lbf3 cS 2 e4 is a Sicilian Defence, and you will also find 1 lbf3 as the introduction to the King's Indian Attack, which consists of the additional moves g3, .Bg2, O-O and d3 (see Chapter 6). The name 'Reti Opening' is used to describe different variations depending upon which book you're reading. As I define it, the Reti Opening arises after 1 lbf3 dS 2 c4, although those moves don't have to be played immedi- ately. That is, in order for the opening to be a Reti, White has to play lbf3 and c4, and Black ... dS. To distinguish the Reti further from other openings, I'll stipulate that White doesn't play d4 at an early stage (that is, not before White completes most of his development). In the vast majority of cases, he fianchettoes one or both of his bishops. In fact, some books examine only variations with the double fianchetto, as prac- tised by the opening's most famous advocate, Richard Reti himself. I'll include positions with a single fianchetto or no fianchetto at all if they are relevant to specific move-orders. t ... dS This is Black's normal path to the Reti Open- ing. After 1 lbf3, the players can also arrive at variations of the Reti by 1...e6 2 c4 dS or 1...c6

2 c4 dS. Of course, Black has many other possi-

bilities' such as 1... lbf6, when 2 g3 bS!? is an example of the kind of leeway that Black is given by the non-committal 1 lbf3. Black fre- quently plays 1...cS, when he is probably hop- ing for 2 e4 (a Sicilian Defence) or 2 c4 (a Symmetrical English Opening). If White re- plies to 1. .. cS with 2 g3, the game might con- tinue in any number of directions; for example, a King's Indian Attack (after .Bg2, O-O and d3), a Symmetrical English Opening (after c4), or, less frequently, a Closed Reti Variation (with ... cS, ... e6 and ... dS in response to White's c4 and a fianchetto on either wing; see below). Other nuances are best shown by example.

2 c4 (D)

RETI: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 13

White attacks the centre. As described above, he will fianchetto one or both bishops, with g3 & .tg2 and b3 & .tb2 in the majority of varia- tions. Most openings, even those of a largely positional nature, contain several major lines that are unavoidably tactical. The Reti Opening is an exception, in that almost all its set-ups in- volve long-term manoeuvring. Because White avoids moving a centre pawn, there tends to be little early contact between the opposing forces. White fails to provide Black a target, and with some exceptions Black will also avoid too ag- gressive a commitment of his pieces. In most important variations, Black does establish a sig- nificant pawn presence in the centre. White's strategy is to snipe at his opponent from the wings, and eventually to expand on the queen- side or in the centre. In broader terms, this is the 'hypermodern' strategy, a name which proba- bly needs updating, since it came into general usage in the 1920s! After 2 c4, the game can still transpose into other openings, of course, notably if White plays d4. Since each variation leads to distinct positional themes, I'll discuss them as we go along. The 2 ... d4 Advance w Khuzman - A. Mikhalevski Beersheba 1993 Ilbf3 d5 2 c4 d4 (D) This aggressive push is one of the traditional and most important replies to the Reti Opening, and has always had a good reputation. In fact, some players prefer to make the Reti move c4 only after Ilbf3 d5 2 g3 e6 3 c4 or, say, Ilbf3 d5 2 g3 c6 3 c4 (or, if he doesn't want to gambit his c-pawn, he will wait with c4 for a few moves), or after an early b3 and .tb2. Black's motivation with 2 ... d4 is territorial gain. You may recognize that this position bears a close resemblance, with colours reversed, to the Modem Benoni (1 d4 lbf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5) should Black play ... c5 next; and to the Schmid Benoni (1 d4lbf6 2lbf3 c5 3 d5 and 4lbc3) if Black plays ... lbc6 (without ... c5). In several variations we shall see illustrations of reversed positions in which White's extra tempo gives Black the information that he needs to adjust strategies and maintain equality. That trade-off has been a theme throughout these volumes, and is explicitly featured in Chapter 6. 3g3 An obvious alternative is 3 e3 (D), introduc- ing one of the very few Reti Opening lines in which White will not normally fianchetto a bishop as part of his strategy.

This e-pawn advance isn't seen as much as 3 g3 in grandmaster play because Black is thought to gain an uncontroversial equality. On the other hand, the resulting play has enough substance to keep good players interested: a) 3 ... c5 4 exd4 cxd4 5 d3 is a reversed Benoni, intending g3 and .tg2. That opening boasts of dynamic options versus almost any set-up, so it's probably best for Black to avoid it when he is a tempo behind. b) 3 ... dxe3 has been a bit underrated. To be sure, after 4 fxe3 Black has surrendered the

14 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

centre to White (who has a 2-1 majority), but a d3/e3 pawn-formation isn't terribly impressive unless the pawns can both advance. The stan- dard line is 4 ... g6 S d4 i..g7 6 lDc3, and now 6 ... lDh6!? has the idea of ... lDfS, so Gausel- Mortensen, Copenhagen 1996 continued 7 e4!?

After 7 ... O-O!? (7 ... cS would attack the vul- nerable d4-square at the cost of a cramped game following 8 dS) 8 i..e2!? (8 i..f4) 8 ... i..g4 9 i..e3 (9 dS) 9 ... i..xf3? (9 ... fS is best) 10 gxf3 White threatened 11 1i'd2, winning the knight. Then Dunnington suggests 1O ... eS 11 dS fS, but 12 h4 looks extremely strong, with space, two bish- ops and an attack. Obviously, both sides have many options in such flexible positions. c) The simplest course is 3 ... lDc6 4 exd4 lDxd4 SlDxd4 'ii'xd4 6lDc3 (D).

White has failed to get an advantage here for many years, although there is plenty of content in the position, and play for both sides. I'll just show an excerpt from the most popular modern main line: 6 ... c6 (preventing lDbS or lDdS; 6 ... eS

7 d3 lDe7 has been played for at least 70 years

without being completely resolved; it's fair to say that the game is unbalanced but equal) 7 d3 lDh6!? (headed for fS) 8 i..e3 (after 8 i..e2, 8 ... lDfS 9 g4lDh4 10 l::tgi is a known line; then 1O .. :i!t'd6 11 l::tg3 eS 12 lDe4 1i'd8 is unclear; Black has also played 8 ... g6) 8 ... 1i'd8 9 i..xh6!? gxh6 10 d4 i..g7 11 dS, Zviagintsev-Granda, Pamplona 1995/6. Here Black's bishop on g7 compensates for his weaknesses; he can play, for example, Il...1i'd6 or Il...1i'b6. We now return to 3 g3 (D):

3 ... lDc6 This is easily Black's most popular move, but not his only one. a) 3 ... cS is playable, giving White an inter- esting decision. He can play 4 b4, with a re- versed, tempo-up Benko Gambit. This is an appealing practical choice, because the tempo is definitely helpful in most, if not all, lines. Moreover, the variation is more difficult for Black to play than White. It would be a useful exercise for the reader to compare the position after 4 b4 with the Benko Gambit itself, which is dealt with in Chapter S. White's other main option is 4 i..g2 lDc6 S O-O eS 6 d3. Then he usually plays the moves e3, lDa3-c2, l::teI, a3 and l::tbi in some order, in order to chip away at Black's centre by b4 and a timely exd4. Black can counter with any of several formations, but one consistent feature of the position is that exd4 gives Black the option of ... exd4, which tends to be safer than the Benoni-style recap- ture with ... cxd4. You will see a true reversed Rffm: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 15 Benoni with ... cS in our section on 1 liJf3 dS 2 c4 e6 below, when Black follows a main line and plays ... cS and ... d4. b) Grandmasters have shown some liking for the move 3 ... g6. Then Larsen-Chandler, Hastings 1987/8 provides a good example of the play: 4 i..g2 i..g7 S d3 eS 60-0 liJe7 7 b4! O-O 8liJbd2 (or 8liJa3, with the idea liJc2 and either queenside expansion or a central break by e3; this leads to original positions) 8 ... aS 9 bS cS! (Black shouldn't cede too much ground) 10 bxc6liJexc6! (the idea is that the knight on e7 has few prospects, whereas the knight on b8 can watch over cS from a6 or d7) 11 i..a3 (D) (11 l:!.b1 is the obvious alternative; Black has satisfactory play in this kind of position be- cause of his ability to put knights on b4 and/or cS as needed).

ll...liJb4 (or 11...l:!.e8, introducing the idea of ... i..f8; then White might try to target squares like d6 and b6 by 12 cS, having in mind liJe4 and 'Yi'b3) 12 Wib3 liJ8a6 (a good alternative is 12 .. :iVe7 with the idea ... liJ8a6 or ... liJ8c6) 13 i..xb4 axb4?! (13 ... liJxb4 is better) 14 a3! bxa3 IS "iVxa3l:!.e8 16l:!.fb1 and White had a pleasant advantage, very much in the style of a Benko Gambit, and not even a pawn down! 4 i..g2 e5 (D) 50-0 In the reversed position (picture Black's knight already developed on f6), d3 is usually met by ... i..b4+, to force a piece to d2. That strat- egy is also a sensible one here; for example, S d3 i..b4+ 6 i..d2 (the idea is that after 6liJbd2 i..d6, White can no longer play liJa3-c2, but 6 liJfd2 would certainly be possible, retaining the w option of liJa3-c2) 6 ... aS; Black might play ... liJf6-d7-cS later. Naturally, there are trade- offs. For one thing, White is developing rapidly and getting castled ahead of time. It's an open question whether he can break with e3 or b4, and what advantage that might bring. 5 . liJf6 There's an interesting parallel here with the Schmid Benoni line 1 d4liJf6 2liJf3 cS 3 dS g6 4liJc3 i..g7 S e4 (a position also important to the Sicilian Hyper-Accelerated Dragon: 1 e4 cS 2liJf3 g6 3 d4 i..g7 4 dSliJf6 SliJc3) S ... O-O (as opposed to S ... d6) 6 eS liJe8. If you've played that line with either colour, you might well think that S. .. e4 6liJe 1 (D) would favour White in our game because of the vulnerability and likely decimation of Black's centre.

But that's not necessarily the case. Black has two possibilities: a) 6 ... liJf67 d3 i..fS 8 i..gS (perhaps White should settle for 8liJd2, when Black has a slight positional disadvantage after 8. .. 'iVe7 9 dxe4

16 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

tLlxe4 or 8 ... exd3 9 tLlxd3 iLe7 10 tLlb3 O-O 11 iLf4) 8 ... exd3 9 tLlxd3 iLe7. At this point, in- creasing the light-square pressure by 10 tLld2 is not terribly impressive following 10 ... O-O, when 11 iLxf6 iLxf6 12 tLle4 l:tb8! anticipates White's tLlecS, and 11 ~a4 tLlg4 12 iLxe7 ~xe7 is about equal. Therefore the recommended move is 10 b4!? (D).

This position is said to be clearly better for White, and it certainly looks promising with the cooperation of a queenside advance and the bishop on g2. However, Black's centralized pieces provide a counterweight. Here are some options: a1) 1O ... iLxd3? 11 exd3 iLxb4 12 iLxf6! gxf6 (after 12 ... ~xf6? 13 ~b3! White either wins a piece or exposes the black king) 13 'iVhS with a large positional superiority and attacking possibilities. a2) 1O ... tLle4 illustrates Black's central pres- ence: 11 iLxe7 ~xe7 12 iLxe4 iLxe4 (D), and then: w a21) 13 bS and now 13 ... tLlaS!? 14 tLld2 O-O IS tLlxe4 ~xe4 intending ... l:.fe8 and ... b6 is dynamically balanced. Black can also sacrifice a pawn for activity by 13 ... tLleS 14 tLld2 tLld7 IS tLlb3 O-O-O 16 tLlxd4 hS!. a22) 13 tLld2 O-O (13 ... iLfS 14 bS and here 14 ... tLlaS IS ~a4 b6 is unclear, while 14 ... tLld8 is safer) 14 tLlxe4 'iixe4 IS bS tLleS (or lS ... tLlaS) 16 tLlcs 'iig417 tLlxb7 l:tfe8 with compensation. a3) Kovacevic-Ree, Karlovac 1977 contin- ued 1O ... a6 11 tLld2 O-O 12 iLxf6 (12 a3 ':e8!) 12 ... iLxf6 13 tLle4 'iie7 (or 13 ... l:te8) 14 tLlxf6+ 'iixf6 IS a3 (D).

Here Black has several moves (such as the ambitious continuation lS ... hS), but lS ... l:tfe8 is the most consistent; for example, 16 l:te1 .l:!.e7 17 tLlcs l:tae8!, with the idea 18 tLlxb7? (18 iLxc6 bxc6) 18 ... d3 19 e3 tLld4 20 .l:!.a2 tLlc2 21 l:tn ~c3. b) Strange to say, even after 6 ... fS!? (D), a seeming overextension of forces, Black's posi- tion isn't necessarily inferior. w

RF:I'I: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 17

Theory gives this fifth pawn move a '?' with the follow-up 7 d3liJf6 8 i.gS, but then 8 ... i.e7! 9 i.xf6 i.xf6 10 dxe4 fxe4 11 i.xe4 i.h3 gives Black compensation for the pawn after 12 i.g2 .txg2 13 'iitxg2 (13liJxg2 gS! 14liJd2 'fie7 and ... O-O-O, intending ... hS) and now 13 ... hS! 14 liJd3 h4 or 13 .. :~d7 14liJd2 hS. White can play 12 liJg2 instead, after which Black might try 12 .. :ii'd7!? 13liJd2 O-O-O with the idea 14 'iWa4 l:.he8! IS i.xc6 'it'xc6. The point of all this is that White's capture of the e-pawn takes valu- able time while Black has the extra space to jus- tify ... O-O-O and ... hS-h4.

Let's return to S ... liJf6:

6 d3 (D)

6 ... i.e7 Generally, this move has been criticized be- cause of White's response. There are other moves, such as 6 ... i.d6, but the most important is 6 ... aS, when 7liJa3 is sometimes played with the idea of liJc2, l:.bl, a3 and M. Such positions are fascinating from a strategic point of view, and may appeal to those who want to play chess without immediate confrontations. However, the main line is 7 e3, attacking the centre. Then Black can try: a) 7 ... i.e7 8 exd4 exd4 9liJa3 (D). al) Now 9 ... i.xa3 10 bxa3 is a kind of trade that we've seen in several openings, sometimes when White captures a knight on a6. In con- junction with a fianchettoed bishop on g2, a rook on the b-file will generally more than compensate for the doubled a-pawns, which tend not to be a weakness until the endgame in any case. When White also gains the bishop- pair without giving Black's knights a major

outpost, the overall assessment will normally be in favour of White. a2) Black played 9 ... O-O in Speelman-Humpy Koneru, British Ch, Torquay 2002, which con- tinued 10 liJbS liJe8 11 l:.el i.e6 12 b3 i.f6 13 i.b2 (now Black is tied to the pawn on d4, so she can't move her c6-knight and play ... c6) 13 ... g6 14 'it'd2 i.fS IS h3 hS 16 i.a3?! (the su- perior 16 h4! plans liJgS, to clear the long diag- onal for White's g2-bishop, and in some cases to settle in on the strong e4-square; for exam- ple, 16 ... 'it'd7 17 liJgS a4 18 i.a3 liJd6 19 'iWf4; 16 'it'f4!? is another idea) 16 ... liJM! 17liJbxd4!

A piece sacrifice that takes advantage of the weakening of the kingside that ... hS produced. The game is instructive, as we see White's at- tack on the dark squares inducing further weak- nesses; nevertheless, with perfect play Black might hold: 17 ... i.xd4 18liJxd4 'it'xd4 19 i.b2 ~d6? (19 ... ~d8! was necessary, when White may have to settle for 20 'it'h6liJf6 21 l:.eS l:.a6

18 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

22 .l:hfS gxfS 23 'i6gS+ with a repetition) 20 ~6lLlf6? (20 ... f6 21 g4! hxg4 22 hxg4 .txd3 23 .l::te3) 21 cS! 'ili'dS 22 .l:teS! 'i6d7 (22 ... .td7 23 B .l::txhS!; 22 ... .l::ta6 23 l:xfS gxfS 24 c6!) 23 .te4 (23 l:eS! l:axeS 24 .txf6 and mate follows) 23 ... .l:!.a6 24 .l::txfS! gxfS 2S 'ili'gS+ 'iithS 26 .txfS 1-0. b) 7 ... dxe3 establishes an intriguing balance of forces: S .txe3 .te7 9 lLlc3 O-O 10 .l::tel .l::teS

w Both sides have advantages: White with his very active bishops and pressure on eS, while Black has control of d4 and a target in White's d3-pawn. Cvitan-Hort, Berne 1992 continued

11 h3 (11 d4 exd4 12 lLlxd4 lLlxd4 13 ~xd4

~xd4 14 .txd4 c6 IS .txf6 gxf6leaves Black with the bishop-pair but saddled with the weak f-pawns; since White can't occupy fS or d6 for any length of time, the position is about equal) 1l....te6 12 'ili'b3 .l::tbS 13 .l:%.adl?! (Davies sug- gests 13lLlbS!, both preparing d4 and prevent- ing ... lLld4) 13 ... lLld4 14 .txd4 exd4 IS lLlbS (1S lLle4 bS 16 lLlegS bxc4 17 lLlxe6 cxb3 IS lLlxdS bxa2) IS ... .tcS 16.l:IeS b6 17lLla7 ~d6 ISlLlbS 1/2-1/2. Black actually stands better after IS ... 'i6d7, hitting h3, because 19 'iith2 c6 20 lLla3 'ili'd6 has ideas of ... bS and/or doubling on the e-file. 7 b4! (D) White strikes out on the flank, using tactics to justify an accelerated attack. 7  lLld7? This negative retreat must leave White on top. 7 b4 is obviously a powerful move, but it's not clear that White gains the upper hand versus best play: a) Playing into White's idea by 7 ... .txb4 S lLlxeS! lLlxeS 9 fia4+ isn't so bad, but it gives White a small advantage if Black continues 9 ... lLlc6 10 .txc6+ bxc6 11 'ili'xb4 'ili'd6 12 .ta3. Instead, the exchange sacrifice via 9 ... .td7 10 ~xb4 b6!? of Sjoberg-Adler, Swedish Team Ch 1997/S can be met by development a tempo: 11 .Bf4! (11 .ixaS cS! and 12 ... ~xaS affords Black definite compensation for the exchange) ll...cS 12 'iVd2lLlc6 13lLla3 (threatening lLlbS) 13 ... a6 14 .l::tabl O-O IS 'ili'b2 and White wins material. b) 7 ... lLlxb4! S lLlxeS O-O (D) is much better than its reputation. w White has an extra centre pawn, but Black's pawn on d4 controls territory and restrains any pawn advances. A few examples: bl) White played 9 .tb2?! in Kaidanov- Khmelnitsky, Philadelphia 1993, but this is the reverse of what he normally does when the bishop is blocked by a pawn on d4. That is, when White already has his bishop on b2, he

RET!: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 19

usually moves to c1 in order to activate it on f4 or gS! So if White can't remove the pawn from d4 in a satisfactory way, this bishop move is likely to be ill-advised. Black can reply 9 ... ~d6! 10 lDf3 (10 f4 lDg4 11 lDxg4 i.xg4 12 i.xb7 .:tab8 13 i.f3 i.xf3 14 l:hf3 lDxd3) 1O ... cS. The game's 9 ... lDg4 10 lDxg4 i.xg4 11 i.xb7 .:tb8 12 i.e4 would also have been promising after I2. .. lDa6 13 'ili'c2lDcs 14 i.g2 ~d7. b2) 9 a3 lDa6 (heading for the ideal square cS) 10 lDd2 (D).

1O ... lDcS! 11 lDb3 was played in Blatny- Ricaurte Lopez, Salinas 200S, when Il...lDxb3 12 'ili'xb3 i.cS! 13lDf3 ne8 14 .:teI.:tb8 would have resulted in a solid position. b3) Ivkov-Teschner, Bamberg 1968 went 9 lDd2 .:te8 (another idea is 9 ... lDd7 10 lDxd7 'ili'xd7) 10 lDb3 i.f8 (or 10 ... i.d6 IllDf3 cS) 11 lDf3 cS 12 a3lDc6 (D). w After 13 e3?! (White should consider 13 .:tel or 13 na2!?, preparing e3) 13 ... dxe3 14 i.xe3 the best course of action would have been 14 ... i.fS!, intending IS d4 cxd4 I6lDfxd4 lDxd4 17lDxd4 i.e4! with some advantage for Black because of White's weak c-pawn. 8a3?! Salov gives 8 bS! lDcb8 9 e3 (D).

White hopes for 9 ... dxe3 10 i.xe3, when his bishops would rake the queenside. Black can try 9 ... cS 10 .:tel (10 bxc6lDxc6 11 exd4 exd4 12 lDbd2 lDcs 13 lDb3 is perhaps moderately better for White) 10 ... O-O, but he has a hard time getting his pieces out; for example, 11 lDbd2 l:te8 12lDb3 i.d6 13 exd4 exd4 14 .:txe8+ ~xe8 IS lDgS! lDf6 16 lDaS! "iie7 17 lDe4 lDxe4 18 i.xe4.

8 ... 0-09 e3 9 bS still looks right.

10 ... a5 It was probably time for 1O ... dxe3 11 i.xe3 as! 12 lDc3! (12 bS lDd4 followed by ... lDcS is

20 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

starting to look good for Black) 12 ... axb4 13 axb4 l:.xa2 14liJxa2 with a small but certain ad- vantage for White. 11 b5liJe712 exd4 exd413 a4! (D)

White eliminates any difficulties involving a combination of ... a4 and ... liJcS. More impor- tantly, he discourages the single move that most coordinates Black's pieces, 13 ... liJcS.

13. . liJg6

That is, 13 ... liJcS 14 .lia3 \\Yd6?! IS liJbd2 \\Yb6 16 l:tel has the idea liJe4; then 16 ... .lifS 17 liJe4.lixe4 18 dxe4leaves White in charge due to the threat of 19 eS. 14 liJbd2liJc5!? 15liJb3?! (D) The most accurate move was still IS .lia3!; for example, IS ... .lie7 16liJb3liJxb3 17 'iVxb3 .lixa3 18 'iVxa3 (threatening 'ilkcS) 18 ... .lig4 19 h3 .lixf3 20 .lixf3 l:.b8 21 l:.e2.

15  liJxb3 16 'iVxb3 .lie6?! 16 ... .:te8 17 liJd2 is only slightly better for White. 17 liJd2 'iVc8 18 .lia3 .lie7 19 i..xe7 liJxe7 20 .:tel h6 21 'iVa3! liJf5 22liJb3 b6 Black sacrifices the exchange, but it isn't good enough. However, after 22 ... l:.d8 23 liJcs c6 24 l:.ae2, White's pressure is too great. 23 .lixa8 ~xa8 24 ~c1 c5 25 bxc6 ~xc6 26 ~f4 l:.d8 27 liJd2 ~c5 28 l:.e5 ~c8 29 l:tb2 liJe7 30 l:.eb5 and White went on to win. The Open Reti w Danailov - Bernard Warsaw 1990 1liJf3 d5 2 c4 dxc4 (D) Capturing on c4 opens the position, hence the name 'Open Reti', also called the 'Reti Ac- cepted'. By this means Black resolves the prob- lem of having to defend a structure with ... e6 and ... dS, or ... c6 and ... dS, which he may feel is a cramped one. His d-file is open, and there's a good chance of establishing a healthy restraint of White's d-pawn via ... cS or ... eS. 3liJa3 For White, 3 liJa3 is arguably the course tru- est to the spirit of the opening, since fianchettoes will follow. This development of the knight to the rim is also seen in the Catalan Opening and a couple of other Reti variations, with similar trade-offs. Of course, this is not the only way to recover the pawn; let's look briefly at alterna- tives: a) 3 e3 will usually transpose to a Queen's Gambit Accepted after 3 ... liJf6 4 .lixc4 cS S d4.

RE:l'I; OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 21

b) 3 'it'a4+ can lead down independent paths or in some cases transpose to a Catalan Open- ing. Of Black's many replies, 3 ... liJc6 is per- haps best in terms of clarity: 4liJc3 (4liJeS can be met by 4 ... i.d7 or 4 ... 'it'd6 with the idea S liJxc6 i.d7!) 4 ... liJf6 S e4 (S g3liJd7! 6 'it'xc4 liJb67 'it'b3 eS) S. .. liJd7! 6 i.xc4 (6 'it'xc4 eS) 6 ... liJb6 7 'it'b3 liJxc4 8 'it'xc4 .i.g4. c) 3 e4 is one of the more interesting choices. Then the natural 3 ... cS 4 i.xc4 liJc6 often fol- lows: S O-O (S i.bS i.d7 6liJc3 e6 7 O-O is an original approach by Gavrikov; Davies gives 7 ... liJf6 8 eS liJdS 9 liJxdS exdS 10 d4, when Black might try 1O ... 'it'b6 11 .i.xc6 bxc6 with what looks like equal play) S. .. e6 6liJc3 (D).

In spite of his gaping hole on d4, White's lead in development means that Black needs to be a little careful: 6 ... a6!? (6 ... liJf6 7l:tel i.e7 8 eS liJd7 9 d4 cxd4 10 liJbS O-O 11 liJbxd4 gives White a slight edge) 7 d3, and now: c1) Krasenkow-Volzhin, Koszalin 1998 con- tinued 7 ... liJf6 8 eS liJd7 9 :tel (Kosten men- tions 9 .i.f4) 9 ... .i.e7 10 .i.f4 with a standard attacking formation. Black held his own fol- lowing 10 ... O-O 11 a3 bS 12 .i.a2 .i.b7 13 liJe4 liJd4 14 liJxd4 cxd4 IS 'it'g4 .i.xe4 (trading down as quickly as possible) 16 ':xe4 ~h8! with the idea 17 .. .fS!, Since 17 l:txd4? i.cs 18 l:te4? fS is bad for White, he retreated by 17 l:te2, and 17 ... l:tc8 with the idea ... liJcs was fully equal. c2) In Neverov-Ibragimov, USSR Ch, Mos- cow 1991, Black played the safer-looking move 7 ... liJge7, when 8 i.e3 liJd4 9 .i.xd4 cxd4 10 liJe2liJc6 was equal. Two alternatives for White are 8 .i.gS and 8 .i.f4liJg6 9 .i.e3. Both sides have a lot of leeway in interpret- ing this variation.

[diagram]
Black threatens to defend his c4-pawn and wants to develop quickly by ... bS. There are of course other moves: a) 3 ... eS!? 4 liJxeS i.xa3 S 'it'a4+ (D) (S bxa3?? 'it'd4) and now:

a1) S. .. liJd7 and now 6liJxd7 .i.xd7 7 'iVxa3 is unclear after 7 ... .i.e6 (7 ... liJe7 8 e3) 8 'it'g3!? liJf6 9 'it'xg7 l:tg8 10 'it'h6 'fie7 11 b3. White can also play 6 bxa3; for example, 6 ... a6 7 liJxc4 liJgf6 (7 ... bS? 8 liJd6+ cxd6 9 'it'e4+) 8 ~c2 O-O 9 .i.b2, when White's two bishops and central majority should outweigh Black's faster development, but that can be argued. a2) S. .. bS 6 ~xa3 wins the two bishops and dark squares for White. One line goes 6 ... liJf6 (6 ... 'it'd6? 7 'it'f3) 7 d3 'it'd6 8 'fixd6 cxd6 9liJf3 cxd3 10 .i.f4! with two bishops and the better pawn-structure, Nyback-Deva, European Un- der-16 Ch, Kallithea 2001. b) A traditional recipe is 3 ... cS 4liJxc4liJc6 S b3 eS! 6 .i.b2 (6liJcxeS?? liJxeS 7liJxeS 'it'd4) 6 ... f6 7 g3 liJge7 8 .i.g2 .i.e6 9 O-O liJdS 10 e3 .i.e7 11 d4 cxd4 (ll...e4 is unclear after 12 liJfd2 cxd4 13liJxe4!? fS or 12liJel fS) 12 exd4 e4 13 liJe1 fS 14 f3, Hubner-Garcia Palermo, Bad Worishofen 1993. Now 14 ... liJf6!? IS fxe4 fxe4 16 liJc2 leaves Black's e-pawn vulnerable, but he has aggressive squares for his pieces by way of compensation. We now return to 3 ... a6 (D): 4 liJxc4 b5 5 liJe3 Virtually forced (S liJceS f6 6liJd3 eS is no fun), but the knight does good work here. In the

22 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Reti, White often doesn't move his e-pawn anyway. S. i.b7 6 g3 tbd7 A natural and good move. At first, 6 ... i.xf3 7 exf3 (D) looks tempting, because Black will put a piece on d4 in front of the isolated d- pawn.

But the combination of White's better de- velopment (notice Black's kingside pieces), the strength of his bishop coming to g2 and his attack on Black's weakened queenside prove more important than his weaknesses. For exam- ple, 7 ... tbc6 (7 ... e5 8 i.g2 c6 9 O-O tbf6 10 nel i.c5 11 f4! e4 12 'ili'c2; 7 ... tbf6 8 a4 b4 9 i.g2 'ili'd3 10 f4na7 11 'ili'e2 li'xe2+ 12 'it>xe2 with d4 next) 8 i.g2 tbd4 9 f4 tbf6 10 a4 (10 i.xa8? 'ili'xa8 will give Black plenty of counterplay) 1O ... nb8 11 axb5 axb5 12 tbc2 e6 13 tbxd4 'ili'xd4 14 i.c6+ 'it>d8 15 O-O i.c5 16 i.xb5!? (16 d3 favours White as well) 16 ... 'it>e7 17na4 'ii'd6 18 .Be2nhd8. Black has some compensa- tion, but it doesn't seem sufficient. 7 i.g2 tbgf6 8 O-O e6 9 b3 The double fianchetto is used in most Reti systems. 9 ... eS 10 i.b2 .Be7 Black is making natural moves and has good central control, but 1O ... i.d6 keeps an eye on e5 and may be easier to play. 11 .l:.el O-O 12 ne2 ne8 13 'ili'al! 'ili'b6 14 l:.fc1 (D)

White has played in true Reti style. The nc2 and li'al manoeuvre goes way back to the open- ing's creator and namesake. White's pieces all have good range, but Black has pawn control of the centre. Neither side can claim an advantage yet.

14. . :iWa7?!

Tempi aren't absolutely vital in such posi- tions, but 14 ... .l:.fd8 is natural and probably better. 15 d3 Finally a centre pawn moves! Black's posi- tion is fine; nevertheless, he needs to find a plan. IS. . J:tfd8 16 h3 (D) 16 ... h6 16 ... i.f8 looks like a better solution, guard- ing g7 in order to free the f6-knight to play ... tbd5; for example, 17 tbe5 (17 tbg4 tbd5) 17 ... i.xg2 18 'it>xg2 tbxe5 19 .Bxe5 'ili'b7 + 20 f3 tbd5 21 tbxd5 exd5 22 e4 and now 22 ... c4!? or 22 ... ~d7 is equal. 17 tbg4!? A typical 'crawling-forward' idea would be 17 i.c3 i.c6!? (17 ... i.f8 looks positionally sus- pect after 18 a4!?, but Black comes out satisfac- torilyafter 18 ... na8 19 .l:.a2 'ilVb6) 18 'ili'b2 (with

REm: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 23

the idea 19 b4) 18 ... a5 19 a3 .tf8? (19 .. :i!Va6!)

20 b4 axb4 (20 ... cxb4? 21 .txf6! tDxf6 22

lIxc6) 21 axb4 tDd5 22 tDxdS .txd5 23 .td4! 'itb6 24 e4 .tb7 25 .te3. Then White has in mind 26 bxc5 and can claim a serious central ad- vantage. 17 ... tDxg4 There doesn't seem to be a real threat, so other moves such as 17 ... ~b6 can be consid- ered. IS hxg4tDf619 g5 hxg5 20 tDxg5 ~xg2?! This is not disastrous, but why give White's rook the h-file? A calm move like 20 ... ~b6 is better, when 21 ~xb7?! ~xb7 22 tDf3 tDg4! has the idea of ... f6 and ... e5, blunting White's bishop (23 ~xg7?? f6). 21 'ii;>xg2 ~b7+ 22 tDf3tDeS Now after 22 ... tDg4 23 lIhl f6, 24lIh4! ru- ins Black's plan. Carsten Hansen suggests that 22 ... lId5 23lIh1lIh5 is equal, but White should get a little something out of 24 lIxh5 tDxh5 25 ~h1tDf6 26 ~h4. 23 lIhl ~f6 24 .txf6 tDxf6 25 lIh4 (D)

White has the simple ideas of ~h1 and the move he plays next. He has no weaknesses in his pawn-structure, in contrast to Black's slight one on c5. In conjunction with the h-file and his control of the key square e5, this is enough to claim a winning position! 25 . 'ii;>fS 26 ~c1! 'i!Vd5 27 lId4!? Cleverly winning a pawn, but direct attack by 27 e4! decides outright; for example, 27 ... ~c6 (27 ... ~xd3?? 28 :d2) 28lIh8+ tDg8 (28 ... 'ii;>e7 29lIxd8 'ii;>xd8 30 'i!Vg5) 29tDe5 ~c7 30 'i!Vg5 (threatening 'i!Vh5) 30 ... f6 31 tDg6+ 'ii;>e8 32 ~h5 'ii;>d7 33lIh7 'ii;>d6 34 d4 and White wins. 27 .. cxd4 2S ':'xcS 'ii;>e7 29 lIxdS Or 29lIc5! 'i!Va8 30 'ii;>gl. The rest is easy. 29 . 'ii;>xdS 30 'i!Vf4 'ii;>d7 31 ~bS tDg4 32 ~fS tDe5 33 ~xg7 tDxf3 34 ~xf7+ 'ii;>cS 35 'i!Vxf3 ~d6 36 g4 'i!Va3 37 ~c6+ 'ii;>bS 3S 'i!Vxe6 'i!Vxa2 39 g5 'i!Vd2 40 ~e5+ 'ii;>b7 41 g6 'i!Vh6 42 g7 'i!Vg6+ 43 'ii;>f1 'i!Vf7 44 'i!Vg3 'i!VgS 45 'i!Vf3+ 1-0 I think that it's fair to generalize a bit here and say that after 1 tDf3 d5 2 c4, White can't expect to gain an advantage versus either 2 ... d4 or 2 ... dxc4; however, he can almost certainly reach unbalanced positions which have suffi- cient strategic content to challenge both play- ers. The Closed Reti ItDf3 d5 2 c4 e6 (D) w This is the Closed Reti Opening, the most consistently played variation of the Reti over the first few decades of its development, and

24 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

still very popular. This is due in part to the fact that English Opening players, when faced with

1 c4 e6, frequently want to avoid a transposi-

tion into the Queen's Gambit Declined by 2 d4 d5 or 2 ltJc3 d5 3 d4. Thus, after 1 c4 e6, they play 2 ltJf3 d5 and go into a Reti Opening via 3 g3 or 3 b3. Still another possible move-order is 1 c4ltJf62ltJf3 e63 g3 (or 3 b3) 3 ... d5. Not sur- prisingly, the Closed Reti is characterized by slow manoeuvring. Both sides tend to develop their pieces conventionally, with White fian- chettoing both his bishops and Black playing ... ltJf6, ... i.e7, ... O-O, ... b6 and ... i.b7 and usu- ally setting up a moderate-sized centre with ... c5. You will see that, barring the exchange cxd5, both sides' rooks can stay uninvolved in the fray for a long time, and their optimal place- ment is difficult to determine until the early middle game or later. 3b3 The main line that we're heading for can be reached if White begins with either fianchetto; for example, 3 g3 ltJf6 4 i.g2 i.e7 5 O-O O-O 6 b3 c5, etc. Black has unique options, however, after 3 g3 ltJf6 (or immediately 3 ... dxc4) 4 i.g2 dxc4 (D) (4 ... i.e7 5 b3 transposes to the main Reti lines). w I can't do justice to the large and disparate body of theory and practice here, but both sides should look out for these possibilities: a) 5 'it'c2 (the similar 5 'it'a4+ is less flexible because after 5 ... ltJbd7 6 'i!kxc4 {or 6 ltJa3} 6 ... c5, the queen will have to move again; the- ory indicates an equal outcome) 5 ... ltJbd7 (not the only move, of course) 6 ltJa3 c5 (6 ... i.xa3 7 bxa3 ltJb6 8 ltJe5 O-O 9 i.b2 may give White a small edge because of his bishop-pair) 7 O-O (or 7 ltJxc4 b5 8 ltJce5 ltJd5 9 ltJxd7 i.xd7 10 b3 i.e7 11 i.b2 O-O 12 O-O, Polugaevsky-Serper, Tilburg 1992, and now 12 ... f6 followed by .. J~c8 should be fine) 7 ... l::tb8 8 ltJxc4 b5 9 ltJce5 (9 ltJe3 is worth a try) 9 ... i.b7 10 ltJxd7 ltJxd7 11 d3, Suba-Inkiov, Iraklion 1985, and here 11...i.d6 (preventing i.f4) equalizes. b) 5 ltJa3 'it'd5!? 6 'it'a4+ (6 'it'c2?! can be met by 6 ... ltJc6 7 ltJxc4 ltJb4!? or 6 ... i.xa3 7 bxa3 ltJc6 8 O-O e5!; 6 O-O is similarly answered with 6 ... i.xa3 7 'it'a4+ ltJc6 8 'it'xa3 e5) 6 ... c6 (or 6 ... i.d7 7 'it'xc4 ltJc6) 7 'it'xc4 i.xa3 8 'i!kxd5 exd5 9 bxa3 i.f5!? 10 i.b2 ltJbd7 with a solid position, and roughly equal play. c) 5 O-O!? is a flexible move: 5 ... a6 (or 5 ... ltJc6, with the idea 6 'it'a4 'it'd5!? 7 ltJc3 'iVc5) 6 ltJc3!? b5 (Kosten gives the imagina- tive 6 ... i.e7 7 b3!? cxb3 8 'it'xb3, planning d4, e4 and i.f4) 7 d3! cxd3 8 ltJe5 l::ta7 9 i.e3 c5

w 10 'iVxd3!? (or 10 ltJxd3) 1O ... 'it'c7?! (after 1O ... 'i!kxd3 11 ltJxd3 ltJbd7 12 a4! b4 13 ltJe4 White will recover the c-pawn and obtain the better ending) 11 l::tfdl i.e7, G.Kuzmin-Beli- avsky, Kiev 1978, and here 12 i.f4! is ex- tremely strong. 3 ... ltJf6 At this point it's possible to play the ex- tremely rare 3 ... dxc4 4 bxc4 e5!? (D). The tactical basis for this advance is that 5 ltJxe5?? loses to 5 ... 'it'd4. This dynamic idea, wasting a whole move on ... e6-e5, merits more attention than it has re- ceived. In practice the logical continuation 5 ltJc3 ltJc6 has followed. Then White has to deal

RE:TI: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 25

w with the ideas of ... ltJf6 & ... e4, or ... fS & ... e4. Limited practice has seen: a) 6 .i.b2 ltJf6 7 e3 was tried in Marin- Vukovic, Bucharest 2000. Then 7 ... .i.fS (D) Black. Thus the decision between 3 g3 and 3 b3 becomes more confusing.

4 g3 (D)

would have been particularly interesting, tar- 4 ... .i.e7 geting d3 and planning ... e4. Here 4 ... dxc4 S bxc4 eS!? still merits consid- eration. 5 .i.g2 O-O 6 O-O c5 Black used to employ the formation with W 6 ... c6 7 .i.b2 bS!? (D) more frequently than he For example, S 'ilfb3!? can be answered by

8. .. .Bd6!, with the idea 9 'ilfxb7 ltJb4! followed

by ... :tbS, or S. .. e4. b) 6 g3 fS (6 ... ltJf6 7 .i.g2 .i.e7 S 0-00-09 d3 may give White a very slight English-style edge) 7 d3 (7 .i.g2 e4 SltJglltJf6 is unpleasant for White, while 7 .Bb2 e4!? SltJh4ltJf6 9 .Bh3! .i.cS! is an unclear pawn sacrifice) 7 ... .Bb4 (or 7 ... ltJf6 S .i.b2 .ics 9 .i.g2 O-O) S .td2ltJf6 9 'ilfb3!? .i.cs 10 'ifbS!? 'ilfe7 (Black stands well after 1O .. :ikd6! intending 11 ltJa4!? .Ba3) 11 ltJdS ltJxdS 12 cxdS a6 13 'ifb3 ltJbS 14 .i.g2, with the idea O-O and :tfc 1, Krnic-Wirschell, Wijk aan Zee 2001. White has the better of it here, but you can see that the clever idea with 3 ... dxc4 4 bxc4 eS has considerable promise for does today. w The idea is to get developed and tie White to the defence of c4; if White advances with cS at any point, it should make ... eS easier to accom- plish. Strategically, Black either plays for a queenside attack via ... as-a4 and ... ltJd7-cS, or, if White plays d4, he will ideally get in the free- ing move ... cS. For his part, White will try to use his greater mobility and the slight weaknesses in Black's camp. The classic example is Botvinnik-Bis- guier, Hastings 1961/2: S d3 (since S cxbS or S

26 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

cxdS would free c6 for Black's knight, White plays conservatively, happy with the fact that his bishop on b2 is superior to Black's light- squared bishop) 8 ... ttJbd7 9 ttJbd2 .i.b7 10 'iVc2 :tc8 11 e4 'iVb6 12 eS! ttJe8 13 d4 cS. Now it looks as though Black has achieved all of his goals and will free his game, but White has pre- pared a trick: 14 b4! (D).

Whatever Black does, White will be able to close the position temporarily and then make use of his space advantage: 14 ... cxb4 (14 ... dxc4? is a bad error due to IS dxcS 'iVc7 16 a4! a6 17 axbS axbS 18 :ta7, when along with ideas such as ttJd4, White threatens 19 ':'xb7! 'iVxb7 20 ttJgS, attacking the queen and h7) IS cS iilc7 16 'iVd3 ~c6 17 :tfe1 (White plays to prevent ... f6 or ... fS) 17 ... g6 18 a3! bxa3 19 iilxa3l:la8 20 ~c3 it.d8 21 ttJb3 (D).

Finally White wins the battle for as and is thus able to penetrate on the queenside. (An ex- ercise: count the number of squares available to each side's pieces.) The game proceeded 2l...ttJg7 22 it.aS 'iVb7 23 .i.xd8 l:lfxd8 24 ttJaS 'iVc7 2S l:.e2 a6 26 ttJe1 ttJfS 27 'iVc3 b4 (if Black does nothing, White will build up and fashion a kingside breakthrough) 28 'iVxb4 l:ldb8 29 'iVc3 l:.bS 30 l:lea2 f6 31 ttJxc6 'iVxc6 32 .i.f1 fxeS 33 it.xbS 'iVxbS 34 dxeS d4 3S 'iVd3 'iVxcs 36 l:.xa6 l:.xa6 37 'iVxa6 'iVxeS 38 ttJd3 'iVf6 39 'iVc8+ ttJf8 40 l:.a8 ttJd6 41 'iVd8 'iVxd8 42 l:lxd8 ttJbS 43 ttJeS ~g7 44 ttJc6 1-0. Very nice.

7.i.b2

Delaying i.b2 with 7 e3 has good and bad points; the idea is that in Benoni-like positions with ... d4, White's bishop is often better-placed on c1 than b2. For one thing the bishop on b2 blocks White's support of a b4 advance by a rook on b1; furthermore, a bishop on c1 might find an influential post on f4 or even support the move f4 if Black plays ... eS. After 7 e3 ttJc6 8 iile2, Kourkounakis-Botsari, Aegina 1995 pro- ceeded 8 ... d4 ?! 9 exd4 cxd4 10 ttJeS !? ttJxeS 11 iilxeS ttJd7! 12 ~e2. Now Black should proba- bly play 12 ... eS 13 d3 l:.e8 14 ttJd2 ttJcS, con- ceding White just a small edge after IS ttJe4 due to his mobile queenside majority and a powerful bishop on g2. Unfortunately for White, the absence of a bishop on b2 allows Black to contest eS by 8 ... dxc4 9 bxc4 eS!, with the idea 10 ~b2 ~fS!, If that's satisfactory for Black, then the text-move is preferable. Thus we return to 7 i.b2 (D):

This is the traditional main line of the Closed Reti, and arguably of the Reti Opening as a whole. Black now decides where to put his queen's knight, what to do with his bishop, and whether to play for ... d4. Let's see some games.

RETI: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 27

The Reti Benoni McNab - A. Norris Scottish Ch, Aberdeen 2001

[diagram]
O-O 6 O-O c5 7 iLb2 ttJc6 I haven't used the exact move-order of the game because I want to mention a frequently- used move-order, 7 ... b6 8 e3 iLb7. This will transpose to one of our main lines if Black plays 9 ... ttJc6 or 9 ... ttJbd7 (after 9 'iVe2, for example); see the following game. In this case, however, Black can't play the ... d4 variation that he does here.

8 e3 (D)

Over the years, White has settled upon this move as the main line. 8 cxd5 comes too early to cause Black real problems: 8 ... exd5 (or S. .. ttJxd5 9 ttJc3, when 9 ... iLf6 10 'iVc1 ttJxc3 11 iLxc3 e5 was Reti-Griinfeld, Teplitz-Schonau 1928, while 9 ... b6 with the idea ... iLa6 is also fine) 9 d4 ':'eS 10 ttJc3 iLg4 11 dxc5 iLxc5. Here Black has the kind of active play he doesn't get in the main lines, when his bishop is on b7 in- stead of g4.

[diagram]
In the next game we'll see the safer 8 ... b6. Other moves are seen much less often, although several are playable. Generally, if left to his own resources White can play 'iVe2 and an early d4 (often after cxd5), or in some cases d3 and e4, with some pull. It's worth mentioning that S. .. dxc4 9 bxc4 'iVd3 can be met by 10 'iVb3 with a superior position should Black exchange queens. 9 exd4 cxd4 (D) w Initially only a small minority of players were willing to test this position as Black, since it looked too much like a Modem Benoni with colours reversed in which Black wouldn't be able to play ... e5 successfully. 10 ':'el ttJe8! This retreat became the main line after some bad experiences with slower moves. Tal-Zhur- avliov, USSR Ch, Kharkov 1967 continued 1O ... lIeS 11 a3 a5 (12 b4 must be prevented) 12 d3 iLfS (12 ... 'iVb6!?) 13 ttJe5! ttJxe5 14 ':'xe5 ttJd7 (D). w 15l:tb5! (threateningiLxd4) 15 ... e516ttJd2!. These are standard Benoni ideas. White's pres- sure on the queenside and superior develop- ment (all but one of Black's pieces are on the first rank) guarantee him the advantage. Notice that in this line White doesn't solve Black's problems for him by 16 iLxb7?! iLxb7 17 ':'xb7 ttJc5 IS :b5 :b8!.

28 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

By contrast, 1O ... tiJe8 prepares to support d4 by ... f6 and ... eS while covering vulnerable squares inside Black's camp. 11 d3 White can play more ambitiously by 11 tiJeS tiJxeS 121:.xeS f6 131:.el eS (or 13 ... tiJc7 14 f4 nb8 with the idea ... bS, which is hard to assess) 14 f4! (hacking away at Black's pawn-chain) 14 ... exf4 IS 'iVf3! (1S gxf4 tiJc7 16 'iVG as 17 d3 a4 produces a double-edged fight) IS .. .fxg3 16 'iVdS+ ~h8 17 hxg3 'iVxdS 18 SLxdS, as in Fishbein-D.Schneider, USA Ch, San Diego

2004. White has sacrificed a pawn for excellent

piece pressure. 18 ... SLd6!? looks best, when Kosten suggests 19 SLxd4 tiJc7 20 SLf3 SLxg3

21 SLf2!. Then if 21 ... SLxf2+ 22 ~xf2, White's

central pawns, combined with the e-file and temporary pressure on b7, are at least the equiv- alent of Black's three passed pawns. Similarly,

21.. .SLf4 22 d4 gives White good chances, es-

pecially in view of 22 ... tiJe6 23 SLxb7! SLxb7 241:.xe6. Overall, this line looks like a promis- ing way for White to go. 11 ... f612 tiJa3 (D)

12  e5 13 tiJc2 Although ... tiJbd7 is common in the Modem Benoni, here we see White playing the alternate Benoni plan tiJa3-c2 in almost every line, be- cause b4 (or at least the threat of b4) is neces- sary in order to keep Black on the defensive and counteract his space advantage.

13. .. tiJc7 14 'i'd2

White supports the move b4 and clears his back rank. This does use up the d2-square for a knight redeployment, but tiJd2 isn't necessarily a good idea anyway. Instead, 14 tiJh4! ? (D) is a strange-looking but promising move that tries to provoke Black into weakening his kingside with ... gS, and then attacking it with h4.

This is an idea that appears in the King's In- dian Defence as well as the Modem Main Line of the Benoni. Since f4 is a positional threat, Black 'cooperates': 14 ... gS IS tiJG. Now White is ready to play h4; apparently, he needn't be in a hurry to make progress in such positions since he faces few threats. Here are two examples: a) IS ... SLe6?! 16 tiJfxd4 (this seems a good spot for 16 h4! g4 17 tiJh2 'i'd7 18 'iVd2 as 19 'iVh6) 16 ... exd4 (16 ... tiJxd4 17 SLxd4 exd4 18 :xe6 tiJxe6 19 SLdS 'iVb6! 20 'iVe2 ~h8 21 'iVxe6! 'iVxe6 22 SLxe6 is unclear) 17 nxe6 tiJxe6 18 SLdS ~h8 (18 ... 'iVd6 19 'iVe2 tiJcd8? 20 tiJxd4) 19 SLxe6 SLcS 20 SLfS with a lovely outpost and good prospects, Macieja-Vescovi, Bermuda 2OOS. b) IS ... SLfS seems more accurate: 16 'i'e2 SLg4 (16 ... 1:.f7! covers the second rank to quash any tactics; then 17 h4 g4 18 tiJd2 is hard to as- sess) 17 h3 SLhS?! (17 ... SLe6) 18 g4 SLg6 19 tiJfxd4! tiJxd4. Now the safest move is 20 SLxd4 !le8! 21 SLb2 SLxd3 22 'iVd2; then Black has his share of the centre, but White has the threat of SLxb7 and moves like tiJe3 and 1:.adl in store. In- stead, Kosarev-Bets, Peterhof 2006 continued 20 tiJxd4!? SLb4 21 tiJfS SLxel 221:.xel SLxfS?! (22 ... 1:.b8 23 SLe4) 23 gxfS l::.b8, when White should have opened lines for his rook by 24 h4! gxh4 2S f4! exf4 26 'iVg4+ Rh8 27 'i'xf4 with two bishops, an attack and d4-dS-d6 in reserve. Sometimes White plays 14 a3 as, when IS 'iVd2 transposes to the game, while IS1:.bl has also led to many tough battles.

Rf:TI: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 29

14.  a515 a3 tiJa6 (D)

w 16 b4!? White embarks upon a pseudo-sacrifice con- sistent with the aim of piece activity. Schwartz- mann-Lputian, Wijk aan Zee 1993 saw the slower 16 .flabl: 16 ... .flb8 17 ..tal?! (17 ..tel! keeps the bishop on a freer diagonal: 17 ... b5 18 tiJh4 ..td7, Deleyn-Chuchelov, Belgian Team Ch 1995/6, and now 19 f4!? tiJc7 20 f5 bxc4 21 dxc4 ..tc5 22 ~d3 could be considered, with the idea of advancing by g4, h4 and g5) 17 ... ..td7

18 b4 axb4 19 axb4 b5 20 c5 tiJc7 (D).

w This kind of pawn-structure, common to this variation and the Modem Benoni, would be fine for White if he didn't have his dark-squared bishop, because he could challenge for the a- file. But it sits uselessly on aI, so Black must have the better prospects. In our main game, White solves that problem as follows: ... axb4 17 axb4 tiJcxb4 18 tiJfxd4! exd4

19..ta3

The point: White gets his piece back. 19. tiJxc2 20 ..txe7 tiJxel! Black made the wrong queen 'sacrifice' in Lautier-Kotronias, Sochi 1989: 20 ... ~xe7? 21 .fIxe7 tiJxal 22 'iWa5 tiJb3 23 'iWd5+ 'iti>h8 24 "ijf7! .fIg8 25 .fIe8 ..te6 26 ':xg8+ .fIxg8 27 "ijxe6 tiJac5 28 ~b6 and White went on to win.

21..txd8 tiJxg2 (D)

w 22 ..tb6 ..th3 Now 23 'iWdl g6 24 ..txd4 .fIad8 25 ..tb6 .fId6 is unclear. However, White went astray with 23 "iVe2?! g6 24 .fIbl .fIae8 25 ~f3?? (25 'iWd2) 25 ... tiJel! 26 li'xb7 tiJb4! and Black was win- ning. In general, the chances in this game looked balanced, which we could say about the entire variation. I would encourage White to investi- gate his alternatives on moves 11 and 14. The ... b6 Fianchetto Scherbakov - Vaganian St Petersburg 1998 1 tiJf3 d5 2 c4 e6 3 g3 tiJf6 4 ..tg2 ..te7 5 O-O 0-06 b3 c5 7 ..tb2 b6 8 e3 ..tb7 (D) This and the following positions can be reached by a large number of move-orders; in fact, this game began with ... b6 on the second move! Since there are as yet no open lines, the question of how to activate rooks becomes of interest. Black tends to centralize with .. J:td8, opening the d-file by ... dxc4 when the timing is right; his other rook might go to b8 to support ... a6 and ... b5. White sometimes beats him to the punch with cxd5 and then places rooks on el and dl, hoping for an effective d4. Another

30 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w plan is d3 and a well-timed e4.It's all very po- sition-specific. 9 ttJc3 Let's see two examples of the sort of classi- cal attack that White has mounted time and again: 9 'iVe2 ttJc6 10 l:.dl 'fic7 11 ttJc3 (D).

Now it's very risky to delay ... dxc4 too long, because sooner or later cxdS will produce an advantage, often in the form of a decisive at- tack: a) 11...l:!.fd8 12 cxdS ttJxdS 13 ttJxdS l:.xdS

14 d4 lld7 (14 ... cxd4 IS ttJxd4 ttJxd4 16 i.xd4

and now 16 ... l:.d7 17 llac1leaves White with a clearly superior position; still worse is 16 ... l:.d6? 17 l:.dcl! 'iVd7 18 i.eS with the idea 18 ... l:!.dS?

19 I:tc7) IS dxcS (this draws a piece away from

Black's already under-populated kingside, and the bishop on cS will often be subject to attack) IS ... i.xcs 16 ttJgS! l:.xdl + 171hdl h6 18 ttJe4 i.f8? (D). 19 ttJf6+! (routine, possibly, but nice any- way) 19 ... gxf6 20 'iVg4+ ~h7 21 i.e4+ fS 22 w i.xfS+ exfS 23 'iVxfS+ ~g8 24 I:td7 'iVxd7 2S ~xd7 l:.b8 26 'iVg4+ ~h7 27 'iVfS+ 1-0 Szabo- Padevsky, Amsterdam 1972. b) 11...l:.ad8 12 d3 'iVb8 13 l:.ac1 'iVa8 14 cxdS ttJxdS IS ttJxdS l:.xdS!? (or IS ... exdS 16 d4 ttJb4!? 17 i.c3 i.a6 18 'iVd2! intending 18 ... ttJd3? 19 i.fl! c4 20 i.xd3 cxd3 21 ttJel) 16 ttJel l:.d7 (D). w 17 'fig4 (a typical gravitation kingside) 17 ... g6 18 'iVf4 'iVb8! 19 'iVh6 f6?! 20 d4 l:.fd8 21 ttJd3 'iVa8? 22 ttJf4 l:.d6 and now 23 l:.el! is hard to meet, while 23 ttJxg6!? hxg6 24 'iixg6+ ~f8 2S 'iWh6+ ~e8 26 'iVhS+ also gives White an at- tack. Instead, the natural 23 dS?! (Padevsky- Gregoriu, Istanbul 1975) allows the surprising defence 23 ... ttJeS! 24 i.xeS fxeS 2S ttJxg6 i.f6. 9 ... dxc4! Black cuts out the idea of cxdS right away. Actually, 9 ... ttJbd7 is a respectable move with hundreds of games behind it. Just one exam- ple: 10 'iie2 (10 d3! is more flexible, stopping ... ttJe4 and leaving open the plan of ttJe 1 and f4,

RETI: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 31

and in some cases g4-gS) 1O ... a6 (1O ... lbe4 is an equalizer, according to theory) 11l::tfd1 ~c7 l2l::tac1 dxc4 (again, Black shouldn't wait too long; a number of games have seen the likes of l2. .. .:.ac8 13 cxdslbxdS 14lbxdS i.xdS IS e4 .Bb7 16 d4 and Black has to cope with both 17 dxcS and 17 dS) 13 bxc4 i.c6!? 14 d4! (we see that White's position has some elasticity to it, and he begins a potential central pawn-roller) 14 ... ~7? (Kosten gives l4. .. cxd4 IS exd4 l::tfe8(?!), although 16 dS! exdS 17lbxdS still causes difficulties) IS dS! (D).

Black really should have seen this standard pawn sacrifice coming. Sorokin-Sambuev, St Petersburg 1999 continued lS ... exdS 16 cxdS lbxdS 17 lbxdS i.xdS 18 lbeS! lbf6 (no better for Black is 18 ... lbxeS 19 ':'xdS lbg6 20 l::tdxcS or l8 ... i.xg2? 19l::txd7 ~e4 20 ':'c4) 191:txdS! (the geometry is nice, and Reti players espe- cially love their bishops when they look like these do!) 19 ... lbxdS 20 ':'d1 l::tad8 21 ~d2! lbxe3!? (the bishops are too strong following

21...f6 22lbc4 bS 23 lbaS ~c7 24 i.xdS+ 'iith8

2Slbc6l::td6 26lbxe7 ~xe7 27 e4; after White wins the queen, Black has some tricks, but nothing that should work) 22 i.xb7 lbxd1 23 ~c2 c4!? 24 lbxc4 i.cS 2S i.xa6 i.xf2+ 26 'iitg2 ':'fe8 27 i.c 1 i.cs 28 lbb2 lbe3+ 29 i.xe3 i.xe3 30 lbd3 and White won. An excellent game for the student to play through. 10 bxc4lbc6111i'e2 (D) This has been the starting point for hundreds of games. White is reserving the right to play d3 or d4. He can put his rooks on cl and dl, or dl and bl (leaving the queen's rook on the queen- side to restrain ... bS) or he can leave the king's

rook on f1 to support a kingside pawn-storm. In fact, much of the time that White succeeds di- rectly out of the opening, he does so with some version of f4-fS or g4-gS and transferring his pieces towards the black king. Conversely, having played ... dxc4, Black doesn't have to worry about cxdS diverting his pieces and can get to work in the centre and queenside. It's generally important to exchange off White's light-squared bishop, which other- wise might participate in a central or kingside attack. Generally, ... a6 and ... bS are key moves for Black's counterplay, opening lines on the queenside or driving White's pieces away. 11,..l::tc8 The most common move is 11...~c7. Here are two typical examples after 12 d3: a) l2. .. .:.fd8 13lbel (the conventional move: White protects g2 and prepares an assault by g4, f4-fS, gS, etc.) 13 ... a6! (D). w Black begins the customary counterattack. He will often support ... bS by ... lba7, and probably

32 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

should do so next move. 14 f4 ttJb4?! (14 ... ttJa7! 15 a4! i.xg2 16 'iixg2 'iic6 17 :tbl :tab8 is level) 15 a3 i.xg2!? (rather eager; sometimes w Black foregoes this move in order to prevent a knight or queen from reaching g2) 16 'iixg2 ttJc6 17 g4 ttJe8 18 g5 ttJd6 19 l:tf3 (19 ttJe4 ttJxe4 20 'iixe4 was probably the best plan any- way, thinking about f5 and/or ttJf3) 19 ... b5 20 cxb5 axb5 21 J:h3 b4! (just in time) 22 ttJe4 ttJxe4 23 'iixe4 g6 24 f5! (D).

Suddenly White has ideas like l:txh7, fxe6 and 'iih4. However, the position is just simpli- fied enough for Black to defend, and he has di- versionary moves on the queenside. 24 ... exf5! (24 ... gxf5? 25 g6!!) 25 'iih4?! (25 l:txh7 threat- ens mate; then 25 ... l:td4! - everything else is a disaster - 26 i.xd4 cxd4 27 'iih4 'iie5! 28 ttJf3! 'iixe3+ 29 'iitg2 'ii'e2+ 30 'iitgl 'ii'e3+ draws) 25 ... h5 26 gxh6!. Now everything holds by a thread. There are tremendous complications, but I'll limit the notes: 26 ... ttJe5?! (26 ... 'iith7! 27 'iic4 ttJe5! is best) 27 h7+ 'iith8 28 ttJf3!? f6? 29 ttJxe5 (a pretty line is 29 'iih6!? ttJxf3+ 30 l:txf3 bxa3? {30 ... c4} 31 i.c3! l:txd3 32 'iixg6!! l:txc3 33 l:tg3 'ii'xg3+ 34 'iixg3 a2 35 'ii'f3 and White should win) 29 .. .fxe5 30 'iiVg3 i.f6 31 l:th6?? bxa3 32 :txa3 llxa3 33 l:txg6! 'iitxh7! 34 l:txf6 "fig7 35 'iiVxg7+ 'iitxg7 36 i.xe51bxd3 37 l:tc6+ c:J;f7 38 l:txc5 l:txe3 39 i.f4? 0-1 (time) Lobron- Tiviakov, Moscow Olympiad 1994. A terrific battle with useful tactical themes. b) 12 ... :tad8 13 l:tadl a6! 14 ttJg5?! ttJa7! 15 f4 i.xg2 (generally, this is a good move if White can't recapture with a knight; even then, Black can usually cope with White's kingside play) 16 'iitxg2 b5 17 c:J;gl b4!? 18 ttJbl ttJc6 (D). 19 ttJd2 a5!? (Black's attack is faster than White's, but he could interpose 19 ... h6 to be safe) 20 g4 'iid7 21 ttJde4 ttJxe4 22 dxe4!? 'iiVc7 23 ttJf3 a4 24 g5 :txd125 :txdl :td8 26 h4 ttJa5 27 l:txd8+ 'iiVxd8 28 'iic2 a3 29 i.al f6 with some advantage for Black, Timman-Spassky, Sochi 1973. In this example, White did a good job of handling Black's queenside advance, but you can see that Black maintained his prospects of penetrating into White's position. 12 l:tadl 'iie7 13 ttJel a6 14 f4 ttJa7! So far we see all the same ideas; White's omission of d3 is the only real difference, which gives him a better chance of restraining Black's queenside, because the queen on e2 watches overb5.

15 a4 i.xg2 16 ttJxg2 (D)

...' iiVd7 Black should probably play ... ttJc6 on this or the next move, bringing the knight back into the action.

17 g4 ttJe818 f5!

RET!: OPEN AND CLOSED VARIATIONS 33

White will often attack e6 on the grounds that after fxe6, Black must either take on an iso- lated pawn by .. .fxe6 or cede the d5-square af- ter ... 'iVxe6.

18.  .1f619 fxe6 fxe6 (D)

w 20gS! White sacrifices a pawn to open up lines with a gain of tempo. 20 ... .1xgS 20 ... .1e5!? 2ll:l.xf8+ ~xf8 22 'iVg4! threat- ens'iVe4. 21l:1.xf8+ ~xf8 22 lbe4 .1h6 23 as! (D)

A nice blow on the other wing. Black's pawn-structure is permanently damaged. 23 ... bxaS 24lbxc5! 'iVe7 Not 24 ... ':'xc5? 25 .1a3 'iVe7 26 d4. The a3- f8 diagonal proves decisive anyway. 2S':'0+ ~g8 26'iVg4! lbc7 27 lbe4lbe8? White stands much better in any case after 27 ... .:.f8 28 .l:hf8+ ~xf8 29 .1e5!. 28 .1d4! (D)

Now Black can do nothing about the threat of .1c5.

28. .. l:I.c7 29 .1cs l:I.xcS 30 lbxcs lbc7 31

lbe4lbc6 32lbf6+ ~h8 (D) w 33 lbdS! exdS 34 'iVc8+ lbe8 3S cxdS lbd8 36~xd81-0 The Reti Opening leads to positions that are fluid and unclear. I suspect that its lack of greater popularity in part derives from the absence of the kind of predictable structures that charac- terize many mainstream openings. Some might consider that an advantage, however, in that the player who better adjusts to new issues will generally carry the day.

2 Reti: Slav Variations

Ilbf3 d5 2 c4 c6 (D) w A broad complex of positions can arise from ... c6/ ... d5 structures in the Reti Opening. Right away, I should put them in context. In playing

2. .. c6, Black indicates that he is happy to con-

test a Slav Defence, which White can immedi- ately enter into by 3 d4. The most common alternatives to that move are 3 g3 and 3 b3. White sometimes plays a combination of e3, ~c2, lbc3, b3 and Si.b2, but the 'purest' Reti set-up is the one followed by Reti himself: a double fianchetto. How White can achieve that and whether Black permits him to are the first questions both sides must consider, because there are so many early changes of direction that might spoil their respective plans. The question of how to react to a Slav move- order also arises in the English Opening, and it's worth a digression to talk about how White should respond after 1 c4 c6. Again, he can play

[diagram]
lbf3 d5, transposing to this chapter. I should mention a third option, 2 e4 (equivalent to the Caro-Kann line 1 e4 c6 2 c4), when after 2 ... d5 3 exdS cxd5, 4 d4 is a Caro-Kann Panov Attack. He can also play 4 cxd5, which can reach typical isolated queen's pawn positions after 4 ... lbf6 and 5 ... lbxd5, though White has independent options such as 5 ~a4+!? and 5 Si.b5+. If Black wants to avoid all this, he can also try 1 c4 c6 2 e4 e5, but that has its own set of prob- lems after 3 lbf3, and is quite rare. The inter- ested reader will have to dig around in books and databases. Sticking with the 1 c4 c6 English Opening for a moment, Tony Kosten points out that the move-order 2 g3 d5 3 Si.g2 (D) has some posi- tive features.

First, this move frustrates Black's desire to play ... Si.g4 without committing his knights: 3 ... Si.g4? 4 cxd5 cxd5 5 "i/Vb3 attacks d5 and b7, and 5 ... "i/Vc8 (threatening the bishop on cl) only staves off material loss for one more move, 6 lbc3, because 6 ... e6?? loses to 7 "i/Va4+! and 8 ~xg4 (keep your eye out for this trick, which occurs in several openings). Therefore, after 1 c4 c6 2 g3 d5 3 Si.g2, Black might want to try 3 ... lbf6 4lbf3 Si.g4, but this transposes into a version of the Reti main line below (llbf3 d5 2 c4 c6 3 g3lbf6 4 Si.g2 Si.g4) in which White can play the effective move 5 lbe5. Contrast this with the sequence Ilbf3 d5

2 c4 c6 3 g3 Si.g4 4 Si.g2, when Black can

choose 4 ... lbd7, preventing lbe5. So by playing 1 c4 and 2 g3, White has reached a Reti System and bypassed the popu- lar set-up with both ... Si.g4 and ... lbd7. Of course, there are always trade-offs. After 1 c4

RETI: SLAV VARIATIONS 35

c6 2 g3 d5 3 ii.g2, White must be willing to touch upon a subset of these, let's look at a few play against 3 ... dxc4 (D). games. w Then Kosten suggests recovering the pawn by 4liJa3 ii.e6 (not 4 ... b5? in view of 5 liJxb5, but 4 ... e5 5liJxc4 f6 is definitely worthy of con- sideration) 5 'iVc2 liJa6 6 liJxc4liJb4!? 7 'iVb3 ii.d5! 8 ii.xd5 'iVxd5 9liJf3. Following 9 ... e5 10 a3 b5 11 axb4 bxc4, he recommends 12 ~e3!, attacking e5 and a7 while in some cases playing an effective :ta5. So far, so good, but a possible problem is that Black can play 9 ... e6 instead, which sets up a nice restraint pawn-structure that goes well with the good bishop on f8. 9 ... e6 also works tactically in the line 10 a3 b5 11 axb4 bxc4 12 'iVc3liJf6 with the idea 13 J:.a5 c5. This last position is hard to assess, but at any it's not a clear improvement for White over the lines beginning with 2liJf3. Instead of Kosten's 4liJa3, McDonald likes 4liJf3, giving the gambit line 4 ... b5 5 a4 ii.b7 6 b3! cxb3 7 'iVxb3 (actually, 7 axb5 cxb5 8 'iVxb3 seems to favour White slightly as well) 7 ... a6 8 ii.a3 with strong play. One issue in that case is whether other fourth moves like 4 .. . ii.e6 and 4 ... liJf6 are better. For example, after 4 ... liJf6, we've transposed to 3 g3 liJf64 ii.g2 dxc4 be- low. I have gone somewhat far afield to describe these ramifications of 1 c4 c6 2 g3, but they could be of considerable interest to English Opening players as well as those who prefer the Reti Opening. Let's return to lliJf3 d5 2 c4 c6. The mate- rial expands quickly, as White has multiple moves at every juncture and Black several re- plies to each. With the warning that I shall only The System with ... i..g4 Miroshnichenko - Mammadov Baku 2006 lliJf3 d5 2 c4 c6 3 g3 (D) We are used to weighing the differences be- tween 3 g3 and 3 b3 when White is planning to fianchetto both bishops. But his intention in this game is to forego b3 with other ideas in mind. A drawback to doing so is that he allows ... dxc4 without being able to recapture with the b-pawn, but a significant benefit is that his queen is free to come to b3 or a4, something that happens consistently in the variations of this game and the next. White will also delay liJc3 for some time so as to steer clear of attack by ... d4, as well as to reserve to right to play liJbd2 or liJa3.

3  liJf6 Black doesn't commit his queen's bishop, which can go to f5 or g4. Upon occasion, 3 ... ii.g4 is played instead of3 ... liJf6, but this in- troduces issues of an early 'iVb3, either immedi- ately or after 4 cxd5. The ideas are similar to ones below. 4 ii.g2 The basic position. We'll look at acceptance of the gambit by ... dxc4 on this or the next move in the game Poldauf-Saltaev below (,The Gam- bit Accepted'). 4  ii.g4 (D)

36 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w As you can quickly work out, this basic and popular position can arise via other move- orders. Having played ... i..g4, Black is free to follow up by ... e6 without shutting in his bishop, something he is forced to do in many 1...dS openings. While he has several ways to proceed, Black's most common and in many ways ideal set-up is ... liJbd7, ... e6, ... i..d6 and ... O-O, with ... eS to follow at some point. Occasionally, he is more ambitious and plays ... liJbd7, ... i..xf3 and ... eS straightaway, which saves a tempo, but is riskier because it cedes the bishop-pair and leaves his d-pawn only loosely defended. The move ... i..xf3 fits in well with this general idea of central expansion, particularly if White uses the extra tempo h3 to encourage it. That said, h3 can also be answered by ... i..hS. You can see why many players like the flexibility and im- balance that the ... c6/. .. dS systems can provide. White has his own opportunities, of course. A significant drawback to 4 ... i..g4 is that it takes a defender away from Black's queenside. White will very often try to exploit its absence by playing ~b3, hitting the dS- and b7-pawns, or ~a4, tying up Black's pieces on that side of the board. Another issue is that White can play liJeS, attacking Black's bishop on g4. Note that liJeS, c4, liJc3 and i..g2 all either directly or indi- rectly attack Black's central and queenside light squares, which means that Black can easily lose material if he isn't careful. What's more, a fur- ther pawn-break by e4 can cause additional damage. SliJeS This leap of the knight disturbs the balance by attacking the bishop on g4; White also steers clear of ... i..xf3. Obviously, this needs to be done before S ... liJbd7 is played. On the other hand, Black allows this move for a reason: the knight on eS isn't defended and can be swapped off by ... liJbd7 with a gain of time. A little sim- plification won't hurt Black, who temporarily controls more space. Of course, White can still go into the double fianchetto lines by S b3 (which has its own sec- tion below; see, for example, the game Pod- zielny-Dautov), but other slow moves have generally been unimpressive because they don't do enough about Black's basic plan. For one thing, Black threatens S ... i..xf3 6 i..xf3 dxc4, winning a pawn that is not easy to recover. If White plays S cxdS, Black often responds with S ... i..xf3 6 i..xf3 cxdS, on the grounds that he now has the ideal square for his knight on c6; here S ... cxdS 6liJc3liJc6 is another respectable option. So we can see the reasoning behind S liJeS, which is the critical move. Thus we return to SliJeS (D):

S i..hS?! Since White intends to play liJxg4 followed by e4, Black removes his bishop from capture. a) The retreat by S ... i..fS occurs less often, but it's a legitimate continuation. Then 6 cxdS cxdS 7liJc3 (7 ~a4+!?) can be met by 7 ... liJc6 with the idea 8 liJxc6 bxc6 9 ~a4 i..d7, or 9 .. :ii'd7. Otherwise, 7 ... e6 8 ~a4+ liJbd7 9 g4 i..g6 transposes to a position from this game. b) The most important alternative is S ... i..e6 (D), which may well be the best defence. Black threatens ... dxc4, in some cases fol- lowed by ... i..dS or ... ~d4. As one might expect, White has many ways to react. Unfortunately, they aren't related thematically, so if you are

[diagram]
RETI: SLAV VARIATIONS 37

w interested in this line for either colour you'll want to do some work. Here are a few ideas: bl) 6 'iVb3 'iVc7 is easy for Black because White is so far from getting his pieces out that he can't exploit the queen's placement along the c-file. There may follow 7 d3lbbd7 8lbxd7 i.xd7 9 O-O e6 with full equality. b2) 6 lba3 dxc4 (6 ... lbbd7 develops more quickly) 7 lbaxc4 ..tdS 8 f3! (preserving his light-squared bishop and preparing e4) 8 ... e6 9 d4 i.xc4 10 lbxc4 ..tb4+ 11 'it>f2lbbd7 12 ~b3 lbb6! 13 l:f.dI ..te7 14 e4lbxc4 IS ~xc4 ~b6 gives White the centre and an undoubted edge. But without a knight it's always difficult to make real progress against Black's classic re- straint centre with ... e6 and ... c6. . b3) 6 cxdS ..txdS (6 ... cxdS 7lbc3lbbd7 8 d4 is comfortable for White) 7lbf3 (D) (7 f3?! can be met safely by 7 ... lbbd7 8lbxd7 'iVxd7 9lbc3 eS, or more aggressively and unclearly with 7 ... ..txa2!? 8 .l:txa2 'iVdS {forking eS and a2} 9 lbxf7?! {9lbc3} 9 ... 'iVxa2 10 lbxh8 'iVxbI 11 ..th3! {threatening ..te6} I1...'iVa2 12 ..tc8!).

Now White wants to play lbc3 and capture the bishop on dS, so Black gives it a retreat- square on c6: 7 ... cS 8 O-O (8 lbc3 ..tc6 9 O-O lbbd7 10 d3 appears more promising, intending e4, ~e2 and d4) 8 ... e6 9 a3!? lbbd7 10 lbc3 ..tc6 11 .l:tel ..td6 12 e4lbeS!? (I2 ... eS 13 b4!? cxb4 14 axb4 ..txb4 IslbdS ..td6 16 d4 O-O is unclear; White has a nice centre, but still has to prove full compensation) 13 b4!? cxb4 14 axb4 lbxf3+ IS 'iVxf3 eS 16 bS ..td7 17 d40-0 18 dxeS ..txeS 19 ..tf4 with a complicated position that offers chances for both sides, Stocek-Talla, Czech Ch, Lazne Bohdanec 1999. b4) An intriguing gambit idea is 6 d4!? dxc4

[diagram]
provokes the response 7 ... ..tdS 8 f3 bS 9 e4 ..te6, and now 10 f4! gives White space and some development for the pawn; this deserves a closer look) 7 ... lbbd7 8 f4lbxeS 9 fxeS ..tg4 10 'iVd2lbd7 11 ~gS?! (11 O-O! seems better; for example, I1...e6 12 'iVf4 ..thS 13 ..te3 ..te7 14 lbd2 or l1...f6I2 h3 ..te613 dS ..tg8 14 e6lbeS IS 'iVc3 bS 16 ..te3 ~d617 a4- White's central pawns must count for something!) 11.. .. .te6! 12 dS!? f6 13 'iVe3, Goodwin-Mansson, Coventry 200S, and here 13 ... cxdS! 14 exdS ..tfS eyes d3 for the bishop or knight and seems safe enough. 6 cxd5 cxd5?! From now on Black has problems with his light-squared bishop, as demonstrated by a num- ber of games. Yet the alternative 6 ... lbxdS (D) gives White a central majority and lets him play for advantage in an instructive fashion. a) Quite a few games have featured 7 lbc3. Then 7 ... lbxc3 8 bxc3lbd7 9lbxd7 'iVxd7 10

38 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w ltb1 b6 11 d4 e6 approaches equality. The pop- ular move is 7 ... e6, but 8 g4 .i.g6 9 h41 poses a problem in the form of hS; maybe 9 ... .i.d6 10 ttJc4 hS 11 'iWb3 b6 is best, hoping that the pawn-structure more or less compensates for White's bishops following 12 ttJxd6+ 'iWxd6. b) 7 "iVb31 (D) seems promising.

Then play can go 7 .. :ilic7 (7 ... ttJd7 has been used by strong players, yet 8 .i.xdS 1 seems to secure an edge in view of 8 ... ttJxeS 9 .i.g2 with d4 coming next) 8 d4 e6?1 (8 ... f6 with the idea ... .i.f7 is more active) 9 e4 ttJf6 10 ttJc3 .i.e7 11 h31? (11 .i.f41) 1l....i.g6 (ll...ttJbd7 12 .i.f4 ttJxeS 13 .i.xeS followed by g4 and f4) 12 .i.f4 "iVb6 13 ttJc41?"iVb4 140-00-0, Kirov-Van de Oudeweetering, Groningen 1988, and now the simplest course is IS 'ilYxb4 .i.xb4 16 .i.d6 .i.xd6 17 ttJxd6 with a large positional advan- tage. Apparently Black can't equalize against 7 "iVb3, indicating in tum that S. .. .i.hS is slightly suspect. Black's bishop on hS or g6 is cut off from the rest of the action, as often happens in the Slav Defence. 7 "iVa4+! 7 ttJc3 isn't quite as forcing, but tends to lead to some advantage. A good example is 7 ... ttJc6 (7 ... e6 8 g4 .i.g6?1 9 h4 .i.d6 10 d4 is very awk- ward for Black) 8 ~a4 ~d6 9 d4 ~b4 10 ttJxc6 "iVxa4 11 ttJxa4 bxc6, Kosten-Shirazi, Sautron 200S, and here 12 .i.f41 e6 13l:!.c1 with the idea of ttJcS must be good, especially in view of 13 ... .i.b4+ 14 .i.d21 .i.xd2+ IS ~xd2, when White doubles by l:!.c3 and ::'fc1, and can play e3 and i.f1, if needed, to win material on the queenside. 7 .. ttJbd7 8 ttJc3 e6 9 g4 .i.g6 10 h4 (D)

We've seen this advance in many openings; the basic idea is that Black can't provide an es- cape-square for his bishop by moving his h- pawn, because ttJxg6 would be positionally di- sastrous for him. 10 . :i!i'c7? Black has tried several moves here, mostly in vain. Here's an abbreviated account, very use- ful as an overview of tactical themes: a) 1O ... .i.c2? 11 ttJxf71 (D). 1l....i.xa4 (ll...~xf7? 12 ~xc2 ttJxg4 13 ttJxdS1 exdS 14 .i.xdS+ ~e8 IS ~e4+ ttJdeS 16 f3 and White emerges two pawns ahead) 12 ttJxd8 ~xd8 13 ttJxa4 ttJxg4 14 i.h3 ttJdf6 IS d4 (better is IS ::'gl! hS 16 f3 ttJeS 17 .i.xe6) lS ... lIc8? 16 ttJcS? (16 f31) 16 ... .i.xcs 17 dxcS ttJeS 18 ::'gl 1g6 19 .i.f4 ttJed7 20 .i.xe6? 1: :'xcS 21 .i.e3 lIc6 22 .i.h3 and White's bishop-pair led to a win in Romanishin-Suba, Moscow 1986. b) 1O ... .i.d6 11 d4 h6 (Kaidanov-Htibner, peA Qualifier, Groningen 1993) and now the

RET!: SLAV VARIATIONS 39

simplest path to an advantage is 12lbxg6 fxg6 13 gS hxgS 14 hxgS llxh1+ IS .i.xh1lbhS 16 'iic2lbf8 17 e4. c) 1O ... a6!? barely hangs on tactically, but leads to other problems. Fernandez Murga- Ginzburg, Buenos Aires 1999 went 11 lbxd7 'iixd7 12 'iixd7+ liJxd7 13 hS .i.c2 14 d3 (to trap the bishop) 14 ... d4. Now, instead of the game's lSlbe4?! .i.a4, Kosten points out that White's best line is IS ~d2! .i.xd3! 16 exd3 dxc3+ 17 bxc3 O-O-O!? 18 ':'b1, when the bishop-pair grants him a clear superiority.

11 d4 hS

11...h6 is also losing: 12 gS! hxgS 13 hxgS

llxh1+ 14 .i.xh1 lbg8 (14 ... lbe4 IS lbbS fol- lowed by lbxd7) IS .i.f4 'iid8 16 e4 .i.xe4 17 lbxe4 dxe4 18 .i.xe4. w 12 .i.f4 'iib613 gS! 'iixb214 ':'cl.i.b4 (D) Otherwise Black loses material at once. IS O-O! .i.xc3 16 gxf6 ':'dS 17 lbxd7 Kosten gives the pretty line 17 fxg7 ':'g8 18 .i.gS 'iib4 19 lbxd7! 'iixa4 20 lbf6+ ~e7 21 lbxg8++ ~d7 22lbf6+ ~d6 23 llxc3 and White mates or wins more material. The rest is clear. 17 .. Jhd7 IS llxc3! 'iixc3 19.:tel 'iixel+ 20 .i.xel gxf6 21 .i.a3 a6 22 'iiaS ':'gS 23 'iics .i.e4 24 f3 .i.bl? 2S 'iicS+ ':'d8 26 'iixb7 .i.xa2 27 "ike7# (1-0) The System with .... tfS Smyslov - Bronstein USSR Ch, Odessa 1974 Ilbf3dS2c4c63g3 Sometimes White sets up a structure with e3, b3, .i.b2, 'iic2 and lbc3, moves which can be played in a variety of orders. Let me just pres- ent some of the more dynamic ideas: 3 e3lbf6 4 lbc3 (4 ~c2 e6 S b3 lbbd7 6 .i.b2 .i.d6 7 lbc3 transposes; naturally, there are alternatives) 4 ... e6 (among many options, Black has 4 ... .i.g4, 4 ... .i.fS and 4 ... a6; the last is a modern way to treat many Slav Variations; for one thing, it means that lines with "iVb3, hitting the b-pawn, can be answered by ... bS or even ... lla7) 5 b3 lbbd7 6 .i.b2 .i.d6 (6 ... .i.e7 7 g4!? is promising, since 7 ... lbxg4 8 J::i.g1 followed by llxg7 recov- ers the pawn, and incidentally weakens Black on the a1-h8 diagonal) 7 'iic2 O-O 8 .i.e2 (D).

We have arrived at a system that Black plays versus the Colle Attack, but with colours re- versed and White having an extra tempo. At this point things can get surprisingly tactical: a) 8 ... eS?! is slightly premature because of another typical idea from the Semi-Slav: 9 cxd5 and after 9 ... cxdS 10 lbbS .i.b8 11 llc1 White

40 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

has the dual ideas of iLa3 and liJc7. Instead, 9 ... liJxdS 10 liJe4 i.c7 allows White to play the fun and dangerous attack 11 liJegS g6 12 h4!. b) 8 ... dxc4 9 bxc4 eS and now 10 O-O favours White slightly because of his centre pawns, but the sacrifice 10 g4!? is more fun: 1O ... liJxg4!? (lO ... liJcs 11 gS liJfd7 12 h4 is double-edged) 11liJe4 i.c7 12l:tgl fS 13liJegS, and instead of 13 ... 'iVe7? 14 ':'xg4, as in Cornette-Arutinian, Iraklion 2002, 13 ... liJdf6 14 cS e4 IS h3 exf3 16 i.c4+ liJdS 17 l:txg4 leads to great complica- tions. c) 8 ... 'iVe7 9 g4!? (this is a popular pawn sacrifice in similar positions; White's first idea is gS, driving the knight from the centre, fol- lowed by O-O-O and a kingside pawn-storm) 9 ... liJxg4 10 l:tglliJgeS llliJxeSliJxeS (Wojta- szek-Cichocki, Dzwirzyno 2004) and here Kos- ten suggests 12 O-O-O!, giving the sample line 12 ... dxc4 13 f4! cxb3 14 'iVxb3 liJg6 IS liJe4 with a powerful attack; for example, IS ... i.b4

16 h4 fS 17 liJgS with the idea h5.

Obviously, White won't always get such dy- namic play from the slow build-up with e3, 'iVc2, b3 and liJc3, but in any case the game is unbalanced and both sides should know some- thing about it. d) 8 ... a6 9 ':'gl!? bS 10 g4 b4 (after lO ... bxc4, Gurevich suggests 11 gS! cxb3 12 axb3 liJe8 13 i.d3 with threats) 11 gS! liJe8 12liJa4 'VJIJe7 13 h4, M.Gurevich-Kallai, Bundesliga 200112. White has a dangerous attack, but the position is obscure. 3  liJf64 i.g2 i.f5 (D) w Black develops his bishop before cutting it off by ... e6. As always, the players can arrive at this basic position via different move-orders, and this game in fact began 1 liJf3 liJf6 2 g3 dS 3 i.g2 i.fS 4 c4 c6. By putting the bishop on the active square fS, Black avoids getting hit by liJeS, as in the last game, but also loses the op- tion of ... i.xf3, which makes a successful ... eS less likely. Since Black's queenside is defended by one less piece, White will bring his queen to b3 and try to combine pressure on dS with that on b7. 5 cxd5 This is the most popular choice, although there are two major alternatives. One is to play into a traditional Reti set-up by S b3 e6 6 O-O liJbd7 7 i.b2; compare the double fianchetto game below. The other is S O-O, when S. .. dxc4 is a respectable move that transposes to 4 ... dxc4 S O-O i.fS. Instead, if Black plays S ... e6, 6 d3 has a bit more to it than may first appear: 6 ... i.e7 (the structure after 6 ... dxc4 7 dxc4 'ili'xdl 8 ':'xdl liJbd7 9 liJc3 favours White slightly; he wants to gain the bishop-pair by liJh4, and 9 ... i.b4 lO i.d2 renews that idea, intending to answer 1O ... h6?! with 11 liJbS! cxbS 12 i.xb4 as 13 i.d6, after which the bishops rule) 7 i.e3!? (D).

Quite a few games have arrived at this posi- tion. White is playing one of Black's favourite set-ups with colours reversed (that is, in the London System with 2 liJf3 and 3 iLf4 versus the King's Indian Defence). White's idea is that after 'ili'b3, Black won't be able to reply with ... 'iVb6, and if Black's queen moves to the c-file, a speedy cxdS, liJc3 and l:tel will create strong pressure down that file. With care, Black should be able to keep his disadvantage to a minimum, but the game stays

RETI: SLAV VARIATIONS 41

lively; for example, 7 ... ttJbd7 (7 ... O-O 8 ~3 "fIIc7 9 cxd5 opens the c-file and offers White a small advantage; 7 ... dxc4 8 dxc41li'xdl 9.l:.xdl is naturally playable for Black, but White has somewhat the better of this queenless middle- game) 8 1li'b3 (8 cxd5 exd5 9 1li'b3 "fic7 10 .:tcll? keeps a very small edge) 8 ... 1li'b8!? 9 cxd5 exd5 10 ttJc3 ttJc5 11 "fIIc2 ttJe6 12 ttJd4 ttJxd4 13 iLxd4 O-O, Serafimov-Heyman, Metz 2005, and now 14 e4 dxe415 dxe4 with the idea of f4 mobilizes White's majority and causes Black some difficulties. 5 . cxd5 5 ... ttJxd5!? is not a terrible move, and yet it gives up Black's pawn presence in the centre. One possible reply is 6 O-O e6 7 d4 with a supe- rior central position. Then Black cannot pre- vent e4 forever; for example, 7 ... iLe7 (7 ... ttJd7 8 ttJbd2!? ttJ7f6 9 ttJe5 iLb4? 10 e4! iLxd2 11 exd5 iLxc1 12 dxc6!, etc.) 8 ttJe5 iLg6 9 e4 ttJb6 (9 ... ttJf6 10 ttJc3) 10 ttJc3 O-O 11 h4!, and h5 can only be stopped by a compromising se- quence such as ll...iLf6 12 ttJxg6 hxg6 13 e5 iLe7 14 h5! gxh5 15 "fixh5, with White threat- ening iLe4, 'iti>g2, .l:.hl, and also simply ttJe4. Returning to the game (after 5 cxd5 cxd5), we see that the position has a similar structure to the Exchange Slav. However, the placement of White's bishop on g2 in the Reti gives the po- sition a different character. Although White has taken an extra tempo to develop it, the bishop won't normally be exchanged, as it is after iLb5 or iLd3 in the Slav. This means that it can sup- port the advance e4. 6 "fIIb3 (D) This attack on b7 is played in the great ma- jority of games.

6 ...1li'c8 Since 6 ... b6 would badly weaken the light squares, Black needs to defend b7 with his queen. There are two other logical ways to do so: a) 6 .. :iVd7!? 7 ttJe5 isn't as bad as it looks; for example, 7 ... 1li'c7 8 ttJc3 (White defends c 1, and can answer 8 ... 1li'xe5? by 91li'xb7; thus he gains a lead in development) 8 ... e6 9 d3 (White prevents Black from putting a piece on e4; it ap- pears that he could go for broke by 9 g4!?, meeting 9 ... iLg6 with 10 h4!, when perhaps 10 ... h6 11 ttJxg6 fxg6 is workable; note that Black must avoid 9 ... ttJxg4?? 10 ttJxg4 iLxg4 11 "fia4+) 9 ... ttJc6 10 ttJxc6 bxc6 11 O-O (Dzhin- dzhikhashvili-Bagirov, Tbilisi 1973) and now Black would experience no real problems after ll...iLd6 or Il..Jlb8 121li'a4 iLd6. b) 6 .. :iib6 may be best: 71li'xb6 (7 ttJc3 is also played) 7 ... axb6 8 ttJc3 ttJc6 (8 ... e6 9 ttJb5!? is supposed to favour White, although after 9 ... l:.a5, that's hard to demonstrate) 9 d3 e6 10 ttJb5 .i.b4+ 11 iLd2 'iti>e7 12 ttJfd4 iLxd2+ 13 'iti>xd2 iLg6 14 f4!. White prevents any counter- play based upon ... e5 and has a modest edge. The most famous and instructive game from this position continued 14 ... h6 15 a3 l:.hc8 16 l:.ac1 iLh 7 17 iLh3! ttJd7 18 ':c3 ttJxd4 19 ttJxd4l:.xc3 20 'iti>xc3l:.c8+ 21 'iti>d2 iLg8?! 22 l:.c1 l:.xc1 23 'iti>xc1 f6 24 'iti>d2 iLf7 25 iLg2 g6 26 ttJb5! ttJb8 27 e4! dxe4 28 iLxe4 ttJc6 29 'iti>c3 e5!? 30 fxe5 fxe5 31 a4! 'iti>d7 32 ttJa3 with a decisive advantage based upon ttJc4, since all bishop vs knight positions are winning, Portisch-Smyslov, Wijk aan Zee 1972. 7 ttJc3 e6 8 d3 ttJc6 9 iLf4 iLe7 100-00-011 l:.acl (D)

42 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

1l . :i!Vd7 Black has played 11...liJd7 in several games, to fight for control of e5. In Vilela-Alarcon, Ha- vana 2007, White responded with the direct 12 liJb5 (after 12 a3 a6, the standard idea 13 e4! gives White the upper hand, especially after 13 ... liJc5 14 'l'c2 iL.g6 15 b4) 12 ... liJc5 13 'l'dl 'l'd7 14 liJbd4 liJxd4 15 liJxd4 iL.g6 16 b4 liJa6 17 a3, and the a6-knight is restricted by White's queenside pawns, so he has something to play for. 12 liJe5!? The pawn sacrifice 12 e4 also leads to the better game. Black should accept the pawn, al- though it comes at the cost of exposing his pieces and ceding the bishop-pair: 12 ... dxe4 (12 ... iL.g6 13 exd5 exd5 14 d4 favours White) 13 dxe4 liJxe4 14 liJxe4 iL.xe4 15 liJe5 liJxe5 16 iL.xe4 liJc6 17 .l:.fdl 'l'c8 18 'i'a4.l:.d8 1911xd8+ 'l'xd8 20 iL.xc6 bxc6 21 'iWxc6 with an edge for White, Barcza-Smyslov, Moscow Olympiad 1956. 12 . liJxe513 iL.xe5 iL.g614 e4 (D) A much later game, Pigusov-Lin Weiguo, Beijing 1996, saw the seemingly slow 14 h3, to prevent ... liJg4. There followed 14 ... .l:.fc8 15 e4 dxe4 16 dxe4 with a central superiority for White. A prophylactic move such as 14 h3 is possible since Black has no way to create threats or change the pawn-structure in one move.

After the text-move (14 e4), White has the initiative and Black's bishop on g6 is shut out of the game. 14. .l:.adS The situation becomes tactical after 14 ... liJg4 15 iL.f4 dxe4 16 dxe4 e5 17 liJd5! .l:.fc8 (or 17 ... exf4 18 l:tc7) 18 iL.h3! iL.d6? (18 ... h5 19 llxc8+ l:txc8 20 l:tdl 'l'e8 21 'l'xb7 and White will stay a pawn ahead) 19 f3 h5 20 iL.e3 l:txc1 21 .l:.xcl11c8 22 .l:.dll-0 Pigusov-Maximenko, Riga 1988. 15 exd5 exd5 White will also win a pawn after 15 ... liJxd5 16 liJxd5 exd5 17 l:tc7 'l'e6 18 d4. 16 iL.xf6 iL.xf6 17 liJxd5 .Be5 (D) w IS d4! iL.bS Or 18 ... iL.xd4 19 .l:.fdl iL.e5 20 liJf6+ iL.xf6 2111xd7 .l:.xd7 22 iL.xb7. 19 .l:tfe111feS 20 llxeS+ .l:.xeS 21 liJe3 'l'xd4 22 'l'xb7 h5? 23 .l:.eS 'l'e5 24 liJe4 'l'e1+ 25.ifl 'iti>h7 26 .l:.xbS iL.d3 27 liJd2 .l:.e2 2S 'l'f31-0 The Gambit Accepted Poldauf - Saltaev Bundesliga 200617 1 liJf3 d5 2 e4 e6 3 g3 For 3 b3 and related moves, see the next game. 3 . liJf6 3 ... dxc4 (D) is possible already, and has some unique features. After 4 iL.g2, 4 ... liJf6 transposes to our main game, but 4 ... iL.f5 is an interesting alternative. It prevents 5 'iWc2 and intends 5 liJa3 e5!, which is a theme that we're going to get used to in the next game. The point is that 6 liJxe5?? is a blun- der in view of 6 ... iL.xa3 7 bxa3 'l'd4. Instead, White can continue 4 liJa3, when 4 ... 'iWd5 and 4 ... e5 raise issues that we'll deal

RET!: SLAV VARIATIONS 43

w with below. Unfortunately, the material is lim- ited on the latter move, but clearly S ttJxc4 (again, S ttJxeS?? loses to S ... i.xa3) S ... e4 6 ttJgl ttJf6 can't please White, so S ~c2 should be examined. 4 i.g2 dxc4 (D) w Accepting the gambit. This main line is very important if we are going to assess the Reti Slav as a whole. White is a pawn down, and if he can't recover it or has to make concessions in doing so, this whole move-order becomes suspect. As we shall see in the next game, it's also not easy to bypass this position via earlier deviations. 5~c2 Over the years, this move has probably had the most success and is recommended in two English Opening repertoire books. Not only does White target the pawn on c4, but he stops ... i.fS and stays flexible in terms of playing ttJa3, O-O and/or a4. However, White has run into quite a few difficulties, so finding an alternative could be important. Fortunately, there are at least three candidates. They have a good deal of theory behind them, so I'll try to indicate the outlines and trust you to look into the material more deeply: a) S O-O (D) is fascinating, because White gives Black extra time to consolidate his pawn. The consequences are still unresolved.

Black has an array of options, each unique, with few unifying themes among them: al) S ... i.fS 6 ttJa3 eS!? 7 ttJxc4 (7 ttJxeS?? i.xa3 8 bxa3 'iVd4) 7 ... e4 8 ttJgS!? (or 8 ttJfeS) 8 ... h6 9 ttJxf7! 'iii>xf7 10 'iib3 'iii>e8 11 ~xb7 ttJbd7 12 'iYxc6 :c8 13 ~a4! i.e6 (13 ... 'iii>f7)

14 b3 i.xc4 IS bxc4 ~b6 with no clear resolu-

tion in sight, Salov-Piket, Amsterdam 1996. a2) After S ... i.e6, the forcing sequence 6 ttJgS i.dS 7 e4 h6 8 exdS hxgS 9 dxc6 ttJxc6 10 ttJa3 has been assessed as unclear. Instead, 6 'i!Vc2 ~dS !?, with the idea 7 ttJc3 "ii'hS, resem- bles other lines with ... 'iYdS; it should be fine for Black. a3) S ... bS 6 a4! (D) is risky for Black.

44 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

White threatens 7 axb5 and leaves Black to cover his weaknesses: 6 ... i.b7 (6 ... a6? 7 axb5 cxb5 8 ltJd4! with the idea 8 ... l:ta7 9 ltJxb5; 6 ... e6 7 axb5 cxb5 8 ltJe5 ltJd5 9 d3!) 7 b3! cxb3 8 'iVxb3 a6 9 i.a3!? (or 9 d4 e6 10 ltJc3) 9 ... 'iVd5 10 'iVe3! and Black won't be able to castle if he plays ... e6. a4) 5 ... ltJbd7 6ltJa3 (6 'iVc2ltJb6 7 a4 a5 8 ltJa3 i.e6 is also complex; White has tried 9 ltJe5, with the idea 9 ... 'iVd4?! 10 ltJxc6!, and 9 ltJg5 i.g4 10 ltJxc4! i.xe2 11ltJe5 i.h5 12 b4!, a position reached in several games) 6 ... ltJb6 7 'iVc2 'iVd5!? (Black has also played 7 ... i.e6 8 ltJg5li'd7, when 9 b3!? strives to keep the ini- tiative) 8 ltJh4 (White needs something better here) 8 ... li'd4 9 ltJf3, Deriabin-Sitnikov, Dne- propetrovsk 2002, and now Black can repeat, or play 9 ... 'iVg4! with the idea 10 h3 'iVg6, when White may have to struggle for compensation. All this needs to be studied critically in order to get a feel for the imbalances. b) 5ltJa3 (D) and now:

bl) 5 ... e5?! is ineffective due to 6ltJxc4 e4 7 ltJg5!, when 7 ... i.f5? loses to 8 ~b3! in view of 8 ... 'iVe7?? 9 ltJd6+! or 8 ... 'iVc7 9 d3! exd3 10 i.f4 with too big an attack. Upon 7 ... i.c5!?, 8 'iVc2! is strong. b2) White can reply to 5 ... b5 with 6 b3!, in- tending 6 ... cxb3?! 7 'iVxb3 with active play. b3) 5 ... 'ii'd5 is a good option; for example, 6 O-O e5!? 7ltJg5 'ii'd4 and White must work for his compensation. Perhaps 8 'iNa4 i.xa3 9 'iVxa3 i.g4 would follow. b4) 5 ... i.e6!? (this initiates a typical se- quence that we shall see in other contexts and is usually satisfactory for Black) 6ltJg5 i.d5 7 e4 h6 8 exd5 hxg5 9 dxc6 ltJxc6 10 ltJxc4 e6 11 O-O li'd3 12 li'a4ltJd5 !? with unc1earcomplica- tions based upon 13 ltJe5li'd4 14 li'b5li'b4!. c) 5 a4!? is one of the most challenging moves; for example, 5 ... i.e6!? (D), and now: w c1) After 6 ltJa3 ltJa6 7 ltJe5!?, as in the game Padevsky-T.S0rensen, Berlin 1984, Black has 7 ... i.d5! 8 f3 ltJb4 9 ltJaxc4 i.xc4 10 ltJxc4 'iVd4 11 d3 and now 1l...ltJfd5 or 1l...e5 with strange complications. c2) 60-0 ltJbd7!? 7ltJg5 i.f5 8ltJa3 (D) and here:

c21) 8 ... h6!? 9ltJf3 e5 10 ltJxc4 e4 11ltJd4 i.g6 12 a5 and 12 ... i.c5, as in Miroshni- chenko-Skachkov, Cappelle la Grande 2004, is fine, but 12 ... ltJc5! 13 ltJb3 i.h5! has tactical points that are hard for White to meet. There are probably improvements here. c22) Frolianov has suggested the amazing

8. .. ltJe5!? 9 f4ltJd3!? 10 exd3 i.xd3 'with com-

pensation'! In fact, two pawns, an impressive

RET!: SLAV VARIATIONS 45

bind and kingside attacking chances may be quite enough. Let's return to S 'ii'c2 (D):

[diagram]
After 6liJa3, Black can protect his pawn by 6 ... i.e6 7 O-O liJbd7 or give it back with a good position by 6 ... i.fS 7 'ii'xc4 e6. 6 ...' ii'h5 (D) With the idea ... i.h3; you have to wonder how White is going to get compensation in this position. w 7h3 This at least prevents the bishop exchange. White's alternatives are rather depressing; for example, 7 O-O i.h3 (7 ... liJa6! also appears strong) 8 liJe4 liJxe4 9 'ii'xe4 i.xg2 10 'it>xg2 'ii'dS!. No better is 7 liJe4liJxe4 (or 7 ... i.e6 8 liJd4 i.dS 9 liJxf6+ exf6 10 e4 'ii'eS) 8 'ii'xe4 i.e6 (or 8 ... 'ii'dS) 9 'ii'f4 liJa6 10 O-O, Hug- Adams, World Team Ch, Lucerne 1991, when Black stays on top with 1O ... f6!. 7 ... liJbd7!? 7 ... liJa6! develops with a purpose. Then 8 g4 liJb4 9 'ii'bl 'ii'aS 10 a3 liJbdS remains a pawn up, with ideas of ... liJf4.

8 g4 'i'aS 9liJdl

46 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Finally attacking c4, but this is too passive. 9  tLlb6 10 e4 White doesn't improve matters by 10 tLle3 B .Jte6 11 tLld4 .JtdS. .. :ii'a4!? Black also stands better after 1O ... eS. 11 'ii'bl e6 12 tLlc3 'ii'a5 13 O-O .Jte7 14 b3 0-015 .Jtb2 (D)

15 ... tLlfd7!? Intending ... tLlcS-d3. Black's advantage is quite substantial at this point and he may as well play to grab the centre and develop by IS ... eS!. 16 tLle2?! Last chance. White can activate a few pieces by 16 d3! cxd3 17 'ilVxd3. .. :~'a6! 17 tLlg3 tLlc5 18 tLlh5 f6 19 e5 f5

20 g5 tLld3

Really, the game is over now. 21 .Jtc3 tLld5 22 a4 cxb3 23 'ii'xb3 tLlc5 24 'ia2 tLle4 25 h4 tLlexc3 26 dxc3 tLlxc3 27'iWd2 tLld5 28 !tfc1 .Jtb4 29 'i!Vd4 c5 30 'iWb2 'iWa5 31 ~b3 .Jtd7 32 .Jtfl .Jtc6 33 .Jtc4 'it>h8 34 tLlel .Jtd2 35 !tdl .Jtc3 36 .l:tabl !tab8 37 .Jtxd5 .Jtxd5 38 !txd5 exd5 39 'iWxd5 'ilVxa4 40 tLlg2 'ii'e4 41 'iWa2 .Jtxe5 42 !tel 'iWd4 43 'ilVe21Ibe8 0-1 The Double Fianchetto System 1 tLlf3 d5 2 c4 c6 3 b3 (D) Reti's original strategy involved fianchetto- ing bishops on both sides of the board. With 3 b3, White makes sure that ... dxc4 doesn't win a pawn. For our purposes, this will introduce a plan with .Jtb2, g3 and .Jtg2. Depending upon what you think of Black's alternatives in the next two notes, you may prefer other ways to get to the starting point of this system. Our move-order from the previous games is 3 g3 tLlf6 4 .Jtg2 (or 4 b3, but this still allows the trick 4 ... dxc4 S bxc4 eS!?; compare the next note) 4 ... .Jtg4 (or4. .. .JtfS) S b3. Then S. .. dxc4 6 bxc4 .Jtxf3!? 7 .Jtxf3 'ii'd4?! doesn't win White's c- pawn because of 8 'ii'b3! (D).

After 8 .. :iVxal? (but otherwise 9 .Jtb2 with further gain of time) 9 'iixb7 White threatens checkmate on c8. His other threat, O-O, tLlc3 and 'ii'xa8, may seem slow yet there's little . Black can do about it. Play might go 9 ... ~d8 (9 ... eS? 10 'iWc8+ 'it>e7 11 .Jta3+ cS 12 .JtxcS#)

10 O-O 'iWxa2 11 d4 tLlfd7 12 .Jtf4 'ii'a6 13 'iixa8

e6 14 tLld2 and !tbl. One problem with this 3 g3 move-order for White, however, is that Black still has the option "

RETl: SLAV VARIATIONS 47

of 4 ... dxc4, transposing to the previous section and interfering with the double fianchetto that White is aiming for. 3 . ttJf6 The move 3 b3 has been played for aeons in innumerable grandmaster games, but Black has almost never played 3 ... dxc4 4 bxc4 e5! (D). w The idea is 5 ttJxe5?? 'it'd4. By this means, Black achieves a central pawn presence that White lacks. The idea invites comparison with 1 ttJf3 d5 2 c4 e6 3 b3 dxc4 4 bxc4 e5!, in which Black is a move short from our current position, but that extra move ... c6 prevents Black from playing ... ttJc6. Both positions are playable. At any rate, White has to develop quickly; for example, 5 ttJc3 (5 ~b2!?) 5 ... ttJd7 (D), and now: w a) 6 d3 ttJgf6 7 ~b2 ~d6 8 g3 gives Black easy play after 8 ... ttJc5 9 ~g2 O-O 10 O-O ~f5. b) 6 e3 is sound, although d4 is hard to enforce without concessions; e.g., 6 ... ttJgf6 (D) (the alternative 6 ... ~b4 7 'it'c2 'it'e7 8 ~b2 ttJh6!? 9 ~e2 ttJf6 10 O-O ~f5 would be an in- teresting sequence, with an eye on d3, but also to a kingside attack via ... e4). w 7 d4!? (7 'it'c2 ~b4 8 ~e2 O-O {or 8 ... 'it'e7} 9 O-O ne8 is double-edged) 7 ... ~b4 8 ~d2 O-O 9 ~e2 'ia5!? 10 'it'c2 exd4 11 exd4 (11 ttJxd4 leaves White's c-pawn weak after 11...'it'c7)

11...l:te8. This isn't clear, but it's easier to play

with Black, since after 12 O-O? ~xc3 13 ~xc3 .l:!.xe2! he wins material. c) A similar situation arises from 6 ~b2 ttJgf6. Now: cl) 7 g3?! e4! 8 ttJg5 ttJc5 9 ~g2 (D) leads to obscure play.

One idea is 9 ... ~f5, intending ... h6, when White should refrain from continuing 10 'it'c2? e3 11 'it'xf5 ~xd2+ 12 ~f1 'it'xb2. Another problem for White is 9 ... ~e7; for example, 10 libl ~f5 11 ~a3 'it'd7! has the idea 12 ~xc5 ~xc5 13 ttJgxe4 ttJxe4 and now 14 ~xe4 ~h3

48 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

or 14ltJxe4 i.d4. Thus the move 7 g3 appears suspect. c2) If White plays 7 'iic2 instead, one of many possible continuations would be 7 ... i.d6

[diagram]
exd4 10 exd4 c5 11 d5 ltJe5) 9 i.e2 e4 10 ltJg5 ltJc5 11 f3 (11 i.a3 i.f5 12 i.xc5 i.xc5 13 f3 ltJh5!) 1l...i.f5 12 O-O 'iie5 13 f4 'iie7 14 g4 ltJxg4 15 i.xg4 i.xg4 16 ltJcxe4 ltJxe4 17 ltJxe4 O-O-O 18 ltJxd6+ 'iixd6 19 ltf2 i.h3 with unclear prospects not unfavourable to Black. That's a lot of analysis, but taken as a whole, 3 ... dxc4 4 bxc4 e5! presents White with prob- lems to solve, enough to call into question his ability to gain an advantage. Remarkably, this little two-step manoeuvre hasn't been given se- rious consideration in the extensive literature on 3 b3. What's more, the same idea a move later might be even more challenging in this re- spect, since White's options are more limited. 4i.b2 The most frequently played move by a con- siderable margin is 4 g3, because White likes to stay flexible about the placement of his queen's bishop, but then he again has to deal with 4 ... dxc45 bxc4 e5! (D). w This time the play can vary sharply because of the inclusion of g3 and ... ltJf6; for example, 6 ltJc3 (and not 6 ltJxe5?? 'iid4) 6 ... e4!? (or 6 ... i.d6 7 i.g2 O-O 8 O-O 'fie7) 7 ltJg5, when Kosten suggests the remarkable 7 ... ltJg4! (D) (7 ... i.c5 8 e3 i.f5 9 i.g2 was Malakhov-Sutov- sky, Saint Vincent 2002, when Kosten's 9 ... "fIe7 10 'iic2 i.b4!? I1ltJcxe4 h612ltJd6+ i.xd613 'iixf5 hxg5 14 'iic8+ 'iVd8 15 "fIxb7 reaps a har- vest of pawns). w 8 ltJgxe4 (8 d3?? e3 threatens f2 and the knight on g5, and 9ltJge4 exf2+ 10 ltJxf2ltJxf2 11 'iti>xf2 'iif6+ picks up the knight on c3) 8 .. .f5 9 f3ltJe5 10 ltJf2. After this virtually forced se- quence, Black can play either 1O ... ltJxc4 11 e4 ltJb6 or 1O ... i.e6 11 d3!? i.c5 with the idea 12 e3? 'iia5 13 i.d2 i.xe3. Therefore White might want to play 4 i.b2 before g3 after all. Let's return to the main line with 4 i.b2, and look at two games. Capablanca Variation with 4 ... .i.g4 Podzielny - Dautov Dortmund 1992 IltJf3 d5 2 c4 c6 3 b3ltJf6 4 i.b2 i.g4 (D) w This is called the Capablanca Variation, probably unfairly to those who did the real work developing it. It has become the most popular move versus White's double fianchetto system.

RtTI: SLAV VARIATIONS 49

5 g3 I should mention that some strong players use 5 e3 and try to set up with .Be2, 'fic2 and W lbc3. This was discussed in the note to 3 g3 in the game Smyslov-Bronstein above. In prac- tice, if you choose 5 e3, you'll probably be on your own at an early stage of play. 5 .. e6 Or: a) An important move-order was seen in the game Vaganian-Gulko, USSR Ch, Erevan 1975: 5 ... lbbd7 6 .Bg2 e6 (many players would exchange minor pieces here, without provoca- tion, by 6 ... .Bxf3 7 .Bxf3 e5) 7 O-O .Bd6 8 d3 O-O 9 lbbd2 'fie7, transposing into the main line. b) 5 ... .Bxf3 6 exf3 commits Black rather early, and after 6 ... lbbd7 7 f4, White's doubled f-pawn is coming in handy. This might be worth a closer look, except that in the majority of games White has already played .Bg2 by this point. 6 .Bg2lbbd7 7 O-O (D)

[diagram]
50 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Leko-Kasparov, Wijk aan Zee 2001 went 9 ... a5 10 a3 J..h5!? (1O .. J!Vb6 has become a standard way to treat these positions) 11 'ili'c2 e5!? 12 e4 dxe4 13 dxe4 l:te8 14liJh4 J..c5?! (Kasparovprefers 14 ... liJc5 and 14 ... 'iIi'b6!?) 15 liJdf3! 'ili'b6. At this point, Kasparov calls 16 h3 clearly favourable for White. This seems an odd assessment, but presumably the idea of g4 and liJf5 is strong enough that Black must play 16 ... J..xf3, ceding the bishop-pair in a stable position, something you may not want to do on the 2700+ level!

10 a3 as 11 1i'c2

A game cited above, Vaganian-Gulko, USSR Ch, Erevan 1975, continued 11 h3 J..h5 12 'iWc2 e5 13 e4 dxe4 14 dxe4 (D).

In a majority of games involving the double fianchetto and ... J..g4, White plays e4 at some moment and this pawn-structure results. The combination of e4 and c4 has a mixed effect. From White's point of view, the gaping hole on d4 is clearly a negative, although in practice it proves difficult for Black to occupy. Further- more, his king's bishop is restricted by his own centre pawn on e4. On the positive side, that same pawn supports a knight on f5, which will be very powerfully placed. Black's problem is that if he exchanges the knight by ... J..xf5 (often necessary), then exf5 reopens the g2- bishop's diagonal and White's e-file, while clearing what is effectively an outpost square for White's pieces on e4. In fact, that's what happened in the game after 14 ... :fd8?! (Vagan- ian prefers 14 ... J..xf3 15 liJxf3 l:tfe8; compare this with Kasparov's note above in the same sit- uation) 15liJh4 J..g6 16 liJf5 ! J..xf5 17 exf5 (D).

White controls the crucial e4-square and has prospects of g4-g5. The game continued 17 ... J..c5 18 l:tfe11i'd6 19 l:tad1 l:te8 20 liJb1!? (or 20 liJe4! 1i'f8 21 liJxc5 'ili'xc5 22 'ili'c3) 20 ... 'iIi'f8 21 g4 h6 22 l:te2 and White could im- prove his position slowly while his opponent was left searching for a plan. 11 ... eSI2 e3!? (D)

RET!: SLAV VARIATIONS 51

White plays this unusual move with the idea of keeping the position flexible. To begin with, he stops Black's threat of ... e4-e3. W 12 ... h6!? Nevertheless, the advance of Black's e-pawn can be a factor. Hom queries 12 ... e4, correctly pointing out that after 13 dxe4 the e-pawn lands in trouble following 13 ... dxe4 14 liJd4; that's particularly the case because after the coming h3 and ... .lthS, White has liJfS. However, I'm not sure that Black stands worse after the reply 13 ... liJxe4!, when 14liJxe4 dxe4 IS liJd4liJcS looks satisfactory. 13 :fel 'iWe6?! The idea behind this move, exchanging the g2-bishop, is suspect because White can still transform the pawn-structure. 14:ac1.lth315 cxd5 cxd516e4! .ltxg217 ~xg2 (D)

31 f4! liJd8 321:tflliJe6? But in the long run White can put a knight on c4 (following :bl) and if necessary penetrate with his king into the weak light squares on the kingside. 33 fxe5 fxe5 34 :f5 liJb4 35 liJc4 :c6 36 liJxa51-0 The New York System Our final Reti Opening game is an epic battle involving its inventor. Reti - Em. Lasker New York 1924 lliJf3 d5 2 c4 c6 3 b3 i.f5 4 g3 liJf6 (D) Black's problem now is that he has to give W White the nice square c4 for his knight; also, White's remaining bishop is his good one. 17 ... d4 18 'iWc4! 'iWxc419liJxc4 :a6?! But 19 ... .ltb8 20 a4 and .lta3 gives White a large positional advantage. 20 liJxd6 :xd6 21 a4 :b6 22 liJd2 Now White is ready for .lta3, and he's still in charge of the outpost on c4. 22 . liJb8 23 .lta3 :e8 24 :c7liJa6 25 :c4 liJd7 26 :ec1 Black is tied down and almost without useful moves. As is often the case, White need only open a second front to break down his defences. It is instructive how quickly he does so. 26 .. f6 27 ~f3 ~f7 28 ~e2 liJdb8 29 %:tc8 liJc6 30 :xe8 ~xe8 (D) This is the line from the previous game, but with 4 ... i.f5 instead of 4 ... i.g4. It is often called the New York System, in honour of this game. The set-up with ... .ltfS is solid and has a good reputation, although it's not quite as popular or

52 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

ambitious as that with ... i.g4. Black wants to bring his bishop out in front of his pawn-chain and control e4, of course, while not exposing w himself to a potential loss of tempo via tbe5. One trade-off is that he can no longer play ... i.xf3, which as we saw above comes in handy in some positions, and makes possible the idea of ... e5 in one jump. White will simply complete his develop- ment before trying anything too ambitious. He can hope to play e4 with gain of tempo in the future. S i.g2 (D)

5 . tbbd7 5 ... e6 6 i.b2 i.e7 7 0-00-0 is another order of development. Black does not yet commit the knight, which may go to a6 or even appear on c6 after a later ... c5. 6 i.b2 e6 7 O-O i.d6 Many commentators (among them Botvin- nik) think that 7 ... i.d6 is less accurate than 7 ... i.e7, because the former move exposes the bishop after e4 (see below). Indeed, 7 ... i.e7 is Black's preference in a majority of games, one main line going 8 d3 h6 (Black prepares a re- treat -square for his bishop in order to preserve the bishop-pair should White play tbh4; this is not strictly essential) 9 tbbd2 O-O (D). Then there are various strategies, but play along the lines of our main game goes 10 l:tc1 (10 a3 a5 11 'ilVc2 i.h7 12 i.c3 aims to advance with b4, sometimes prefaced by 'iWb2, so in Winants-Van der Sterren, Wijk aan Zee 1991, Black took action to prevent that by 12 ... b5! 13 cxb5 cxb5 14 'iWb2 b4!? 15 axb4 axb4 16 i.d4 i.d6 17 1:txa8 'iYxa8 18 e4 i.c5!? 19 e5 tbe8, with obscure prospects) 1O ... i.h7 11 a3 as 12 .l:tc2 .l:tc8 13 'iW a 1 tbc5 14 :fc1 (D).

This visually pleasing piece formation was introduced by Reti. White has control of d4 and e5, with pressure along the c-file and elegant bishops raking the long diagonals. For all that, his pieces are bunched up on the first two ranks (only one of them on the third) and Black has the more advanced centre pawn. Csikar- E.Csom, Hungarian Team Ch 1992 continued 14 ... b6 15 cxd5 cxd5 16 i.d4 (16 b4 axb4 17 axb4 .l:ta8 18 'iWbl tba6 is obscure, but probably about equal) 16 ... 'iWd7?! 17 tbe5 'iWb7 18 b4 axb4 19 axb4 tba6 and White had carried out his desired take-over of the queenside dark squares. The game went 20 b5!? (20 tbc6! is thematic, with the idea 20 ... i.xb4 21 i.xf6 gxf6 22 tbxb4 tbxb4 23 .l:tc4!; and 20 .l:txc8 l:txc8 21 .l:txc8+ 'ilVxc8 22 b5 is also strong) 20 .. Jhc2 21 .l:txc2 tbc5?! 22 :a2! tbcd7 23 tbc6 i.d6 24 tbc4! i.b8 25 .l:ta6 and Black's game had fallen apart.

RET!: SLAV VARIATIONS 53

8 d3 O-O (D)

The loose position of Black's bishop on d6 is exposed in the line 8 ... eS?! 9 e4!, hoping for 9 ... dxe4?? 10 dxe4 lLlxe4 11 lLlh4. w 9 lLlbd2 In another early clash of legends, Reti-Tar- rasch, Breslau 1925, White tried out 9 lLlc3!? (blocking off the b2-bishop, but there's noth- ing essentially wrong with the move) 9 ... fie7

10 IXe 1 eS 11 e4 dxe4 12 dxe4 ..te6 13 lLlh4

..ta3 14 lLlfS! ..txfS IS ..txa3 fixa3 16 exfS ':'ad8 17 fic2 ':'fe8 18 ':'ad 1 fiaS 19 ~b2!? fic7 (D). w Again we see White's control of e4 and open files. He needs to improve the position of his minor pieces by an advance of queenside pawns resulting in some combination of cS and bS. The game proceeded 20 fia3 (20 b4! has the idea 20 ... lLlb6 21 cS lLlbdS 22 ..txdS! lLlxdS 23 lLle4; then White has won the opening battle) 20 ... a6 21 cS lLlb8 22 fiM as 23 fic4 ':'xdl 24 lLlxdl!? ':'d8 2S ~c3 l:td4? (Black takes over the attractive d4-square but forgets about his back rank; 2s ... lLlbd7! should be fine, with the idea 26 lLle3 e4! and if allowed, ... lLleS) 26 lLlb2 lLlfd7 27 f4 f6 28 fxeS fxeS 29..tfl?! (29 lLlc4!, threatening lLlxeS, is very strong) 29 ... b6?, and here 30 cxb6! fixb6 31 'iith 1 would have yielded White a winning advantage because of Black's weak pawns and White powerful minor pieces, which can use c4 as a pivot point. 9 . e510 cxd5 cxd5 (D) w U':'cl!? This game has been characterized as a tri- umph of the Classical School of centre and de- velopment over somewhat fanciful hypermod- ern ideas; however, it would be more accurate to call it a victory by Lasker over Reti. Here, for example, 11 e4!? is fine, and has even been claimed to give White an advantage. I think that Black can come very close to complete equal- ity, but he needs to play carefully: a) 1l.....tg4? 12 exdS lLlxdS 13 lLlc4 (or 13 h3 and lLlc4) yields the kind of activity that White is after. b) The same kind of position arises follow- ing 1l.....te6?! 12 exdS ..txdS 13 lLlc4!. c) 1l.....tg6 isn't bad: 12 exdS (12 d4 lLlxe4 13 lLlxeS ':'e8 14 lLlxg6 hxg6 gives Black suffi- cient activity to equalize) 12 ... ..txd3 13 ':'el, and now 13 ... ':'e8 14 lLlc4 ..txc4 IS bxc4 may favour White slightly, but the computer move 13 ... lLlg4! threatens ... lLlxf2 and opens the way for the f-pawn following 14 lLle4 ..txe4 IS .r:.xe4 fS 16 IXe2 e4. d) ll...dxe4 12 dxe4 (or 12 lLlxe4 ..txe4 13 dxe4 fie7 and White's bishops are hard to make

54 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

use of; ... I:Iac8, .. .l'Hd8, and perhaps ... i.a3 can follow, with a level game) and now 12 ... i.e6 looks about equal, but not 12 ... i.xe4?, which B allows White terrific activity after 13 It'lxe4 It'lxe4 14 It'lh4! It'ldf6 15 ~e2 and It'lf5. 11  ~e7 12l:tc2!? This is Reti's wonderful idea again, as above, to maximize the potential of every piece. But another promising method to get some pieces working was to challenge the centre by 12 e4!. You can compare the previous and following notes for the basic ideas.

[diagram]
This creates a serious weakness on b4. It still seems as though the aggressive 13 e4! (D) is best:

13 ... i.g4! (or 13 ... dxe4 14 dxe4 and now 14 ... i.e6 is playable, but not 14 ... lt'lxe4? 15 It'lh4, winning material; here 14 ... i.xe4? 15 It'lxe4 It'lxe4 16 It'lh4 It'ldf6 17 ~e2 is also good for White) 14 h3 i.h5 15 exd5 (15 g4 i.g6 16 It'lh4 It'lc5 again gives Black enough pressure to counteract the bishop-pair) 15 ... lt'lxd5 16 It'lc4. This is extremely complex; for example, 16 ... lt'lb4 (16 ... b5 17 It'lxd6 ~xd6 18 J:te2) 17 l:te2 f5!? 18 It'lcxe5!? It'lxe5 19 i.xe5 i.xe5 20 d4 It'lc6! 21 g4! fxg4 22 It'lxe5 It'lxe5 23 %:!.xe5 ~h4 and the situation is still murky. These lines illustrate the dynamic balance between White's long-range pieces and Black's superior centre, a situation characteristic of many of the Reti Opening double fianchetto lines. Let's return to 13 a4?! (D): 13 ... h614 'iVall:tfe815l:tfcl i.h716 It'lf1!? To guard against ... e4-e3.

16. .. lt'lc5!

Black doesn't fall for 16 ... e4 17 dxe4 dxe4?!

18 It'ld4 e3 19 It'lxe3 i.xc2 20 l:txc2 with terrific

compensation for the exchange.

17 J:txc5!?

White uncorks another exchange sacrifice, but this time out of a feeling of necessity. If 17 ~a2, 17 ... lt'la6! 18 i.c3 b6! intends ... d4, and Black's big centre is finally getting its due. 17 ... i.xc5 18 It'lxe5l:tac819 It'le3 ~e6 (D) White doesn't have sufficient compensa- tion here. Also good was 19 ... l:tcd8 20 ':c2 'i:Vd6. w

20 h3 i.d6?

A strange mistake. Almost any slow move such as 20 ... b6 is good. 21l:txc8 %:!.xc8 22 It'lf3? Returning the favour. 22 It'l5g4! It'lxg4 23 hxg4 or 23 i.xd5 wins the crucial d5-pawn. 22 ... i.e7 23 It'ld4 ~d7 24 'iiih2! Reti probably couldn't resist showing off, but this is apparently the best move in any case!

RET!: SLAV VARIATIONS 55

24 ... h5 Something level-headed such as 24 ... .i.c5! 251i'h 1 and now 25 .. J:te8 or 25 ... l:f.d8 is better. 251i'hl! (D)

A lovely picture! 1i'al-hl and White's back in the game. 25 . h4 Now 25 ... l:f.d8 26 liJb5! has in mind .i.xf6 and liJxd5, or even .i.d4-b6. 26 liJxd5 hxg3+ 27 fxg3 liJxd5 28 .i.xd5 .i.f6! (D) w Black has to neutralize White's fine set of bishops.

29.i.xb7?!

29 1i'f3! is solid and good; White will play e4 to anchor the bishop on d5, achieving a dy- namic balance. 29 . J:tc5!? A good move, although 29 .. J:td8! 30 e3 .i.xd3 31 1i'f3 "fic7 is better still. 30 .i.a6? (D) White threatens 1i'a8+, but his pieces get misplaced. He had to scramble with 30 .i.e4! .i.xd4 31 .i.xh7+ ~xh7 32 "fie4+ f5 331i'h4+! ~g6 341i'xd41i'xd4 (34 ... 1i'e7 35 e4l:.c2+ 36 ~gl) 35 .i.xd4 l:f.c2 36 ~g2 l:.xe2+ 37 ~f3, which should end in a draw.

30. .. .i.g6 31 1i'b71i'd8!?

White is in serious trouble after 3l...1i'd6!. But the text-move is also good enough. In what follows White has various alternatives, but he remains just outside the drawing zone. 32 b4! l:.c7 33 1i'b6 l:f.d7! 34 1i'xd8+ l:.xd8

35 e3 axb4 36 ~g2 .i.xd4 37 exd4 .i.f5 38 .i.b7

.i.e6 39 ~f3 .i.b3 40 .i.c6 l:.d6 41 .i.b5 l:.f6+ 42 ~e3 l:.e6+! 43 ~f4 l:.e2 44 .i.c1 l:.c2 45 .i.e3 .i.d5 0-1 This great battle illustrates the Reti at its best and I would urge everyone to experiment with his system from time to time in order to obtain some fresh positions to play with.

3 Modern Kingside Fianchetto

The fianchetto is used in three general types of central environment. Thus far in this series, we have seen it in a variety of well-established openings of two of these types. In the first case, a central presence is employed in conjunction with a fianchetto. For instance, in the Griinfeld Defence Black plays 1 d4 liJf6 2 c4 g6 along with a central break C3 ... dS), whereas in the Modem Benoni, Black's ... g6 is joined with ... cS. In the English and Reti Openings, White's g3 fianchetto combines with a pawn on c4, whereas in most major d-pawn openings, White can merge the same g3 with the central move d4. In a second set of mainstream openings, there is no central pawn presence, that is, no early break or pawn on the fourth rank. Some examples are the King's Indian Defence and Pirc Defence, in which Black plays ... d6. It's true that he often follows this with a central ad- vance by ... eS or ... cS, but not within the first few moves. This also applies to the Queen's In- dian Defence with ... b6, where the moves ... dS and ... c5 are usually delayed. However, notice that in most lines of these openings, Black de- velops quickly; in particular, his king's knight is developed to f6, controlling e4 and dS and making kingside castling more convenient. This adds an element of safety and contests the cen- tre of the board. In a third class of fianchetto defences, still looked at askance by some masters, Black fore- goes commitment to either a central break or a strong central presence, often playing without a knight on f6 or c6. The most prominent exam- ples begin with l...g6 and l...b6, which can both be played versus any first move by White and may therefore be considered 'universal' openings. In most variations with these moves, Black allows White to choose from a wide vari- ety of central formations. Thus l...g6 and l...b6 grant Black flexibility, but do the same for White. The defences initiated by l...g6 and l...b6 appeared sporadically in the 19th century and first half of the 20th century, but by and large leading players disapproved of them. After all, why should Black want to give White space and an ideal centre without a fight? The 'Hyper- modems', beginning in the 1910s, proposed that targeting the centre from afar by means of a fianchetto was a legitimate alternative to set- ting up a traditional centre. But even they usu- ally included a pawn on the 4th rank in their plans, or at least quick development. See, for example, the Reti Opening from the previous chapters. Then, in the latter part of the 20th cen- tury, many players discovered that they were comfortable operating with less space, particu- larly if there were opportunities to extend the range of their fianchettoed bishops by eventual pawn-breaks, or to exploit concessions that White might make to prevent that from happen- ing. Thus 1.. .g6 in particular was elevated into the mainstream, and 1...b6, while not wildly popular among high-level players, has attracted the attention of a number of grandmasters. The overriding issue in both cases is whether White can use his greater territorial control to clamp down on Black's game. For the developing player, there is a lot to be learned by playing such positions from both sides and watching these conflicting goals play out. Before plunging into l...g6, I should note that White can himself pursue such a strategy by means of 1 g3 or 1 b3, allowing Black to set up a large centre, when the tempo derived from moving first gives him some extra ways to de- velop. In practice, 1 g3 often transposes to other openings. For example, it can lead to the Reti Opening if White follows with liJf3 and c4, to the King's Indian Attack if White plays liJf3 and d3, or to various d-pawn openings if White plays an early d4. At a grandmaster level, how- ever, White plays 1 g3 infrequently, because Black is able set up conservatively if he wishes, without a big centre, and establish equality relatively easily. 1 b3 can run into the same problem, but it has a more defined history of

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 57

independent theory which I'll be examining in the following chapter. The Modern Defence

1 e4 g6 is called variously the Modem Defence,

the King's Fianchetto Defence, the Rat, the Robatsch, and the Utjelky. Perhaps that's a re- flection of its multi-faceted nature; in fact, the move 1...g6 tells us little about the kind of the game that will follow. Both White and Black can deploy their forces in a wide array of for- mations that bear little relation to one another, and the play can go in almost any direction. Thus, in what follows, I'll concentrate upon a selection of the most popular responses to 1. .. g6, with an emphasis on black pawn-structures that haven't been well represented in the rest of this series. From White's point of view, the normal cen- tral set-ups apply, but we'll begin with what is arguably the most important one, involving the centre d4, e4 and f4. This is a direct threat to the playability of 1...g6, more so than the other broad centres that we have examined, for exam- ple, in the King's Indian Defence, the Pirc De- fence, or the Samisch Variation of the Nimzo- Indian. Let's step through some themes that arise from early moves, and then take a look at the problems arising from that central structure.

[diagram]
Obviously 1 d4 g6 2 e4 i.g7 leads to the same position. Curiously, Black has often played 2 ... d6 at this point, because there are lines in which he'd rather get on with a queenside at- tack instead of putting a bishop on g7 yet. Since White plays i.e3, 'iVd2 and i.h6 in many lines, Black may even save a tempo by not playing ... i.g7. That's rather abstract, but he might also be motivated by a specific sequence, that is, 2 ... d63 tLIc3 c6 4 f4 (D), the set-up White uses in the first three games. Then 4 ... i.g7 transposes to the main games, and Black also has these options: a) 4 ... 'iVb6 prevents S i.e3 and puts pressure on the d4-pawn, but Black must be careful in the face of White's attack; for example, S i.c4 i.g7 6 tLIf3 tLIh6 (6 ... i.g4? 7 i.xf7+) 7 i.b3 i.g4 S i.e3 dS, Bologan-Azmaiparashvili, Eu- ropean Clubs Cup, Panormo 2001, and here

White can play simply 9 'iWd2! dxe4 10 tLIgS! O-O 11 h3 i.cs 12 g4 and O-O-O with the centre, development and much better placed pieces. b) The most subtle move is 4 ... d5! with the idea S eS hS!?, intending to develop his pieces on kingside light squares, a typical sequence being 6 tLIf3 tLIh67 i.e3 i.g4 S i.e2 tLIfS 9 i.f2 e6 (D). w This is precisely the position arising from the game Hector-Hei below, which begins 1 e4 g6 2 d4 i.g7 3 tLIc3 c6 4 f4 dS S eS hS, etc. In that game, however, Black is a tempo 'ahead', in that he has played ... dS in one jump rather than via ... d6-dS. Ironically, however, Black's extra tempo there is ... i.g7, which is an unde- sirable move! This bishop actually belongs on fS, from where it supports the move ... cS and can go to its best position on e7. Indeed, the move ... i.fS occurs in Hector-Hei. So, by play- ing 2 ... d6 and deferring ... i.g7, Black has man- aged to save two moves ( ... i.g7-fS) in return for his loss of only one tempo ( ... d6-dS). It's

58 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

silly things like this that make a positional player's life more gratifying! Of course, 2 ... d6 in conjunction with 3 ... c6 is itself committal, and some players may not prefer this pawn- formation if White refrains from (or delays) f4 and plays, say, lbf3 or i.e3 instead. We now return to 2 ... i.g7 (D): w 3lbc3 I'm going to focus on this straightforward knight development, which is basic to the tradi- tional main lines of the Modem Defence, and easily the most popular at every level. It also makes possible a hypermodern interpretation of the opening by Black. For example, the move ... a6 with the idea ... bS is highly relevant in lines with lbc3, and not so much so otherwise. It would be impossible to address the enormous range of possibilities that 1...g6 opens up with- out sacrificing my emphasis upon ideas and themes, but I'll give games with the moves 3 c3 and 3 c4 below. 3 ... d6 Black can also play the subtle and very popu- lar 3 ... c6; see below for illustrative games. If he wants to challenge the centre, the most the- matic move is 3 ... cS, perhaps aiming for a Sicil- ian Defence after 4 lbf3 cxd4 S lbxd4. This is infrequently played as White has two good al- ternatives: a) One is 4 dS, when after 4 ... d6 it is harder for Black to find counterplay than in the Mod- em Benoni (1 d4lbf6 2 c4 cS 3 dS e6 4lbc3 exdS S cxdS d6 6 e4 g6 and ... i.g7), because the knight on c3 is well placed to meet Black's nat- ural pawn-breaks. I won't go into the details, but the most natural continuation is S lbf3 lbf6 (D) (upon S ... eS? or S. .. e6? there follows 6 dxe6 i.xe6 7lbbS; instead, S. .. a6 is logical, but does weaken the b6-square on the queenside, and White can play the standard manoeuvre lbd2-c4; for example, 6 a4 lbf6 7 i.e2 O-O 8 lbd2 e6 9 lbc4 exdS 10 exdS l:te8 11 O-O). w The variation after S. .. lbf6 has transposed to a line of the Schmid Benoni, an opening that can arise from a wide variety of move-orders. A sample line goes 6 i.bS+!? (6 i.e2 is equally common) 6 ... i.d7 (6 ... lbbd7 7 a4 a6 8 i.e2 brings Black's queen's knight to d7, a square from which it can't do much; 6 ... lbfd7 has been played in high-level games, but White has done well, for example in the main line 7 a4 O-O 8 O-O lba6 9 l:tel lbc7 10 i.fl) 7 a4 O-O 8 O-O and White intends to play i.f4 and/or lbd2-c4 with an edge. Hundreds of games have been played with the Schmid Benoni, however, and as you might suspect, both sides have lots of ways to set up their forces. b) 4 dxcS (D) voluntarily breaks up White's centre, with the idea that Black will either lose time recovering his pawn or make concessions. This capture has been played quite a bit and there is plenty to explore. One line is 4 .. :ilVaS S i.d2 'iVxcs, when a challenging move is 6 lbdS!?, threatening 7 i.b4 'iVc6 8 i.bS!. Then there can follow 6 ... lba6 (6 ... b6 is also played, although it's riskier) 7 lbf3 (or 7 i.e3 'iVc6 8 i.d4) 7 ... e6 (7 ... i.xb2?! 8 l:tbl i.g7 9 i.xa6 bxa6 10 O-O ties Black down due to i.b4, when 1O ... aS 11 l:tbS 'iVc6 12 i.xaS works out tacti- cally in White's favour) 8 i.c3 'it>f8 9 i.xg7+ 'it>xg7 10 lbc3 and Black has weaknesses to worry about. Still, this whole line is playable.

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 59

4 ... i.xc3+!? S bxc3 'iVaS constitutes another trade-off: attack on White's vulnerable pawns versus dark-square weaknesses around Black's king. White can develop nonnally, but he can also temporarily hold on to his pawn with the ambitious 6 'iVd4lbf6 7 'iVM, when 7 .. :iVxM 8 cxb4 lbxe4 9 i.b2 is an ideal position for White's bishop-pair, so 7 ... 'iVc7! 8lbf3 lbc6 9 'iVa4 might follow. These lines after 4 ... i.xc3+ are particularly interesting and unresolved.

4 f4 (D)

Here we have White's most direct challenge to Black's entire system. The intent is to domi- nate the centre and limit Black's pieces. Still, playing with a large centre exposes White to more counterattacking possibilities, so things are by no means clear. One advantage of 4 f4 is that it restricts the opponent's reasonable re- sponses in a way that 4 i.e3 or 4lbf3 doesn't. 4  c6 We shall see 4 ... a6 in the next section, with a note on 4 ... lbc6. Note that 4 ... ttJf6 transposes to a Pirc Defence, and indeed, a Pirc player may wish to use a l...g6 move-order to get to some of his favourite lines. However, when Black plays 1.. .g6, he has to deal with a number of ad- ditional early options by White, whereas I e4 d6 2 d4lbf6 (the Pirc) compels the defence of e4 on the second move and so limits White's choices. Most notably, the Pirc move-order 1 e4 d6 2 d4 ttJf6 3 lbc3 g6 bypasses any lines with c4 for White. After 4 ... c6 Black intends to answer ttJf3 with ... i.g4, when by the further .. :iVb6, he can put pressure upon d4, White's most vulnerable point in the centre. The attack on White's centre by ... i.g7, ... i.g4 and ... 'iVb6 is aggressive and pointed, but it carries the risks that an early queen move typically entails. If Black doesn't want to go this way, he can play for queenside expansion by ... bS, as in the note to S. .. i.g4 be- low. Slbf3 S i.e3 is also played, and worth knowing if you play either side of the popular move-order 4 i.e3 c6, because at that point S f4 transposes. A seeming drawback to S i.e3 is S. . :iVb6, be- cause b2 is attacked and the move ... eS will ex- ploit the pin on d4. But White can still try for advantage after 6 l:.b 1 (protecting b2) 6 ... eS!? (6 ... fS!? was Yudovich-Botvinnik, Moscow Ch 1966; then 7 eS! dxeS 8 fxeS i.xeS 9 i.c4! gives good attacking chances for the pawn, so maybe simply 6 ... ttJf6 should be tried) 7 lbf3

In spite of the tempo consumed by ltbl (which also precludes O-O-O), White's centre and development pose serious problems for Black:

60 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) 7 ... 4:Jd7 8 ~d2 exd4 (8 ... ~c7 9 fxeS dxeS 10 dS) 9 4:Jxd4 'it'd8 10 4:Jf3! (White piles up on d6; also, ..td4 can be effective at the right mo- ment) 1O ... ~e7 11 :dl ..txc3 12 'ii'xc3 4:Jgf6 13 eS! dxeS 14 fxeS 4:Je4 (otherwise e6 will fol- low) IS ~d4 fS 16 exf6 4:Jdxf6 17 ..tc4 with a clear superiority. b) 7 ... ..tg4!? 8 fxeS dxeS 9 ~d2! (9 ..tc4 exd4! 10 ..txf7+! <J;;e7 11 ..tf2 ..txf3 12 'ii'xf3 4:Jd7 yields unclear play) 9 ... exd4 10 4:Jxd4 and White drives Black's pieces back; for example, 1O ... 'it'b411 h3 ..tc8 12 a3 'it'e7 13 ..tc4 4:Jf614 O-O O-O IS ..th6! with a serious attack. Then IS ... ..txh6 16 ~xh6 ~cS?! 17 .l:.bdl ~xc4 18 eS 4:Je8 19 4:Je4 is winning for White. Because this line with S ..te3 can be intimi- dating for Black, he might do well to avoid S. .. 'it'b6 in favour of S. .. 4:Jf6 or S ... bS!? We now return to S 4:Jf3 (D):

S  ..tg4 Black chooses a committal course: he will have to cede the bishop-pair. The 'positional' follow-up to 4 ... c6 is S ... bS, which can lead in any number of directions; obviously, such a non-developing move risks having to go on the defensive. In response, the straightforward 6 ..td3 is popular (as well as 6 a3); for example, 6 ... ..tg47 eS!? 4:Jh6 (control offS is important)

8 h3 ..tfS and White has two instructive op-

tions: a) 9 g4 (preventing Black from occupying fS) 9 ... ..txd3 10 'ii'xd3 'i!i'd7 11 ..te3 4:Ja6 12 O-O-04:Jc7?! 13 exd6 ~xd6 14 fS 4:JdS IS 4:Je4 ~c7 16 fxg6 hxg6 17 ..td2 4:Jg8 18 4:JcS and White was obviously for choice in Ehlvest- Granda, Zagreb Interzonal 1987 . b) 9 ..txfS, with the idea 9 ... 4:JxfS 10 g4! 4:Jg3 11 .l:.gl b4 12 4:Jbl! 4:Je4 13 'ii'e2 dS 14 4:Jbd24:Jxd2 IS ..txd2. Then White has a sub- stantial superiority in every sector of the board; among other ideas, fS can follow. While S. .. bS may be playable, it gives White a lot of space and development to make use of. As always, you should refer to books and data- bases to learn more.

6..te3

Black's basic idea, to attack White's centre, is shown in the line 6 ..te2 'ilVb6 7 eS 4:Jh6! 8 4:Je4 O-O 9 c3. This is about equal; for example, 9 ... ..tfS !? 10 4:Jf2 cS 11 O-O 4:Jd7. 6  'i!i'b6 (D) w We have arrived at one of the oldest main lines of the Modern Defence. 7 ~d2 ..txf3 Doubling White's pawns. Without this move, Black's strategy makes no sense. He shouldn't permit a rook to get to the 7th rank by 7 ... ~xb2? 8l:tb1 'iWa3 9.l:.xb7. 8 gxf3 4:Jd7 9 O-O-O 'ii'aS 10 <J;;bl! A calm move that is characteristic of such positions; for one thing, it defends a2 and there- fore frees White's knight on c3 to move . 10.. bS (D) This advance is consistent with the position, attacking via ... b4 and/or ... 4:Jb6-c4. The main drawbacks to it are that Black still doesn't rem- edy his backward development and that if the attack doesn't succeed, the move ... bS will make it riskier for him to castle queenside. In- stead, Black could castle more safely right away, but it's not clear where his counterplay is com- ing from after, say, 10 ... O-O-O 11 .l:.g1 ~b8 12

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHEITO 61

l:tg5 (or 12 f5) 12 ... ~c7 13 d5, as in 1. Polgar- Crouch, Hastings 1992/3. w After the text-move (l0 ... b5), we have a bat- tle between a centralized position and a flank attack. White has no immediate threats, and Black is counting upon the lack of weaknesses in his pawn-structure (typical of positions with few pawns past the 3rd rank); ideally, his solid position will render White's advances harmless until he can himself make progress. This strat- egy runs up against the Classical school of thought, which says that the modem fianchetto defences (l...g6 and 1...b6) are simply insuffi- cient if White plays in a principled manner by constructing a broad centre, developing quickly and suffocating Black. Experience shows that Black will have many tricky ideas, mostly due to the fact that White's centre is exposed. But the true classicist trusts that these are tempo- rary problems that can be neutralized, after which his pawns and pieces will roll forward. As it happens, the outcome of the particular variation before us (with 4 ... c6 5 lbf3 i..g4) seems to support his point of view. Even if that proves the case, of course, the modernist will point to other variations in which his philoso- phy wins the day. And so it goes. Let's see how the opposing strategies play out in two illustrative games that begin with 1O ... b5. llh4 Bologan - Todor~evic Las Palmas 1993 Trusting in his broad centre and space, White launches a straightforward flank attack. 11  lbb6 Black's idea is to play ... lbc4, either before or after ... b4, or perhaps ... lba4. a) It's still too early for Black to develop by ll...lbgf6?, because of 12 e5 lbd5 (12 ... lbh5 13 d5!) 13 lbxd5 ~xd2 14 i..xd2 cxd5 15 i..xb5. b) Instead, the d7 -knight can also be used to support ... c5, one example going 11...b4 12 lbe2 lbgf6 13 lbg3!? (13 .l:.gl and 13 f5 with the idea 13 ... gxf5 14l:tgl are good alternatives) 13 ... l:tb8?! (13 ... lbh5 14 lbxh5 'iVxh5 15 i..e2 favours White, who intends f5 and l:tdgl) 14 h5 gxh5 15 f5 c5 (finally) 16 dxc5lbxc5 17 i..d4

The bishop on d4 opposes Black's bishop on g7 and thereby interferes with his most promis- ing attacking possibilities on the queenside. You might want to compare openings such as the Sicilian Dragon and King's Indian Defence. Lanka-Todorcevic, Rome 1990 went 17 .. J:tg8 18 i..c4 (or 18 lbxh5!) 18 ... 'ii'c7?! 19 lbxh5 lbxh5 20 l:txh5 lbd7 21 l:txh7 'iVxc4 22 l:txg7 l:txg7 23 b3! 'ii'b5 24 i..xg7 and White was win- ning.

12 h5 b413lbe2lbc414 'it'd3lbxe3

Black's last few moves seem to be the most logical ones, and at this point he can only main- tain his knight on the strong square c4 by allow- ing White to keep his dark-squared bishop and pursue further attacking ideas: 14 ... d5 15 i..c1 l:tb8 16 hxg6 hxg6 17 ':xh8 i..xh8 18 f5! gxf5 and while 19 lbg3 was quite effective in Kor- neev-Movsziszian, Berga 1996, even better is 19 exd5! cxd5 20 'it'xf5, threatening ~h7. 15 "'xe3 (D)

62 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

An interesting situation has arisen. At first sight, Black's position seems compact and rel- atively safe from direct attack. However, he finds it hard to develop his pieces or castle, so he has difficulty working up counterplay. This gives White time to get organized. He has vari- ous ways of improving his position such as tiJg3, f5, d5 and e5, and his bishop can go to h3 or c4. In general, the opposite-coloured bishops favour White's attack. In view of all this, Black will have trouble defending. 15 tiJf6 Black's king is also exposed after 15 ... O-O-O; for example, 16 'ilVb3!? tiJh6 17 l:.gl e6 18 c3! bxc3 19 tiJxc3 sets up attacks based upon the open c-file and d5 breaks. Then Busemann- Vinot, email corr. 2002 continued 19 ... 'iit>d7 20 l:.g5 ~b6 21 'ilVc2 l:.b8 22 f5 exf5 23 i.h3 i.f6 24 l:.g2 lIhe8, and now the easiest course for White was 25 exf5; for example, 25 ... gxh5 26 'ilVd2 tiJg8 27 tiJe4, threatening ':xg8 among other things.

16 h6 i.f817 d5! (D)

17  cxd5 18 e5 18 tiJd4 with the ideas of i.b5+ and e5 is also strong. ... tiJd7 19 e6 fxe6 20 ~xe6 lIb8 21 tiJd4 ~c5 22 i.h3 l:.b7 23 lIhel The power of every white piece is maxi- mized, ensuring success. 23 ... tiJb6 24 f5! gxf5 25 'it'xf5 1-0 The threat of ~h5+ is decisive.

11 f5 (D)

Franzen - McAlpine corr. 1991 In some ways this is more thematic than the

11 h4 of the previous game, in that White frees

his e3-bishop for use upon the c I-h6 diagonal. The main difference is that Black is finally per- mitted to develop his g8-knight.

11 ... tiJgf6 This move wasn't advisable before 11 f5 be- cause White would have responded with e5. Here's a look at two instructive email correspon- dence games with alternative defensive plans. In both, we see how important it is to keep your pawn-structure intact in the Modem Defence: a) 11...tiJb6 12 h4 b4 13 tiJe2 tiJc4 14 ~d3 tiJxe3 15 'ili'xe3 (very similar to the previous game) 15 ... tiJf6 16 tiJg3 O-O-O 17 h5 gxh5 (soon after this positional concession White will stand much better, but 18 h6 was a threat, and 17 ... l:.hf8 18 fxg6 hxg6 19 hxg6 fxg6 20 tiJe2 has threats such as l:.gl and tiJf4, in con- junction with i.h3+ and perhaps d5) 18 ~b3 ndf8 19 i.c4 d5 20 i.e2 i.h6 21 e5 l:.fg8 22 tiJe4! tiJe8 (22 ... tiJxe4 23 fxe4 and Black can't

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 63

defend everything) 23ltJcS 'it'b6 24 f6! e6 2S f4 i.xf4 26 i.xhS .:tf8 27 i.xf7! lhf7 28 'iVh3 4:Jc7 29 4:Jxe6 ~b7 30 'it'hS .l:thf8 31 4:Jxf8 .:txf8 32 'it'g4 4:JbS 33 'iVxf4 4:Jc3+ 34 ~al 4:Jxdl 3S e6 1-0 Petraitis-Vinot, email 2004. b) 11...b4 12 4:Je2 gxfS 13 .:tgl (the open file is well worth a pawn) 13. .. i.f8 14 .:tgS e6 IS exfS h6 16 J:.gl 'iVxfS 17 'iVxb4 'iVxf3 18 .l:td3 'it'f6 (Black is simply underdeveloped) 19 'iVb7 l:tb8 20 'iVxc6 'it'd8 21 dS 4:Je7 22 'iVa4 4:JxdS 23 l:txdS exdS 24 i.h3 i.e7 2S i.d4 .l:tf8 26 4:Jf4 'it'c8 27 i.fS a6 28 .l:tell:tbS 29 i.f6 1-0 Nejtek-Valenta, email 2003. 12 i.d3!? Quite often this bishop is best-placed on fl, where it can't be harassed and can still choose whether to go to h3. 12.:tg 1 is in the spirit of the lines above; for example, 12 ... b413ltJe2 cS? 14 dxcS dxcS (14 ... ltJxcS IS 4:Jd4) IS 4:Jc1! 'iVb6 16 'iVg2 with the idea of f4 and eS. ... b413 4:Je2 c5 14 i.h6 Or 14 a3 .l:tb8 IS dxcS 4:JxcS 16 i.c4.

14. . O-O

Black would do better to divert White's queen by 14 ... i.xh6! IS 'it'xh6 gxfS 16 exfS .l:tc8. 15 i.xg7 ~xg7 16 h4l:tfc8 (D) w 17h5! Analysis by Keene, Botterill and Williams from back in 1972 went 17 b3 4:Jb6 18 hS c4! with a highly unclear counterattack. 17.. c4 18 hxg6 cxd3 19 'it'h6+ ~h8 20 cxd3 20 .l:txd3 may be even stronger. 20 .. b3 20 .. .fxg6 21 4:Jf4! gxfS 22 ltJg6+ ~g8 23 4:Jxe7+ ~f7 24ltJxfS .l:tg8 2S .l:tdgl is winning for White. 21 axb3!? 21 a3! would win more quickly following

21...l:tc2 22 gxf7 l:txe2 23 .:tdgl.

21...l:tab8

White also gets through after both 21 .. .fxg6 22 ltJf4l:tg8 23 4:Jxg6+ l:txg6 24 'iVxg6 .:tg8 2S ~f7 and 21...'iVc7 22 .:td2. 22 gxf7! l:txb3 23l:td2! (D)

Threatening l:tgl and ltJf4, so Black's play is forced. 23 ... l:ta3 24 bxa3 ~xa3 Or 24 .. J:tb8+ 2S .l:tb2. 25 l:tb2 'iVxd3+ 26 ~al 'ifa3+ 27 .:ta2 'ifb3 28e5 and White won shortly. In these two examples, Black's queenside play wasn't a match for White's pawn-mass. Tiger's Modern Fedorovsky - Pel Pardubice 2008

[diagram]
This advance is eccentric (literally), but fun and respectable. Before going on to describe it in detail, let me mention two rare alternatives. The slightly more committal4. .. e6!? has been used to get to what is sometimes called the 'Hippo- potamus' set-up, which includes the moves ... b6, ... i.b7, ... g6, ... i.g7, ... ltJd7 and ... ltJe7, and sometimes even ... a6, ... f6 and ... c6! Such positions are not easy to crack and contain an elastic energy, which is to say that too hurried an advance by White can provoke a dynamic

64 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

counterattack. Nevertheless, it shouldn't sur- prise anyone that White can achieve the better game if he plays accurately. The best approach W is to advance slowly and only with support; af- ter all, Black isn't going anywhere! Probably 4 ... ~c6 (D) is the most interesting of the 'irregular' choices. w This attacks White's d-pawn. Black's idea is to reply to 5 ~f3 with 5 ... SLg4, further straining the defence of d4. Instead, 5 SLe3 opens vari- ous possibilities, induding 5 ... ~f6 (threaten- ing ... ~g4) 6 ~f3 O-O 7 SLe2, and here Davies likes the sequence 7 ... e6 8 O-O ~e7!? followed by ... b6 and ... SLb7, which is an 'improved' Hippopotamus due to Black's light-square pres- sure and possible central breaks (which is not to say that he'll achieve equality against perfect play, but you can have some fun here). In place of this, Velimirovic-Davies, Vrnjacka Banja 1991 saw 5 SLb5 (a move that Davies said drove him away from playing 4 ... ~c6) 5 ... a6 6 SLxc6+ bxc6 7 ~f3 f5!? (Davies cites grandmaster games which went 7 ... SLg4 8 O-O 'iWb8!? 9 h3 SLxf3 10 l:i.xf3 and 7 ... ~f6 8 O-O O-O 9 'iWel! with ideas of e5, f5 and/or ~4, depending upon Black's response; he rightly prefers White's chances in both cases) 8 e5 ~h6 9 'iVe2 e6 10 SLe3 O-O 11 O-O-O SLd7. Black has his pieces out, but he lacks space and his g7 -bishop is se- verely restricted. In the game, White expanded with h3, g4-g5 and h4-h5 with an excellent at- tack. For more on ... ~c6, see the next note (in which ... a6 and a4 are played before ... ~c6). Let's return to the game move, 4 ... a6 (D). It is sometimes called 'Tiger's Modern', af- ter Grandmaster Tiger Hillarp Persson, and has an even more modern feel than 4 ... c6. For one thing, Black doesn't even feint at contesting one of the four central squares. Such rook's- pawn pushes are increasingly common for both players in contemporary chess, representing a flight from some of the heavy theory associated with the traditional face-off of central pawns. These relatively noncommittal moves have a positive purpose (in this case, the support of ... b5 and ... SLb7), but they also serve a preven- tative function that can frustrate typical plans of the opponent. Here 4 ... a6 may remind you of the Najdorf Sicilian, in that it prevents SLb5. In- deed, the moves ... c5 and ... cxd4 often follow, when a very Sicilian-like position arises. Assuming that he continues with 5 ... b5, Black has played his first five moves with only one piece developed and a single central pawn mod- estly situated on the third rank. Why does he do this? One motivation is pragmatic: White's theoretically weakest point in this formation is e4 (as it is d4 in the King's Indian Defence structure with pawns on c4, d4 and e4), be- cause that square can't be defended by the f- or d-pawn. Thus both the moves ... J.b7 and ... b4 will increase the pressure on that point. Like- wise, ... ~f6 at some point attacks e4, and if White plays e5, Black can land a knight on d5, a post that is serendipitously strengthened by a pawn on b5 or b4 (because White cannot as easily play c4 to attack the knight on d5). Black might even find a way to make the move ... f5 work, perhaps after ... e6; notice that these are both moves that support the influence of Black's bishop on b7 down the light-squared long diagonal. Ultimately, Black's ideas and White's counterstrategies are hard to pin down

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 65

in advance, and will depend upon the opportu- nities presented by the opponent. 54Jf3 B 5 .lie3 is often played, and can easily trans- pose, for example, to the note to White's 7th or 8th move below. 5 a4, preventing ... b5, is a 'natural' response, at least for a player without a lot of experience with this system. But after 5 ... 4Jc6! (D), Black has improved upon 4 ... 4Jc6 because b5 is de- nied to a white bishop or knight, and should White play d5, Black's knight has access to M. In addition, White can only play O-O-O at the risk of exposing his king to a dangerous attack because of the weakened queenside. w The only potential risk for Black would be in the line 6 d5 4Jb4 (6 ... 4Jd4 7 .lie3 c5 ap- pears logical, but 8 dxc6 4Jxc6 9 4Jd5! targets Black's weakened b6-square) 7 a5. With this advance, White stops ... a5 and now threatens :a4 or a knight retreat followed by c3, trap- ping Black's knight. (Instead, the immediate 7 4Jbl threatens c3, but 7 ... a5! 8 c3 4Ja6leaves Black with better development, prospects of ... 4Jc5, and an extended long diagonal.) After 7 a5, however, Black stands quite securely if he plays 7 ... e6 8 .l:!.a4 c5!, as in Mikhailovsky- Hillarp Persson, Gothenburg 2003.

[diagram]
This is Black's idea: he will forego a central pawn challenge until after he develops by ... .lib7 and ... 4Jd7. Then after ... c5 and ... cxd4, Sicilian themes can arise, or the game can go its own way, as it does in this contest. 6 .lid3 (D) 6  4Jd7 Relatively noncommittal; Black would like to playa speedy ... c5 in some lines. There's no way to give a complete survey of this variation, so I'll confine myself to some examples; these will be a little dense but hopefully useful if you're in- terested in 4 ... a6. I shall be citing the games and opinions of Tiger Hillarp Persson a lot, because he is the leading contemporary exponent of 4 ... a6 in Modem Defence lines. Hillarp Persson prefers 6 ... 4Jd7 over 6 ... .lib7, when he feels that 7 a4! is good for White. This may well be so, yet the latter move is almost never played! Rather than use mountains of analysis, let's fol- low some logical moves: 7 ... M 8 4Je2 4Jd7 9 O-O 4Jgf6 (9 ... e6 allows 10 f5!, opening lines for both White's rook on f1 and his dark- squared bishop, always a dangerous proposi- tion for Black) 10 e5 4Jd5 (D). w If White can rid himself of the knight on d5, he can trust that his large, mobile centre will work to his advantage. In addition, moves such as e6 and 4Jg5 can be effective. For his part,

66 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black will try to break down White's pawn- mass. Specific moves communicate the key ideas better than words can here: a) 11 c4 bxc3 12 bxc3 (12 tbxc3 tbb4!? 13 ~b3!? ~xf3 14 ~xb4 l:!.b8 IS 'iVc4 ~a8! is about equal; then White shouldn't be too greedy, as after 16 'iVxa6 O-O and ... cS, he will struggle to hold things together) 12 ... O-O (12 ... aS sets up the move ... tbb4 in response to c4; then 13 tbgS!? initiates an attack such as 13 ... e6 14 J:!.bl J:!.b8 IS exd6 cxd6 16 ~a3!? tbe3 17 ~c 1 tbxfl 18 ~xd6; still, this is a good point for Black to look for improvements) 13 l:[bl .l:.b8 14 c4 tbSb6 IS as tbc8 16 tbgS! e6! (16 ... h6 17 tbxf7 J:!.xf7 18 e6) 17 dS!? tbcs 18 dxe6 fxe6 (18 ... tbxe6 19 tbxe6 fxe6 20 ~e4!) 19 ~e3! h6 20 ~xcS hxgS 21 exd6 cxd6 22 ~d4 with mul- tiple threats. This is fascinating material, al- though obviously not forced. b) 11 as ('!' - Hillarp Persson; White pre- vents ... as and takes away the retreat-square b6 for Black's knight on dS) l1...cS 12 tbgS! O-O (Hector-Hillarp Persson, Gothenburg 1997 went 12 ... cxd4 13 e6 tbcS, when one road to advan- tage is 14 exf7+! ~f8 IS fS!) 13 e6 f6 14 tbf7 'iVc7 IS fS! cxd4? (IS ... gS is better, however ugly) 16 exd7 ~xf7 17 tbxd4! and moves like tbe6 and 'iVg4 are too strong to resist. We now return to 6 ... tbd7 (D): w 7 e5 The usual move. Instead, 7 a4 b4 8 tbe2 is similar to, and may transpose to, the previous note. The move-orders can be confusing; for the record, after 7 ~e3, 7 ... cS 8 eS is the note to White's 8th move, and 7 ... ~b7 8 eS is the note to 7 ... cS. White can also play 7 O-O ~b7 (perhaps not best; by transposition, Stefansson-Hillarp Pers- son, Gausdal 1996 went 7 ... cS 8 dxcS tbxcs 9 ~e3 ~b7 10 ~xcS dxcS 11 eS, when Black held the balance following 1l...'iVb6 12 ~e4 ~xe413 tbxe4tbh6! 14c40-0). Now 8 ~e3cS 9 dxcS tbxcS! is a common position with Sicil- ian-like qualities. But 8 eS! is more dangerous, in view of 8 ... cS 9 exd6! cxd4 10 tbe4. I suspect that 8 ... e6 or 8 ... tbh6 is better. Notice how many options both sides have on every move! 7 .. c5 7 ... ~b7 is the main alternative, which often transposes, although 8 ~e3 might now be met by 8 ... tbh6 (rather than 8 ... cS); for example, 9 ~e2 (9 ~e4 'i!i'c8) 9 ... e6 (Finkel mentions 9 ... O-O 10 O-O-O tbg4 11 ~e4 as slightly in White's favour) 10 O-O-O tbb6 11 l:!.hgl tbfS, and perhaps 12 ~f2 is more accurate than 12 ~xfS exfS 13 dS, which led to an unclear mess in Antal-Vajda, Nagykanizsa 2003. 8~e4 I ordinarily try to limit chaotic variations which contain few positional lessons, but in this case both sides need to be aware of some con- crete possibilities. Keep in mind, however, that if you play 4 ... a6, you aren't forced to go into this position, and neither is White. To begin with, some remarkable play can re- sult from 8 ~e3 ~b7 (D): a) A couple of games have followed the long and complex line 9 ~e4 'iVc8 (in S.Pav- 10v-V.Yanov, Kiev Ch 2008, Black tried to get his knight out by 9 ... ~xe4 10 tbxe4 tbh6 11 dxcS tbg4 12 'i!i'e2 dxeS 13 O-O-O! 'iVc7 14 fxeS tbdxeS IS ~d4 O-O 16 h3 tbxf3 17 ~xg7 ~f4+

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 67

18 ~bl ~xg7 19 hxg4, and here 19 ... lLle5 would have been unclear according to Finkel; there are naturally many options!) 10 .1xb7!? ~xb7 11 dxc5 dxe5 (l1...dxc5 12 a4! b4 13 ~d5) 12 'ii'd5 ~xd5 13 lLlxd5 l:i.c8 14 lLlb6!? lLlxb6 15 cxb6lLlf6, Mortensen-Hillarp Persson, Danish Team Ch 2003. Now Hillarp Persson suggests 16 fxe5! lLld5! 17 .1d4 O-O, when White can keep a modest advantage by 180-O-O or 18 a4l:i.xc2 190-0, but it may not be much. b) A shocking line follows 9 lLlg5 cxd4 10 e6 (D).

10 .. .f5!! 11 .1xf5 (11 exd7 + 'ii'xd7 will leave Black with a powerful pawn-centre) 11...lLldf6 12 .1xg6+ hxg6 13 'ii'd3 lLlh6 14 ~xg6+ ~f8 15 .1xd4 ~e8 and Black has the upper hand, San Segundo-Hillarp Persson, Elista Olympiad 1998. S. .. l:i.bS (D) A sort of main-line position has arisen, which has produced fascinating play. Black is trying to combine the best features of the Pirc and Si- cilian Defences. 90-0 A few snippets of analysis illustrate the con- flicting factors of White's attacking pieces and his crumbling centre: a) 9 .1e3 b4 10 lLle2 can go in a number of directions; for example, 1O ... lLlh6 (or 1O .. :iVc7

11 c3 lLlh6!) 11 dxc5! lLlg4 12 .1d4 dxe5 13

lLlxe5 lLldxe5 (13 ... lLlgxe5 14 c6!) 14 h3!? O-O 15 hxg4 lLlxg4 16 .1xg7 ~xg7 with approxi- mate equality. b) 9 lLlg5 cxd4 (after 9 ... lLlh6 10 e6!, there might follow 1O ... lLlf6 11 .1c6+ ~f8 12 exf7; then 12 ... cxd4 13 lLld5!? is fairly crazy, whereas 12 ... lLlxf7 13 dxc5 h6 14 lLlxf7 ~xf7 15 ~e2 .1e6 is unclear) 10 .1d5 (a cute line is 10 e6 f5! 11 .1xf5 lLldf6!) 1O ... e6 11 lLlce4! (11 .1xe6? lLlxe5 !) 11....1f8 12 lLlxf7 ~xf7 13 lLlg5+ ~e8 14 .1xe6 dxe5 15 .tf7+ ~e7 160-0 e4! 17 ~el lLldf6 18 .1b3lLlh6. This is still unclear. 9 ... cxd4 9 ... b4 may well be just as good, and I'll leave it for you to research. 10 lLlxd4 dxe5! Black sacrifices the exchange for a pawn in order to destroy White's large centre; this is in the spirit of the 4 ... a6 line, and of many modem openings. The alternative 1O ... .1b7 11 .1xb7 1:txb7 allows White to use his superior develop- ment. Hillarp Persson gives 12 e6!? (12 exd6! is perhaps more convincing, since 12 ... exd6? 13 lLld5 is unacceptable, but 12 ... ~b6 13 .1e3 ~xd6 14 1:tel maintains White's initiative) 12 .. .fxe6, and even here, 13 .1e3!? lLlf8 14 a4! b4 15lLle4looks promising for White. UlLlc6 ~b6+ 12 ~hl (D)

68 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

12  liJgf6! Black plays another exchange sacrifice for the double purpose of developing quickly and controlling more of the centre. If he tries to avoid capture by 12 ... .l:!.b7?, White's easiest so- lution is 13 fxeS, with ideas including ~f3 and liJxe7. Then 13 ... liJxeS 14 .te3! ~c7 IS .tf4 leaves Black without good moves. Alternatively Black has tested 12 ... b4!? a number of times, but instead of 13 liJxb8, 13 liJa4! looks strong; one line would be 13 .. :~c7 14liJxb8liJxb8 IS .te3, intending lS ... liJf6!? 16 .tb6 ~d7 17 liJcS. 13liJxb8 ~xb8 14 fxe5 Erenburg gives 14 i.d3 .tb7 IS 'iWe2, but Black still has his basic central control for com- pensation after lS ... O-O.

14. .. liJxe5!?

Several games have proceeded in this fash- ion, but 14 ... liJxe4 IS liJxe4 liJxeS should be investigated as well. Black has obvious and probably adequate compensation for White's minimal material edge. 15 .tf4 O-O Not lS ... liJhS?? 16 .tc6+, but now 16 ... liJhS is threatened.

16.tf3

White wants to discourage ... liJhS while clearing the e-file for a direct attack on the eS- knight. 16 "iVe2liJhS 17liJdSliJxf4! 18liJxe7+ 'it>h8 19l:txf4 .te6 is unclear according to Hill- arp Persson. ... b4 16 ... e6!? 17 ~e2 liJfd7 18 .l:!.ad1 ~b6 19 liJe4 was Kariakin-Hillarp Persson, Benidorm 2003; here 19 ... .tb7 would keep Black right in the game. 17liJd5!? Erenburg and Hillarp Persson like 17 ~e2!. Then 17 ... liJfd7 18 liJdS .l:!.e8 19 a3! should fa- vour White, although Black still has his bishop- pair and pawn for the exchange. ...liJxd518 .txd5 (D) You can see how theoretical the odd little move 4 ... a6 has become: it turns out that we're still in a main book line! The earlier game Malmdin-Hillarp Persson, Sandviken 2004 went 18 'iixdS .te6! 19 ~e4 .tfS 20 'iYe2 "iVbS 21 ~xbS axbS with a pawn and plenty of play for the exchange.

[diagram]
18 ... ~bS might be playable. White can force the pace with 19 .txeS .txeS 20 .txf7+ .l:!.xf7 21 'iid8+ 'it>g7 22 .l:!.xf7+ 'it>xf7 23 ~xc8 i.xb2 24 !:I.e1, but after 24 ... .tf6, it will be hard for him to make progress. 19 .tb3 ~b5 20 a3 bxa3 21.l:!.xa3liJg4? Black should simply develop by 21....tb7.

22 e4 ~h5 23 h3 .txb2 24l:ta2 e5 25 l:txb2

exf4 26 ~f3 g5 27 'it>glliJf6 28 ~xh5liJxh5 29 e5 Black has levelled the material, but White's rooks and passed pawn are too strong. 29 ... liJg3 30 l:td1.tf5 31.te2 .te6 32 .td3 as 33 e6 l:te8 34 l:te1 'it>f8 35 e7 'it>e7 36 i.a6 liJe4 37 .txe8 .txe8 38l:td11-0 Conclusion: The hypermodern move 4 ... a6 is somewhat risky, but produces rich chess that will appeal to gamblers. Modern Defence with an Early ... c6 Hector - Hflli Copenhagen 2002

1 e4 g6 2 d4 .tg7 3liJe3 e6 (D)

Today this has become a very popular move- order. Sometimes it is a prelude to fairly con- ventional set-ups involving ... d6. But Black can also play 4 ... dS next (as he does in most of this section), staking out a central presence on the light squares. This strategy resembles Black's in variations of the Caro-Kann Defence (which sometimes directly transpose to these lines), the Scandinavian Defence and the Alekhine

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 69

w Defence. It seems odd to move so quickly away from the dark-square strategy that 1...g6 im- plies, but it turns out that the combination of ... g6, ... c6 and ... dS yields a solid position, whether or not White commits to a big centre. In general, the variation with ... c6 and ... dS suits players who want to play safely and not be too short of space. 4f4 Again, this is the most critical test. Indeed, f4 lines are especially appropriate versus the Modem Defence; they pose great danger for Black and at the same time are less risky than similar systems in other defences. Why? Be- cause in other lines with broad centres such as the Four Pawns King's Indian, the Exchange Griinfeld, or even the Four Pawns Attack versus the Alekhine Defence, Black's pieces generally develop more quickly than in the Modem. In the next game we shall see 4 lbf3 and 4 .llc4. 4 ... dS This move is one of the main points behind

3. .. c6: Black switches from the dark-square em-

phasis of 1...g6 and 2 ... .llg7 to a direct assault on White's light squares. In particular, White's e4-square can no longer be defended by pawns. Of course, it's not too late to return to 4 ... d6, which we saw above. S eS (D)

... hS The odd-looking advance of Black's h-pawn introduces Gurgenidze's system of develop- ment, which can also arise from the Caro-Kann Defence via I e4 c6 2 d4 dS 3 lbc3 g64 eS .llg7 (4 ... hS!? S f4lbh6 might save Black some time, but S f4 is hardly necessary) S f4 hS. Black's idea is multi-faceted. He prevents White's move

g4, which might not seem important until you realize that Black intends to put a bishop on g4, appropriately outside the pawn-chain which is about to be constructed by the move ... e6. Normally, that bishop will subsequently be ex- changed after White plays h3, when the useful- ness of ... hS becomes apparent: it can both prevent White's g4 directly and, in some cases, it will advance to h4 and restrain two pawns (on h3 and g2) with one. Black also secures an effective outpost for his knight on fS; and since the knight will prob- ably come there via h6, it's handy that the move ... hS prevents g4. It also eliminates h4-hS, a standard way in which White normally meets the combination of ... g6 and ... lbh6. Ultimately, then, Black sets up a fortress on the kingside with pawns on e6, f7, g6 and hS, daring White to expand in that sector. I should mention that Black can play other moves here. One such is S. .. lbh6, still looking at the light squares, and if White responds 6 lbf3, Black can reply with 6 ... .llg4, or even the strange-looking 6 ... f6, attacking the front of the pawn-chain (contrary to some of the old text- books, attacking the front of a pawn-chain is very often a productive way to attack it). I'm going to forego analysis of those lines, how- ever, in part because they tend to be less the- matic. 6lbf3(D) 6 .lle3 has some unique points after 6 ... lbh6 (6 .. :iib6 7 ':bl .llfS Slbf3lbh6 9 .lle2 doesn't look like what Black wants) 7 h3!? (7lbf3 'Ylib6 S ':bl would be more conventional) 7 ... lbfS S .i.f2 h4 (the more forcing line S. .. 'tlkb6 9l:tb 1 h4 10 lbf3 lbg3!? 11 .llxg3 hxg3 seems to fall a

70 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

little short after 12 'iVd2, intending 13 liJe2, to hit the g-pawn, although that's not completely clear) 9liJf3!? (9 'ii'd2! intends 9 .. :iWb61O O-O-O liJg3 11 .i.xg3 hxg3 12 liJge2 .i.g4 13 l:I.gl! .i.h5 14 "ili'e3) 9 ... e6 (now though, 9 ... 'iVb6! is a good try, because 10:b lliJg3!? 11 .i.xg3 hxg3 is rather muddy) 10 .i.d3 .i.f8 liliJe2 .i.e7 12 O-O liJd7 13 b3. White can be happy in this kind of position; compare the main game. Since 6 .i.e3 also avoids some of Black's promising op- tions in the main line, it should be looked into carefully by both sides.

[diagram]
12 O-O transposes to the game, and the inde-

pendent line 1O ... ~b6 (hitting d4 and b2) virtu- ally forces White to castle queenside, but 11 O-O-O h4 12 liJa4 'iia5 13 'iVb3! gives White effective play in that sector; for example, 13 ... b5 14liJc5 or 13 ... 'ii'c7 14 ~bl, with an early c4 to follow. It could be that 8 h3 is the most accurate move-order; at any rate, it avoids the next few notes.

8 ... liJf5 9 .i.f2 (D) 9 ... e6 Or: a) 9 ... 'ii'b6 should definitely be considered, although it is seldom played. For example, 10 !Ibl (10 'ilVd2 .i.xf3 11 gxf3 liJxd4 12 O-O-O liJxf3 13 'iie2 liJd4 14 'iid2 liJf3 repeats) 1O ... h4!? (1O ... liJd7 11 0-00-O-O; 1O ... liJxd4 11 b41) 11 h3 .i.h5 1? 120-0 liJd7 13 b4 e6 with an unclear game. b) A creative if perhaps too exotic alterna- tive played by master Brian Wall begins with 9 ... liJd7 followed by ... liJf8-e6. In one game, Black then continued ... .i.h6 (hitting f4) and ... liJeg7, further blockading the light squares!

10 h3 .i.xf311 'ii'xf3 (D)

MODERN KINGSlDE FIANCHETTO 71

White intends g4. 1l. .. h4 Now we have a position that has arisen many times over the years. Black logically clamps down on the possibility of g4. Given White's successes, however, we should look at alterna- tives: a) Anand-Blatny, World Junior Ch, Baguio City 1987 went 1l...ttJh4 12 iVg3 ttJf5 13 'iVf3 (13 i.xf5 h4! 14 "iVg4 exf5) 13 ... ttJh4 14 i.xh4 'iVxh4+ 15 g3 iVe7. Now White played too hast- ily with 16 g4?! hxg4! 17 hxg4 l:i.xhl+ 18 iVxhl iVb4 190-O-O iVxd4 and he lacked full compensation. Correct was 16 O-O-O! ttJd7 17 g4 (this is thematic: White wants to blast away with f5) 17 ... O-O-O 18 f5, and now 18 ... exf5 19 gxf5 gxf5 20 i.xf5 'it'b8 21 i.xd7! J:hd7 22 l:i.hfl leaves White better with his pressure down the f-file, whereas 18 ... gxf5 19 gxf5 iVh4 20 ttJe2 c5 21 c3 gives him a small but real posi- tional edge. b) The rarely-played 1l..."iVb6!? (D) is in- teresting, trying to discourage White's straight- forward plan of O-O followed by queenside expansion: w bl) 120-O-O h4 (now that White has com- mitted his king to the queenside, Black should prevent g4) 13 "iVe2 (13 i.xf5 gxf5 14 ttJbl ttJd7 15 "iVe3 ttJf8! intends ... ttJg6 and perhaps ... i.h6, Alekseva-Pietrasanta, Le Touquet 2(01) 13 ... i.f8 14 "iVel i.e7 15 ttJe2!? White has the simple idea of ttJgl-f3, i.xf5 and ttJxh4; never- theless, 15 ... ttJd7 16 ttJgl c5! 17 i.xf5 gxf5 18 ~f3 c4! gives Black enough counterplay. b2) 12 O-O! can be played anyway, because 12 ... ttJxd4 13 "iVdl will win the pawn back; for example, 13 ... ttJd7 14l:f.bl! a5 (not 14 ... O-O-O? 15 b4, when ttJa4 can't be prevented), when there are some wild lines such as 15 a3 a4! 16 b4 axb3 17l:i.xb3 "Wia7 18 ttJb5! cxb5 19 i.xb5 b6 and 15 ttJa4! "Wib4 16 c3 ttJf3+! 17 'it'hl ~xf4 18 i.gl! ttJdxe5 19 i.e2 b5 20 ttJc5 O-O 21 i.xf3 ttJxf3 22 'iVxf3 'ikxf3 (or 22 ... 'iVc7!?), when White's piece only just outweighs Black's three pawns.

12 O-O ttJd7 (D)

Several top-level games have reached this point. Black has done everything right from a positional point of view: he rid himself of his bad bishop, block;lded White's centre (immo- bilizing his bishops), and established a 'one re- strains two' situation on the kingside (h-pawn versus h- and g-pawns). Nevertheless, White's record from this position has been extremely good. It's not only his two bishops that make the difference, but his greater command of territory. In combination with his lead in development, this is effective in squelching his opponent's counterplay. The position looks closed, but White will be able to operate on the queenside, and as long as he can keep lines open there, his bishops will exert a powerful influence in the long term. Similarly, any pawn-breaks like ... c5 or .. .f6 tend to open up lines for White's pieces, so Black usually has to stay passive. Finally, Black's pawn on h4 can become a target for White's pieces. Interestingly, if you look at other openings such as the King's Indian De- fence in which White's pawns on b2 and a3 are held up by the manoeuvre ... a5-a4, it will often happen that the pawn on a4 can be attacked to good effect by a queen on dl, bishop on c2 and

72 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

knight on c3. The mirror image of this attack shows up in the main game and notes below. 13b3 White anticipates playing c4. The somewhat more accurate 13 tt:Je2! has been played several times, covering g3 and freeing the c-pawn to move. Then Sivokho-Chernyshov, St Peters- burg 2000 illustrates the fundamental strate- gies: 13 ... b5!? (13 ... ii.f8 14 a4 prevents ... ii.a3 . ideas) 14 c3! (D) (preparing b3 and c4, rather than the immediate 14 b3 b4!, after which Black succeeded in contesting White's queenside ex- pansion in Smirnov-Kobaliya, European Ch, Ohrid 2001: 15 c4 bxc3 16 ~fcl! ii.f8 17 tt:Jxc3 !?, and Black could have just about lev- elled matters with 17 ... ii.a3 18 ~c2 'iVb6, based upon the tactic 19 tt:Ja4 tt:Jxd4!).

Black's position doesn't look so bad, but he lacks a plan. The game continued 14 ... tt:Jb6 (af- ter 14 ... ii.f8, one good line is 15 a4 a6 16 axb5 axb5 17 b3 with the idea c4) 15 b3 (here's the point: White has queenside play and Black has nothing equivalent; compare the comments in the main game) 15 ... ii.f8 16 ~fc1 'iWd7 17 c4 bxc4 18 bxc4 dxc4 19 ii.xc4 ii.e7 (if 19 ... tt:Jxc4 20 ~xc4, White's rooks will dominate the c- and b-files) 20 ii.a6 tt:Jd5 21 ~abl O-O, and here the most direct course was suggested by Lukacs: 22 ~b7 'iVd8 23 ii.d3! with ongoing pressure. 13 ... ii.f8 14 tt:Je2 14 a4!? would prevent the resource in the next note. 14 . ii.e7 This was Black's opportunity to exploit the slight weakening caused by 13 b3: 14 ... ii.a3!, and if 15 c4, 15 ... a5!. Then it's awkward for White to expel the bishop from a3 or utilize the c-file. 15 c4! (D) Neither side can do much on the kingside. White's greater control of territory, on the other hand, gives his pieces quick access to the queen- side if the play opens up there, so he is happy to advance on that wing.

15 . tt:Jb6 Black wants to lure White's pawns forward immediately and close the queenside. His alter- natives illustrate just how important space can be; in spite of the many strong players who have defended the variation beginning with ll...h4, it's possible that Black's position is simply lost: a) Grishchuk-Kalantarian, Anibal Open, Li- nares 1999 saw a straightforward execution of White's strategy: 15 ... 'iVa5 16 a3 ~f8 17 ~fc1 <t,;g7 18 ~h2 a6 19 ~c2 b5 20 c5 'iVc7 21 a4 l:ihb8 22 b4 bxa4 23 ~xa4 ~a7 24 ~ca2 ':ba8 25 ii.xa6 tt:Jb8 26 b5 cxb5 27 ii.xb5 and White emerged a pawn up. b) 15 ... ~f8 is perhaps the most logical move, scurrying over to connect rooks, but it hasn't done much better than the alternatives. One smooth example went 16 ~fc 1 ~g7 17 a3 tt:Jb6 18 ~h2 a5 19 c5 tt:Jd7 20 b4 axb4 21 axb4 b5! 22 ii.c2 'fIic7 (there is only one file open now, so Black hurries to make sure that White doesn't control it) 23 'iVc3 'iVb7 24 tt:Jgl! (Black's ad- vanced h-pawn is weak, which means that he cannot defend both sides of the board) 24 ... ~xal 25 ':xal ~a8?! 26 ~a3 ~a6 27 tt:Jf3 'iVa8 28 l:i.xa6! 'iVxa6 29 ii.xf5 exf5 30 'iVel and White captures on h4, Ehlvest-Negulescu, Erevan

1988. The h4-pawn is one reason that Black

MODERN KINGSlDE FIANCHETTO 73

finds it so hard to contest White on the queen- side in this line. 16l:!fc1 16 cS is also perfectly fine, since White's b4-bS can't be stopped without allowing some other type of activity. 16 . .'~f8 17 c5! ttJd7 18 b4 a6 19 a4 Black can't really stop this stereotyped at- tack. 19 ... ~g7 20 ~h2 'fic7 21 ttJgl!? This knight is intended to come to f3 and at- tack the h-pawn. That's a good plan, although it's probably even easier to play 21 ttJc3!, in- tending bS. 21  b6 22 'fie2 bxc5 After 22 ... bS, 23 l:!a3 and 1:i.ca1, perhaps even with 'fia2, will penetrate on the queenside. 23 bxc5 a5 24 l:!abl f6!? 25 ttJf3 fxe5 26 fxe5 .l::.ab8 27l:!xb8 I:txb8 (D) 27 ... 'fixb8 28 I:tb1 'fic7 29 'fie1 threatens ..ItxfS and capture on h4, but 29 ... 'ilVd8 permits 30 l:tb7 with devastating effect. w

28..1txf5

Now material losses are inevitable. 28 . exf5 29 ..Itxh4 ..Itxh4 30 ttJxh4 ttJf6 30 ... 1:i.b4 31 'fif2! threatens 'fi g3. After this White has various faster wins, but he keeps a grip on the position and wins nicely: 31 'fiel ttJe4 32l:!bl :'xb133 'fixbl 'fie7 34 ttJf3 g5 35 g3 'fif7 36 'fib8 g4 37 e6! 'fixe6 38 'ilVc7+ 'fif7 39 'fixf7+ ~xf7 40 ttJe5+ 'it>e6 41 ttJxc6 ttJc3 42 h4 ttJxa4 43 ttJxa5 ttJc3 44 ttJc6 ttJe2 45 'it'g2 ~d7 46 ~f2 ttJc3 47 ttJe5+ ~e6

48 c6 ttJb5 49 ~e3 ~f6 50 ttJd3 ~e7 51 ttJe5

~f6 52 ~d3 ~e6 53 h5 ~f6 54 h6 ttJc7 55 'it'c3 ttJe6 56 ~b4 1-0 This variation has had a fascinating history. Nevertheless, the main line is a wonderful illus- tration of the advantages of controlling more space. Black should look into playing 9 ... 'iYb6 or one of his 11th-move alternatives; as so of- ten happens when one player has two knights against two bishops, he can't wait by, but must undertake something dynamic. Adams - Bologan Bundesliga 1998/9

[diagram]
The remarkable 3 ... dS!?, intending 4 ttJxdS c6 S ttJe3 'fixd4 or 4 exdS ttJf6 (with the idea S ..Itc4 ttJbd7 and ... ttJb6) is a speculative idea which has received recent attention. It is proba- bly in White's favour, but remains playable. You can research this in books and databases. 4ttJf3 White plays the natural developing move, aiming at the centre. Of course, there are many alternatives such as 4 i.e3 and 4 ..ItgS, and 4 h4 is certainly possible. But the popular 4 ..Itc4 (D) leads to particularly interesting play.

That directly discourages ... dS, and it puts a priority on quick development, sometimes hav- ing in mind a direct attack. The play is complex, generally going in one of two main directions: a) Black should avoid overextending by 4 ... b5?! 5 i.b3 b4 6 ttJce2 ttJf6?! 7 e5 ttJd5 8 a3! bxa3 9 ':'xa3 O-O, as in Georgadze-Radev, Tbilisi 1971, when White can claim much the better game following 10 ttJf3 d6 11 ttJf4!. b) 4 ... d5 (this is the way to go if Black wants to insist upon the ... b5 break) S exd5 b5 6 i.b3

74 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

b4 7 lDce2 (or 7 lDa4, eyeing c5 and preparing a3) 7 ... cxd5 (D). w Black has played this way many times with passable results. He gives himself extra operat- ing room on the queenside and hopes to de- velop rapidly there ( ... a5 and ... .iLa6 is a natural follow-up). Nevertheless, his queenside struc- ture is a little airy: squares such as a4, a5, c5 and c6 will permanently lack pawn protection. Therefore, White should maintain some edge by gaining access to them; for example, 8.iLd2!? (the similar 8 a3 bxa3 9 I;1xa3 gives White posi- tional pressure against the queenside with max- imum flexibility) 8 ... a5 9 a3 bxa3 10 lIxa3 lDc6 11 lDf3 lDf6?! (ll...e6! anticipates 12 .iLa4 lDge7, when White might want to reposi- tion via 13 .iLb4!? i.d7 14.iLc5) 12 .iLa4 .iLd7 13 'iWal 'iVb6 14 1:.b3 'iWa7 15 .iLxc6 .iLxc6 16 lDe5 'ilVa6, Schrnittdiel-Vogt, Austrian Team Ch 1999. Here White could safely play 17 ~xa5! 'ilVxa5 18 .iLxa5 with the idea 18 .. Jha5?? 191Ib8#. c) Black's most common reply is 4 ... d6 (reaching the same position as after 3 ... d6 4 .iLc4 c6). Then White's favourite independent move is the primitive 5 'ilVf3!?, in order to in- duce 5 ... e6 and create dark-square weaknesses on d6 and f6 (5 ... lDf6?! 6 e5 doesn't work out well). Then one main line goes 6 lDge2 lDd7 7 O-O lDgf6 8 .iLb3 0-09 .iLg5 (D). This curious position typifies many variations of the Modem Defence. Black has a backward pawn-structure and passively-placed pieces, but his position remains elastic and he is pre- pared to react dynamically to advances by his opponent, much as in the Hedgehog Variation of the English Opening and certain Sicilian

Defences. With that in mind, let's examine a couple of strategies: c1) Elsewhere in this book we've seen the kind of pawn-structure arising from 9 .. :~e7 10 .l:tadl h6 11 .iLh4 e5; for example, in the King's Indian Defence, Philidor Defence, and espe- cially the Pirc Defence. Nunn-Fauland, Vienna 1991 continued 12 ~e3 (White's pieces have good scope and he intends to break down the e5 strongpoint) 12 ... .l:te8!? (12 ... g5 13 .iLg3 lDh5 keeps lines closed and is at any rate safer) 13 f4! exd4 (initiating exchanges that leave White with the more active pieces; 13 ... exf4 14 lDxf4 '1t>h8 15 lDfe2 may improve, but throws Black on the defensive) 14 ~xd4 lDxe4 15 .iLxe7 .iLxd4+ 16 I;1xd4 lDxc3 17 lDxc3 .l:txe7 18 .l:txd6 lDf8 (in Nunn-Ehlvest, Skelleftea 1989, Black played 18 ... '1t>g7?!, when 19 f5! gxf5 20 .l:txf5 created two new weaknesses in his position) 19 .l:td8 b6 20 a4! .iLb7 21 .l:td6!. White has a large advan- tage, intending f5 and, under the right circum- stances, a5. c2) 9 ... b5! is more in the modem spirit: Black plays flexibly; he might want to follow up with ... b4 and ... .iLa6, or ... a5 and ... i.a6, or simply ... .iLb7. Now: c21) The forcing 10 e5!? is terribly compli- cated after 10 ... dxe5 11 'ilVxc6 .l:tb8, when a simple response to 12 lDxb5 is 12 ... .iLb7!, in- tending 13 ~c7 .iLxg2! or 13 ~c4 ~b6 with the ideas ... .iLd5 and ... .l:tfc8. So in Baramidze- Iordachescu, Dresden 2003, White played 12 dxe5 lDxe5 13 ~c5 lDfd7! 14 .iLxd8 lDxc5 15 .iLe7 lDxb3 16 axb3 .l:te8 17 .l:txa7 lDc6 18 .iLd6 lDxa7 19 .iLxb8 lDc6 20 .iLf4, and here Black's easiest course was 20 ... e5! with the idea 21 i.e3 lDd4.

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 75

c22) 10 a3 'fic7 (D) (l0. .. .ltb7 11 ':adl 'Wic7 also looks playable). w After 11 dS?! (straightforward development by 11 ':adl followed by ':fel appears best) l1...cxdS! 12 exdS .ltb7! 13l2JxbS iVcS, Black gets the pawn back with excellent activity. Rublevsky-Iordachescu, European Ch, Silivri 2003 went 14 l2Jbc3 l2JxdS IS l2JxdS .ltxdS 16 .ltxdS exdS (l6 ... l2JeS! is also good) 17 c3 l2JeS 18 'fig3 ':ab8 19 ':ab1 l2Jc4 with a nice initia- tive for Black. Instead, 14 .ltxf6l2Jxf6 ISl2Jbc3 l2JxdS 16l2JxdS .ltxdS 17 .ltxdS exdS 18 c3 l:l:ab8 19 ':abl was suggested, but then 19 ... 'fic4 20 ':fdl ':fe8 gives Black good counterplay. For example, the isolated queen's pawns can't be blockaded due to the tactic 21 l2Jd4 .ltxd4 22 ':xd4 ':xb2!. Black can fall victim to sudden attacks in these lines with 4 .ltc4 d6 S 'fif3. But some Modem Defence players like to provoke White into aggressive activity, trusting that their com- pact position can repel any rash advances. We return to the calmer 4l2Jf3 (D): 4 ... d5 5 h3 Over the years, this has become White's most popular choice. He expends a tempo, but prevents Black's plan of playing ... .ltg4 and ... .ltxf3, which is a good minor-piece trade-off in what will be a semi-closed position. After playing ... .ltxf3 and ... e6, Black is left with his good bishop and believes that his knights will be well-placed in the resulting structure. Three brief examples: a) S .lte2 .ltg4 6 eS e6 7 O-O l2Je7 8 h3 (slow) 8 ... .ltxf3 9 .ltxf3 cS (central counterattack along the lines of the French Defence makes the

knights as effective as the bishops) 10 l2JbS?! (correct in principle, but it's too time-consum- ing to try to prop up the central pawn-chain; Black has only a small edge after 10 dxcSl2Jbc6 11 .ltf4 iVaS 12 l:tel 'fixcS) 10 ... O-O 11 c3 l2Jbc6 12 l2Jd6 (White can no longer hold the centre: 12 l2Ja3 cxd4 13 cxd4 'ifb6 14 l2Jc2 l2JfS) 12 ... cxd4 13 cxd4 'iWb6 14 .lte3 and now 14 ... l2Jc8 IS l2Jxc8 l:.axc8 16 'fid2 wasn't bad for Black in Rozentalis-Blatny, Warsaw 1999, as he can break up the centre with ... f6. How- ever, he could have played the classic exchange sacrifice to destroy White's centre: 14 ... l:tad8! IS 'iid2lhd6! 16 exd6l2JfS (D). w In this position both d-pawns will fall, leav- ing Black's centre pawns unopposed and mo- bile. b) White has to be careful not to give Black a favourable French Defence in which he has exchanged off his light-squared bishop and re- tains excellent knights. For example, A.Belu- sov-Yurtaev, Seversk 1997 saw S eS .ltg4 6 h3

76 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

i.xf3 7 'R'xf3 e6 8 h4? 'iVb6 9 ttJe2 cS 10 c3 ttJc6 11 'R'd3 cxd4 12 cxd4 ttJge7 with the better game, since ... ttJfS is not easy to counter. c) White can try for a quick attack by S exdS cxdS 6 i.f4 ttJc6 (6 ... i.g4 is also playable) 7 ttJbS, but the reply 7 ... 'it>f8! forces a retreat. T.Kovarcik-Reinderman, Cappelle la Grande 1996 continued 8 ttJc7?! (White should be sat- isfied with disturbing Black's king and accept a loss of time by 8 i.e2 a6 9 ttJc3; then 9 ... i.g4

10 O-O e6 creates a threat against the d4-pawn,

when 11 ttJel i.xe2 12 ttJxe2 i.h6 is roughly equal) 8 ... eS 9 ttJxeS i.xeS 10 i.xeS ttJxeS 11 ttJxa8 ttJc6 12 i.e2 i.e6 13 O-O 'R'xa8 and Black emerged with two pieces for a rook and pawn. Even with his dark-square weaknesses, this must be equal or better for him. S  ttJf6 (D) This is Black's most direct way to challenge White's centre. In the next game we'll see S ... ttJh6. w 6eS White makes the normal choice. Black can simplify and succeed in liquidating the centre following 6 i.d3 dxe4 7 ttJxe4 ttJxe4 8 i.xe4 0-090-0 ttJd7; for example, 10 i.gS!? (10 i.e3 eS; 10 c3 cS 11 i.e3 Vic7 12 'iVe2 ttJf6 13 i.d3 b6) 1O ... h6!? (1O ... 'iVb6! 11 l:tbl eS! would carry off a safe central break) 11 i.e3 cS!? 12 dxcS (or 12 'R'd2) 12 ... 'iUc7 13 'iVe2 (13 b4?! as! 14 bS ttJxcS IS b6 'iVd6) 13 ... .u.b8!? 14 ~bS ttJf6 IS i.d3, Chandler-Christiansen, Thessaloniki Olympiad 1984, and now IS ... ttJdS provides compensation. White may be able to find a very small edge after 6 i.d3, but that isn't clear. 6 ... ttJe4 7 ttJxe4 7 i.d3 ttJxc3 8 bxc3 cS has some themes in common with the French Defence. I won't go into the theory here, but the play is rather less forcing than in the main lines and worthy of your investigation. 7 ... dxe4 8 ttJgS cS (D) Black needs to counterattack before ttJxe4 simply wins a pawn. w 9dS White plays for a positional advantage. The sharp moves 9 i.c4 and 9 e6 have also been tried here, but Black can at least hold his own after complications. 9 ... i.xeS 10 ttJxe4 ttJd7 De1chev-F.Rey, Val Thorens 1996 is often cited for its finish, but also illustrates the dan- gers of an overly passive strategy for Black: 10 ... O-O 11 c3 b6?! (better moves are ll...ttJd7 and 1l...'iVc7 with the idea ... I;!d8) 12 i.h6 .l::.e8?! 13 'iVf3 ttJd7 14 i.bS i.b7 IS O-O-O filc7 16l:thel (lovely centralization) 16 .. .Iled8 (D).

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 77

17 d6! (now some pretty tactical play follows) 17 ... ~xd6 18 'iVxf7+!! (the point) 18 ... '>itxf7 19 ~c4+ ~dS! (19 ... e6?! 20 ttJxd6+ '>itg8? 21 l:txe6 mates in a few moves) 20 ttJxd6+ ~xd6

21 J:.xdS 'iVe6? (but after 2l...'iVf6 22 ~gS '>itf8!

23 ~xf6 ttJxf6 24 l:tdeS Black has weaknesses and is quite tied down) 22 J:.xe6 '>itxe6 23l:!.d3+ ~eS 24l:te3+ '>itd6 7S J:.e6+ '>itc7 26 ~f4+ '>itb7 27 ':'xe7 '>itc6 28 a4 a6 29 ~e2! '>itb7 30 ~f3+ ~a7 31 ~xa8 '>itxa8 32 ~c7 1-0. 11 c30-0 After ll...ttJb6 12 ttJxcS 'ii'xdS 13 ~bS+ ~f8 14 ~h6+ ~g7 IS ~e3! White stands sig- nificantly better due to his superior develop- ment. 12 ~h6 (D)

... J:.e8 This is sensible, and Black also comes close to equalizing with 12 ... ~g7 13 'iVd2 (13 ~xg7 ~xg7 14 ~c4!?) 13 ... ~xh6 14 'iVxh6 'iVb6 IS O-O-O ttJf6 16 ttJxf6+ 'ii'xf6 17 ~e3 'ii'd6. 13~h5!? An active choice. White has also played 13 'iYf3 ~aS 14 ~e2, when 14 ... ttJf6 equalizes. 13 ... a6 14 ~xd7 ~xd7!? Here 14 ... 'iVxd7 looks perfectly good; for example, IS ttJxcS (IS O-O 'iVbS! followed by ... l:td8) IS ... 'iVbS 16 'iVa4! J:.d8 17 'iVxbS axbS 180-0 J:.xdS 19 J:.adl J:.xdl 20 ':'xdl ~c7 21 a3 f6 and Black's activity fully compensates for whatever slight positional edge White pos- sesses, Lagowski-Macieja, Polish Ch, Warsaw 2004. 150-0 IS ttJxcS?! ~bS makes it difficult for White to get castled; ... 'iVc7 and " .. l:.ad8 might follow. 15  :iVc7 Adams queries this move, and suggests that IS ... ~fS 16 ttJxcS ~b6 yields compensation. Then 17 ~e3! would discourage 17 ... ~xb2?! due to 18 g4. 16 l:.el :ad817 'iVf3 ~f5 18 ttJg5 (D) 18.. ~f6 The alternative defence 18 .. .f6 19 ttJe6 ~xe6 20 dxe6 c4 21 l:.adll:.xdl 22 l:txdl is unclear. Possibly Black should settle for 22 ... ~h2+ 23 '>itfl ~d6 instead of 22 ... 'iVb6 23 ~dS! ~xb2 24 ~d8!'

[diagram]
Adams mentions 19 g4 ~c8 20 .l:!e3 and 19 l:.e3 with the idea :ael. Compare the game. 19  c4 20 l:tael 'iVd7?! (D) Not 20 ... ~d3?? 21 'iVxf6!, but 20 ... l:.d6 could be tried. 21 g4?! This forces Black's bishop to a good square. White could instead play 21 ttJe4!.

78 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

21  i..d3 22 .tIe3 i..xgS?! Now Black will have trouble on the dark squares. He could challenge White to make progress after 22 ... bS. But not 22 ... Vi'xdS?? be- cause of 23 Vi'xf6!. 23 i..xgS f6? Adams gives 23 .. :~xdS 24 Vi'f4!, with an at- tack based upon capturing on e7. 24 i..h6?! 24 d6! is stronger: 24. . :iixd6 2S i..xf6 .l:i.f8 26 .tIe6!, etc. 24  .'itf7 2S .tIeS! <itg8? The final mistake. 2S ... aS with the idea ... bS would protect Black's queenside. 26 .tIe6! Vi'xdS 27 'iVxdS .l:IxdS 28 l:!.xe7 .tIxe7 29 .l:txe7 .tIaS 30 Itg7+ <itf8 31 .tIxg6+ <ite7 32 .tIg7+ <ite6 33 l:!.xb7 l::txa2 34 l:!.b6+ <itf7 3S i..e3l:!.aS 36 <ith2 hS? 37 i..d4 fS 38 gS .l:i.bS 39 g6+ <itg8 40 l:!.xa6 .tIb8 41 <itg3 1-0 Golubev - B. Schneider Belgian Team Ch 200213

[diagram]
liJh6 (D) w This remarkable knight development is one of Black's favourite methods of working against White's structure. The point isn't immediately clear, since the follow-up ... dxe4 and ... liJfS won't normally have much impact if White de- fends his centre by c3. Instead, Black's main idea is an outrageous reorganization by ... f6 and ... liJf7! That looks like a misprint: after all, by playing in this manner Black is using valu- able tempi to block off his own bishop on g7, place a knight on the superficially uninspiring square f7, and weaken the e6-square! Never- theless, we have to remember that chess is a matter of specifics and timing. It turns out that Black's cluster of pieces on the kingside serves not only the purpose of preventing the advance eS by White, but of preparing ... eS for himself. For his part, White is happy to accept the gift of so much time, and will try to show that his op- ponent's strategy is too slow. 6 i..f4 A good, straightforward developing move. Black plays similarly versus 6 i..d3: 6 .. .f6 7 O-O 0-08 .tIel (8 i..f4liJf7 9 exdS cxdS 10 .tIelliJc6 with ... eS next is exactly what Black wants, but 8 'iVe2liJf7 9l:!.dl is a natural alternative set-up for White) 8 ... liJf7 9 b3 (D) (9 eS fxeS 10 dxeS and now 1O ... e6 intends ... cS and ... liJc6, or in some cases simply ... liJd7 and .. :fic7; 1O ... .Be6 is another way to prepare ... cS, when 11 liJd4 i..c8 doesn't leave White anything much better than l2liJf3, repeating the position).

With 9 b3, White dares Black to make use of his eccentric set-up. He has various ways to do so, none completely clear: a) It's not obvious how White answers 9 ... eS. One critical line would be 10 exdS cxdS 11 i..a3 e4! 12 i..xf8 (12liJxdS exd3 13 i..xf8 i..xf8 14 c4 is also obscure; the knight on dS may be more important than preserving a bishop) 12 ... i..xf8 13liJxe4 dxe4 14 i..xe4liJc6, and I suspect that Black's two pieces are the equal of White's rook and two pawns. b) 9 ... a6 (here Black plays a flexible move in the spirit of the Modern Defence: he covers bS in preparation for ... eS, and may be contem- plating ... bS) 10 i..b2 eS!? 11 dxeS (White can

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHE1TO 79

get the same material imbalance as in the previ- ous note with 11 exdS cxdS 12liJxdS!? 'ikxdS 13 i.c4 'ikd7! 14 dxeS fxeS 15 liJgS 'ike7 16 .txf7+ .l:.xf7 17liJxf7 'ikxf7 18 i.xe5 i.xe5 19 .l:.xeSliJc6 20 .l:.e3 ..tfS 21 c3, which is equally unclear) 11.. .fxeS and now 12 liJa4?! was tried in Zamicki-Reinaldo Castineira, Internet Chess Club 2003, targeting eS. A simple move such as 12 "fid2 is probably better, because Black could have forced White to prove his point by 12 ... b5! 13 liJcs 'ikd6 14 b4 liJd7, when he appears to have no problems. c) Hracek-Van Mil, Hamburg 2002 saw typ- ical piece deployment for both sides: 9 ... .l:.e8 10 i.b2 a6 11 i.f1 bS 12 'ikd2 i.b7 13 .l:.adlliJd7

14 a3 e6 (White has a classical position with

centralized development, but nothing obvious to do) IS h4 'ikc7 16 hS gxhS (or 16 ... gS) 17 liJh4 dxe4!? (17 ... liJh6!?) 18liJxe4 fS 19liJg3, and here 19 ... liJf6 would have kept things level; for example, 20 i.e2 .l:.ad8 21 i.xhS cS. 6 ... f6 (D) Black proceeds with the idea of .. .f6 and ... liJf7, followed by ... eS if allowed. Continuing 6 ... dxe4 7liJxe4liJfS 8 c3 0-09 "iVd2 surrenders the centre to no apparent purpose. w 7 exd5! The flexible strategy 7 i.e2liJf7 8 i.h2 O-O

9 O-O was tried in Topalov-Shirov, Linares

1994. Black held his own by playing solid, non-

descript moves: 9 ... b6 10 llel i.b7 11 i.f1 liJd7 12 a4 a6 13 a5 b5 14 exd5 cxd5 15 lle6!? !rc8. Now Shirov suggests l6liJe2'!', although l6 ... 'ike8 with the idea ... liJd8 yields dynamic chances (17 liJf4liJgS f). 7  cxd5 8liJb5! (D) White goes for the throat. Black looks rela- tively safe following 8 i.xb8!? .l:lxb8 9 i.bS+ cJ;;f7 (9 ... i.d7 10 ~e2) 10 'ike2 e6, as in Bar- lov-Gaprindashvili, Palma de Mallorca 1989 .

8  O-O!?

This pseudo-sacrifice is logical. 8 ... liJa6 al- lows 9 c4 with real pressure. Then 9 ... O-O can be answered variously; for example, 10 liJc3! is a particularly straightforward choice, intending to meet 1O ... e6 with 11 "fib3. In Gallagher- Efimov, European Team Ch, Pula 1997, White played 10 cxdS 'iYxdS 11 !leI, when ll...liJf7 12 i.c4 ~fS looks best. 9liJc7?! After some forced moves this comes to little. White should play 9 c4! (D).

Then Black seems to have his work cut out for him; for example, 9 ... liJc6 (9 ... a6 10 liJc7 eS may be best, although 11 ttJxa8 exf4 12 c5! gives White's knight access to b6 and leaves him with a lead in material; after 9 ... i.d7?!, 10 'ikb3!

80 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

creates significant problems, since 1O ... dxc4 11 'ili'xc4+ followed by 12 CiJc7 will win some- thing) 10 cxdS 'iWxdS 11 CiJc7!? (or 11 'iWd2! with the idea ll...gS 12 CiJc7; a little better is Il...CiJf7 12 CiJc7 ~e4+ 13 i.e3, but Black should sacrifice an exchange by 13 ... i.fS, since 13 ... l:tb8?? 14 i.d3 traps his queen!) 11..:iVaS+ 12 ~d2 ~xd2+ 13 i.xd2 l:tb8 14 dS (or 14l:tel CiJfS IS i.c4+ 'iith8 16 dS) 14 ... CiJeS IS CiJxeS fxeS 16 l:tel and White has only a modest ad- vantage, Chebotarev-Novitsky, St Petersburg 200S. Overall, however, Black needs some- thing better versus 9 c4!. 9 ... eS 10 i.xh6 After 10 CiJxa8? exf4, the knight won't es- cape from a8. 10  i.xh6!? There seems nothing wrong with 1O .. :tWxc7!. The critical line is 11 i.xg7 'iitxg7 12 dxeS 'iWaS+ 13 c3 fxeS 14 CiJxeS l:te8 IS f4 CiJc6 16 i.e2 'tWcS (or 16 ... i.fS) 17 'tWd2 CiJxeS 18 fxeS l:txeS with balanced play, since 19 O-O-O can be met by 19 ... d4!.

11 CiJxa8 e4 12 CiJd2 CiJc6 13 i.e2

Over the next few moves both sides have rea- sonable alternatives. 13 ... i.e614 O-O (D)

14  :iVxa8 Golubev gives 14 ... CiJxd4 IS CiJb3; still, after IS ... CiJxe2+ 16 'i'xe2 ~xa8 (16 ... iH7!?) 17 CiJcs i.c8 Black has the bishop-pair and some nice centre pawns to play with. IS c4!? White is trying to disturb Black's harmoni- ous regrouping, but it's at the cost of weakening his pawns. IS  l:td8 16 cxdS i.xdS 17 i.c4 i.xc4 18 CiJxc4 At this point, Black played 18 ... bS!? 19 CiJe3 CiJxd4 20 'iWg4, with an unclear position. His easier course would have been 18 ... CiJxd4! 19 'iWg4 fS 20 'iWh4 i.g7 with excellent play. Black's set-up with ... CiJh6, .. .f6 and ... CiJf7 is ingenious. Nevertheless, White's alternative of

9 c4 in the main game shows that anyone who

wishes to play such slow moves needs to be very well-prepared. Classical Set-Up Geller - Hort Linares 1983

[diagram]
White adopts the classical development of his knights, as we saw in Volume 1 versus the Pirc Defence. He is satisfied with the 'ideal' two-pawn centre and follows the textbook ad- vice of bringing knights into play before bish- ops. Variations with 4 i.gS are by no means harmless, but less frequently seen.

[diagram]
I'll concentrate upon this modem continua- tion. Alternatively, 4 ... CiJf6 returns to the Pirc Defence, and 4 ... c6, Black's other main option, usually intends queenside expansion by ... bS, but may also revert to a Pirc Defence if White plays slowly and Black chooses ... CiJf6 at some point. S i.e2 bS 6 O-O (D)

[diagram]
MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 81

By moving his knight first, Black supports ... c5 and perhaps ... e5, while keeping his bishop on the c8-h3 diagonal for a move, in case e5- e6 becomes bothersome. Nevertheless, 6 ... tLld7 has its own drawbacks, and we need to under- stand the implications of various move-orders. At this junction there are two natural alterna- tives: a) Black is behind in development in these ... a6/ ... b5 lines, and so both sides should be on the lookout for direct attacks. For example, an extremely important attacking theme arises in the variation 6 ... tLlf6? 7 e5! tLlfd7 (7 ... dxe5 8 tLlxe5 .ltb7 9 .ltf3!) 8 tLlg5! (or 8 e6!, since 8 .. .fxe6 9 tLlg5 attacks e6 and prepares moves such as .ltg4/f3 and .l:.el, and the common de- fensive idea 9 ... tLlf8? gets hit with 10 .ltxb5+! intending 1O ... axb5 11 'ili'f3) 8 ... dxe5 9 dxe5 and now 9 ... e6 (to prevent 10 e6) is strongly met by 10 .ltxb5!, again with the idea 1O ... axb5 11 'ili'f3. If Black instead plays 9 ... tLlxe5, he comes out on the short end of the long forced sequence 10 'ili'xd8+ ~xd8 11 f4 h6 12 fxe5 hxg5 13 .l:.xf7 .ltxe5 14 .ltxg5; for example, 14 ... tLlc6 15 .ltf3 .ltxh2+ 16 ~f2 .ltb7 17 .l:i.el .ltd6 18 .ltxc6 .ltxc6 19 .ltxe7+. b) The obvious alternative is 6 ... .ltb7, when 7 .i:!.el tLld7 transposes to the game. In order to counter this move-order, White might try 7 a4. This leads to very complicated play, with White striving for a small advantage; for example, 7 ... b4 8 tLla2 a5 (perhaps 8 ... .ltxe4 9 tLlg5 .ltb7 10 .ltf3 'ili'c8 should be played) 9 e5!? tLlh6!? 10 c3 bxc3 11 tLlxc3 O-O 12 'ili'b3. Some of these choices come down to a matter of personal style. For example, even 7 e5!? has been tried, hoping for an effective 8 e6 or 8 tLlg5. Then 7 ... tLlh6 and 7 ... e6 are solid answers, but the whole game lies ahead. We now return to 6 ... tLld7 (D):

7.tIel

Hillarp Persson asserts that White can claim superiority by 7 d5 .ltb7 (Black's game after 7 ... e6 8 tLld4! 'ili'f6 9 .lte3 tLle7 has an awkward look to it; White might play 10 dxe6 fxe6 11 f4 with ideas of e5 next, when Black is on the de- fensive) 8 tLld4 tLlgf6 9 a3, when he rightly points out that Black has trouble attacking the d5-pawn. But it's still a game, and Black can prepare a pawn-break; for example, 9 ... O-O 10 i.e3 tLlb8 (or 1O ... .l:.e8 or 10 ... 'iIi'e8, both with w the idea ... e6) 11 ~d2!? (11 .ltf3 'i!i'c8 12 .tIel c6) 11...c6 12 dxc6 tLlxc6 with what appears to be quite an acceptable Sicilian position for Black. 7 .. .lth7 Black can head for the Sicilian Defence structure straightaway by 7 ... c5 8 .ltfl cxd4 9 tLlxd4 .ltb7 (after 9 ... tLlgf6 10 a4! bxa4!? 11 .u.xa4 tLlc5 12 1:!.c4 White threatens e5; this seems slightly awkward for Black in spite of White's exposed rook). White's most promis- ing positional path is 10 a4 b4 11 tLld5 (D).

Following l1...tLlgf6 12 tLlxb4 'iVb6 13 c3, it appears that White has a substantial advantage: a) 13 ... tLlxe4 14 a5 'ili'c7 15 tLlxa6! .ltxa6 16 .l:.xe4 d5 17 1:!.e3 and White is a good pawn ahead, Kristensen-Welling, Copenhagen 1995. b) 13 ... .ltxe4 14 a5 'ili'b7 15 f3 .ltd5 16 'ili'a4 'it>f8 17 c4 tLlc5 Ih-1f2 Rublevsky-Sakaev, FIDE World Cup, Khanty-Mansiisk 2005. However, White stands much betterfollowing 18 'ili'a3!. We now return to 7 ... .ltb7 (D):

82 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w The position after 7 ... .1Lb7 has been the start- ing point for a good many Modem Defence bat- tles. It embodies the fight between classical and hypermodern development. S.1Lfl White moves his bishop out of the way, both protecting the e4-pawn and strengthening its potential advance to e5. In the next game we'll look at 8 .1Lg5. S. c5 Black begins his attack on d4. This com- pletes the plan laid out by 4 ... a6. 9a4 In the Classical Variation, this pawn advance is White's default strategy. White lures Black's b-pawn forward and then attacks it, opening lines for his own benefit. 9  b4 9 ... cxd4 10 ttJxd4 b4 transposes into the note above on 7 ... c5; 9 ... bxa4?! 10 l:txa4 not only re- duces the pressure on White's centre (via ... b4), but creates weaknesses on Black's queenside, notably on a5 and a6. 10 ttJd5 ttJgf6 (D) Black can't just toss out moves in this sys- tem; for example, 1O ... e6? 11 .1Lf4! was already practically decisive in the game Honfi-Vadasz, Kecskemet 1975, based upon 11...exd5? 12 exd5+ ttJe7 13 .1Lxd6 .1Lf6 14 .1Lxe7 .1Lxe7 15 d6, winning. 11 ttJxf6+ Or: a) 11 dxc5 ttJxc5 resembles a Sicilian De- fence. Then the aggressive 12 .1Lg5 is well-met by 12 ... O-O! with the idea 13 .1Lxf6 exf6 intend- ing ... l:te8 and/or ... f5, when 14 ttJxb4 ttJxe4 fa- vours Black. w b) After 11 .1Lg5 cxd4 12 ttJxd4, 12 ... h6! 13 .1Lh4 O-O 14 ttJxb4 ne8! threatens to regain the pawn on e4, which is surprisingly hard to de- fend. In response to a slow move, ... g5 or ... ttJc5 is good, so a plausible line is 15 .1Lxf6 ttJxf6 16 .1Ld3 a5 17 ttJa2 "iib6 18 c3 nab8! 19 "iie2 e5! 20 ttJb5 d5 21 exd5 e4 22 .1Lc4 ttJxd5 23 .1Lxd5 .1Lxd5 with the bishop-pair and activity in re- turn for the pawn. 11  ttJxf6 11 ... .1Lxf6 seems playable as well, since the critical 12 .1Lh6 is unclear after 12 ... cxd4 13 ttJxd4 ~b6 14 c3 nc8. 12d5 White tries to shut out the b7-bishop and win space at the same time; the drawback is that Black's dark-squared bishop becomes all the more powerful. 12 O-O 13 .1Lc4 White would like to play 13 a5, but then 13 ... e6! breaks up the centre with active coun- terplay. 13. a5 14 \li'd3 ttJd7 15 c3 ~b6 (D) w

MODERN KINGSlDE FIANCHETTO 83

16~f4~a6 Now the play is equal, in part because nei- ther side will be able to break down the other's defences. 17 eS ~xc4 18 ~xc4 ~a6 19 ~e4 bxc3 20 14 ~g3 f6? 15liJh4 ~f7 16 ~d3 f5 17liJxg6!

bxc3 c4 B Black would love to play ... liJc5-d3. 21 ~e3! ~b6 But now 2l...liJc5 22 exd6 exd6 23 ~h6 liJd3 24 ~xg7 ~xg7 25 ~d4+ only loosens Black's king position. 22 ~e2 ~a6 23 ~e3 ~b6 Ih-1fz Khalifman - V. Popov St Petersburg Ch 1997 I d4 g6 2 e4 ~g7 3liJf3 d6 4liJc3 a6 5 ~e2 bS 6 O-O ~b7 7 ~elliJd7 8 ~gS (D)

White frequently places his bishop on this active square, from which point it pins the en- emy e-pawn, participates in direct attacks, and stays out of the way of White's e-file play (as opposed to 7 ~e3 or 8 ~e3, for example). From Black's perspective, the bishop doesn't defend against ... c5, and it can become isolated from the central squares if driven back to h4 by the move ... h6.

8. .. cS

In the Modem Defence, Black always has to have a healthy respect for primitive-looking assaults; for example, 8 ... h6 9 ~h4 liJb6!? 10 a3 c5 (it's safer to attend to development by 1O ... liJf6 or 1O ... g5 11 ~g3liJf6) 11 e5!? cxd4 12 'iVxd4 dxe5 13 ~e3! ~c7?! (Black should play 13 ... liJf6! 14 liJxe5 and now 14 ... liJbd5!, defending nicely - but not 14 ... O-O?f 15 i..(3) 17 ... ~d7 (allowing a cute finish; 17 ... ~xg6 is also losing after 18 ~h5+! ~f6 19 ~xe5+) 18 ~h5 ~xd3 19 liJf4+! 1-0 Griinfeld-Soltis, Lone Pine 1979. It's mate in two.

9 a4 h610 ~h4 (D)

Hillarp Persson analyses 10 ~e3 b4 11liJd5 liJgf6 12 liJxf6+ (12 ~c4!?) 12 ... liJxf6 13 e5 liJd5 14 e6 O-O and claims an edge for Black; at any rate, he'll have very active pieces.

10 ... cxd4 Movsesian likes 1O ... b4 llliJd5! g5 12 ~g3 for White on the basis of 12 ... e6 13 ~xd6!, but 12 ... liJgf6! solves Black's main problems; for example, 13 dxc5liJxc5 14liJxf6+ ~xf6 15 e5 dxe5 16 ~xe5 O-O! 17 ~xf6 ~xd1 18 ~exdl exf6 19 liJd4 ~fe8 with active pieces and the idea ... ~e5. So perhaps 10 ... b4 maintains a bal- ance. 114Jxd4

84 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Browne-Benko, Las Vegas 1975 saw the im- mediate IllLldS, which is also not easy to meet: ll...bxa4 (played reluctantly; ll...gS?! is unde- sirable because of 12 .Bg3 lLlgf6 13 lLlxd4! with the idea 13 ... lLlxe4 14 lLlfS) 12 lLlxd4 lLlgf6 13.iO!? (13 ':'xa4!) 13 ... lLlcs (13 ... eS !?) 14 lLlxf6+ .Bxf6 IS .Bxf6 exf6 16 1ld2 ~f8 with level chances. 1l. . :iVb6 12lLlb3 .Bxc3?! Probably not the best idea. 12 ... b4!? seems playable. 13 bxc3 (D) 13 .. lLlgf6 We've seen this trade-off frequently through- out this book: White's c-pawns are exposed along the half-open c-file and Black has poten- tial dark-square weaknesses because of the ex- change of his bishop on c3. In this case, he has the additional problem of a target on bS. 14 axb5 14 .Bxf6 lLlxf6 IS axbS axbS 16 'i!Vd4!? is also promising. White goes after the b-pawn and invites the lengthy forcing sequence 16 ... 'i!Vxd4 17 cxd4 lLlxe4 18 lLlaS! .Ba6 19 lLlc6! (hitting bS) 19 ... ~d7 20 lLlb4 .Bb7 21 .ixbS+ ~c7 22 lha8l:txa8 23 f3 ~b6! 24 .Bc4 J:ta4! 2SlLldS+ .ixdS 26 .ixdS lLlc3 27 .Bxf7 ':xd4 28 ':'xe7 ':'dl + 29 ~f2 .tId2+ 30 ~f1 gS 31 .Bb3 and Black has a difficult task ahead. It's not clear how he can deviate from all this. 14 axb5 15 ':'xaS+ .ixaSl6lLld4 .Bxe4 White seems to have the better of it regard- less; for example, l6 ... gS 17 .i.g3 lLlxe4 18 .ixbS ~d8 (18 ... lLlxc3?? 19 'iVai!) 19 'iVaI .Bb7 20 ':'bl fIlc7 21 .i.a6!. Perhaps l6 ... b4 should be tried, but White wins a pawn by 17 .ibS!? 0-018 cxb4 eS 19 .Bxd7lLlxd7 20 lLlf3, counting upon 20 ... gS 2llLlxgS! hxgS 22 i.xgS with three pawns and an attack for his piece. 17 .Bxb5 g5 IS .Bg3 e5 19 f3 .Bg6 20 .Bf2 1lc7 21 .in ~e7 Movsesian mentions the ending 21...O-O 22 lLlbS 1lc6 23 1lxd6 'ilVxd6 24lLlxd6 .Bxc2, but then White has 2S c4 with a powerful passed pawn. 22 flid2 White is probably winning now, even if his execution isn't perfect: 22  .l:IbS 23lLlb5 1lc6 24 c4lLleS 25 h4! f6 26 .i.d3 .Bxd3 27 1lxd3 gxh4?? 2slLld4 'ilVa4 29 1lh7+ ~dS 30 lLle6+ ~cS 31'ilVe7 c;t>b7 32 I:tbl + ~aS 33 1lxeS! 1-0 Other White Formations Lines with 4 .i.e3 are popular versus both the Pirc Defence and Modem Defence, often plan- ning 1ld2 with some combination of f3, i.h6 and h4-hS. In the case of the Modem Defence, however, it's worth mentioning that if Black de- lays ... lLlf6, the move .Bh6 won't be possible. The following game again illustrates Black's modem strategy of ... a6 and ... bS: Xie Jun - M. Gurevich Haarlem 1997

1 e4 d6 2 d4 g6 3lLlc3 .Bg7 4 .Be3 a6 (D)

5 'i!Vd2 Pursuing the above-mentioned plan. Other moves:

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 85

a) The insertion of 5 a4 b6 favours Black be- cause White will be less disposed to play O-O-O, while an attack by e5 isn't so dangerous with White's bishop on e3. b) White can also play for the big centre by 5 f4, when the game Ramesh-Hillarp Persson, Amsterdam 2000 continued 5 ... b5 6 tiJf3 i..b7 7 i.d3 tiJd7 8 'ii'e2!? (8 O-O) 8 ... c5 (Hillarp Persson suggests 8 ... b4!? 9 tiJdl tiJgf6) 9 dxc5 tiJxc5 10 i..xc5 i..xc3+ (l0. .. dxc5 11 e5 ~b6 12 i..e4!) 11 bxc3 dxc5 12 e5 tiJh6 13 O-O 'iWb6 with unclear play which looks satisfactory for Black.

... bS 6 f3

[diagram]
is another common approach. 6 ... tiJd7 7 h4 Direct, and sort of a main line. Obviously there are legitimate alternatives, such as 7 O-O-O i..b7 8 h4 h5 9 tiJh3, when Speelman suggests 9 ... l:tc8 with the direct idea ... c5, reinforcing both Black's attack on the queenside and his pressure along the a1-h8 diagonal. 7  h6!? White's idea after 7 ... h5 is to use the g5- square (this is often the only reason for Black to avoid ... h5 versus h4): 8 tiJh3 i..b7 (8 ... c5 9 tiJg5 and now 9 ... i..b7 would transpose; instead 9 ... b4?! 10 tiJe2 was played in Cheparinov- Sakaev, Dresden 2007, when Black might try 1O ... tiJh6, but 11 dxc5! dxc5 120-O-O keeps up the pressure with the ideas tiJf4 and i..c4; you can see why Black would like to delay ... b4) 9 tiJg5 (D).

This secures the knight at the cost of some time. Black should start a counterattack: 9 ... c5 (or 9 ... nc8 10 O-O-O) 10 dxc5, Cubas-Leitao, Americana 2007, and now 1O ... tiJxc5 11 ndl tiJh6 (or 1l...nc8!?) is good enough, with a bal- anced game. Then White doesn't profit from 12 ttJxb5 axb5 13 Jixc5 O-O 14 Jid4 i..xd4 15 'iYxd4 nxa2.

8 g4 hS! 9 gS

9 gxh5 ':xh5 has the idea of ... e5 and per- haps ... i..f6, attacking the weak pawn on h4. 9 . e610 tiJge2 tiJe7 (D) Black is cramped, but White's pieces aren't particularly well placed for attack. 11 tiJg3 dS 12 tiJce2 i..b7 13 c3 'iWc8!? It's also possible to play 13 ... c5 directly. 14 i..h3 cS Black is exerting pressure on both centre pawns and will begin queenside expansion. IS O-O 'iWc616 b3!? O-O 17 eS as! 18 tiJf4 b4 19 cxb4 axb4 (D) w 20 tiJfxhS?! This enterprising attack falls short.

86 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

20 . gxh5 21 tbxh5 cxd4 22 ~xd4 ~xe5! 23 ~xe5 23 l:i.ac1 is met by 23 .. Jha2!, and Black is also in charge after 23 tbf6+ tbxf6 24 ~xe5 (24 gxf6 ~xd4+ 25 'i!Vxd4 tbg6 26 h5 e5) 24 ... tbd7 25 ~b2~d6. 23 .. tbxe5 24 ~f4?! ~c3! Now everything is defended; the rest of the game is straightforward. 25 tbf6+ ~g7 26 tbh5+ ~g8 27 tbf6+ ~h8

28 g6 tbg8 29 tbxg8 tbxg6 30 ~h6+ ~xg8 31

h5 ~d4+ 32 ~g2 ~f4 0-1 Of course, White has several other ways of setting up against the Modem Defence without playing tbc3. The following games show a few of these. Bruzon - Bareev FIDE World Cup, Khanty-Mansiisk 2005

[diagram]
This is an extremely solid set-up. The play- ers can also reach the position of the main game via 3 tbf3 d6 (3 ... c5 is the Hyper-Accelerated Dragon Variation of the Sicilian Defence) 4 ~d3 (4 c3 tbf6 5 tbbd2 O-O 6 ~e2 transposes the note to 5 ~d3 below) 4 ... tbf6 5 0-00-06 c3. One of the most frequently-used non-trans- positional lines with 3 tbf3 is 3 ... d6 4 ~c4 tbf6 5 'iVe2. White has a simple idea: e5 followed by e6 and/or quick development. In many cases he clears the back rank and castles queenside. In response, Black can play 5 ... c6, to provide an anchor for his knight on d5 if White chooses to advance his e-pawn. Or, more interestingly, 5 ... 0-06 e5 tbe8 (D). w This is a strategy in the spirit of many mod- em openings: permitting White's centre to ad- vance so as to undermine and break it down. Two examples of contrasting pawn-play and piece-play on Black's part: a) 7 h3 (White tries to deny Black's c8- bishop any active squares) 7 ... c5! (taking ad- vantage of the non-developing move h3) 8 c3 tbc7!? (8 ... cxd4 9 cxd4 tbc6 10 O-O tbc7 11 tbc3!? dxe5 12 dxe5 tbd4! 13 tbxd4 ~xd4 equalizes due to 14 J:tel ~e6! 15 ~xe6 tbxe6) 9 dxc5 d5! 10 ~d3 tbe6 11 .lte3 tbd7 120-0 ~c7 (or 12 ... tbexc5) 13 c4 dxc4 (13 ... tbxe5) 14 ~xc4 tbxe5 15 tbc3 tbxf3+ 16 ~xf3 ~xc3 17 bxc3 ~d7 18 .ltxe6 and in Negi-Hillarp Persson, Malmo 2007, Black tried 18 ... fxe6!?, an interesting attempt to unbalance things, but 18 ... ~xe6 19 J:tabl b6! 20 cxb6 axb6 is also possible, a standard device that we've seen in the Griinfeld Defence and in several other open- ings. b) 7 O-O allows Black to develop piece activ- ity: 7 ... ~g4 8 J:tdl (after 8 tbbd2, the piece- play approach is 8 ... tbc6 9 ~e3 dxe5 10 dxe5 ~d7, intending ... ~f5 or ... J:td8; Black can also use his pawns by 8 ... c5!?, and if9 dxc5, Hillarp Persson suggests the typical Pirc Defence sacri- fice 9 ... tbc61O exd6 exd611 ~e3 J:tc8) 8 ... tbc6 9 ~d5! ~d7 (or Hillarp Persson's 9 ... e6 10 ~xc6 bxc6 11 tbbd2 c5) 10 tbc3 e6 11 ~b3 d5?! (l1...dxe5 12 dxe5 ~e7 looks better) 12 h3 ~xf3 13 'ili'xf3 f6 and in the game Sham- kovich-Keene, New York 1980 White missed the chance for 14 tbxd5! exd5 15 ~xd5+ ~h8

16 e6 'iVe7 17 ~xc6 bxc6 18 ~xc6 followed by

d5. 3 . d6 4 tbf3 (D)

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHEITO 87

4  lbf6 Black more often than not plays ... lbf6 to transpose to a Pirc Defence formation against the slow c3. The Pirc move-order I e4 d6 2 d4 lbf6 3 Bd3 g6 4 lbf3 Bg7 S c3 arrives at the position in the game. The move we saw so often above, 4 ... a6, doesn't make as much sense now, because ... bS can be answered by a4; then there's no knight on c3 to be attacked by ... b4. Naturally, 4 ... c6 and even 4 ... e6 are legitimate options, if rather passive ones.

[diagram]
S lbbd2 O-O 6 Be2 is another common piece placement. Black can play the normal array of moves such as 6 ... cS, 6 ... lbbd7 and 6 ... b6, or play in an analogous fashion to our main line: 6 ... lbc6 7 O-O eS 8 dxeS (8 dS lbe7 prepares to move the knight from f6 and play ... fS; by com- parison with a King's Indian Defence, White is far away from being able to effect a meaningful queenside advance) 8 ... dxeS (or 8 ... lbxeS) 9 'it'c2!? (White would like to play lbc4, attack- ing eS, perhaps followed by l:td1 and lbe3-dS; another and possibly better version of this would be 9 b4 a6 10 'it'c2) 9 ... aS 10 a4 lbhS (this is Black's standard idea: he intends to place his knight on an aggressive post on f4 and slowly increase the pressure on White's kingside) 11 l:!.e1 (11 g3 may improve) 1l...lbf4 12 in 'it'f6

13 h3 hS!? 14 'iti>h1 gS! lSlbg1 g4 with a seri-

ous attack in Hracek-Hodgson, Neu Isenburg 1992.

[diagram]
The attraction of White's formation is that the pawns on c3 and d4 blunt the influence of Black's bishop on g7. Then White can develop without having to worry over his centre. On the other hand, the formation with c3 is rather pas- sive, putting no real pressure on Black. Thus Black has plenty ofleeway in developing. There have been many games with this line over the years (as well as with White's bishop on e2 and queen's knight on d2, as in the previous note), but I'll limit myself to a popular remedy that fits the occasion: 6 ... lbc6 Although 6. .. lbbd7 planning ... eS is perfectly playable, it blocks Black's light-squared bishop and attacks nothing. By means of 6 ... lbc6, Black wants to play ... eS with direct pressure on d4, in order to force a commitment from White. Al- ternatively, Black has played 6 ... cS, planning ... lbc6 with the same end in mind. 7lbbd2 This is a natural move, yet it blocks the bishop on c1, so White sometimes waits and brings the knight to a3. To maintain flexibility, White often does that by 7 h3, because it's a move he plays in almost every line anyway, and of course it prevents ... Bg4. By looking at the lines which follow, you can see that 7 h3 usu- ally transposes. Other instructive choices: a) 7 dS gains time and prevents ... eS for the time being, but exposes the d-pawn to under- mining via ... c6 and/or ... e6 after 7 ... lbb8 (D): w al) 8 l:te1 c6, and if White plays 9 c4, then Black's g7 -bishop has regained its power on the long diagonal. a2) After the immediate 8 c4, 8 ... c6 is also fine for Black, while 8 ... Bg4!? 9 h3!? .Bxf3 10 'it'xf3lba6 11lbc3lbd7! 12 Be2lbacS 13 Bd2

88 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

as, as in Korchnoi-Sznapik, Lucerne Olympiad 1982, exploits the dark squares and White's passively-placed pieces to counteract his space deficit. a3) 8 h3 c6 9 c4 cxdS lO exdS (10 cxdS e6! 11 dxe6 ~xe6 12 lbc3 lbc6 leaves Black with an isolated pawn but he has wonderful bishops and the prospect of ... dS; Hillarp Persson con- tinues 13 ~f4 dS 14 eS lbd7 IS nel and now IS ... f6!? 16 exf6 'ilYxf6 with satisfactory play, while IS ... d4! intending 16 lbbS 'ilYb6 looks better still) lO ... lba611lbc3lbcs 12 ~c2 e6 13 ~gS exdS 14 cxdS ~d7 was equal in Sturua- YrjOlli, Komotini 1992, since IS b4lba6 16 a3 WIIc7 exposes White's modest weaknesses down the c-file. b) 7 J::tel eS 8 h3 (after 8lbbd2, 8 ... lbhS is Black's normal plan, while the game Alekseev- Hillarp Persson, European Team Ch, Kherso- nisos 2007 continued 8 ... lbd7, hitting d4; then after 9lbb3 simply 9 ... aS should give balanced play; for example, lO a4 exd4 11 cxd4lbb4 12 ~bl b6 with pressure on White's centre to fol- low) 8 ... h6 9lba3lbhS (heading for f4) lO lbc2

This has been a very popular position over the years. Now: bl) lO ... lbf4 11 ~xf4! exf4 12 b4 gives White a good jump-start, especially since the natural attack 12 ... gS is countered by 13 bS lbe7 14 eS!, grabbing a lot of territory, as in Collinson-Chabanon, Oakham 1992. b2) On the other hand, the calm lO ... ~d7 11 b4 a612 a4 'ilYe8!? (maybe 12 ... 'ii'f6 is a simpler solution) 13 lIbl lba7 neutralized the queen- side in Bakhtadze-Kiilaots, Chernnitz 1998. b3) The instructive encounter Gausel-Hillarp Persson, Sweden-Norway match, Karlstad 200S continued lO ... a6!? 11 a4 (after 11 li'd2, ll...gS is possible, since White has no indirect attack on hS) 1l...li'f6!? (Black's primitive idea is to play ... lbf4 and attack by advancing the king- side pawns; nevertheless, the queen can be- come exposed here) 12 as (12lbe3! may favour White somewhat in view of 12 ... exd4 13 lbdS ~d8 14 cxd4 with the idea 14 ... lbxd4 Islbxd4 ~xd4 16 ~xh6 :te8 17li'd2) 12 ... lbf4 13 ~f1 gS (this leaves a hole on fS; Black hopes that White won't be able to exploit it in time) 14 dS lbe7 IS lbe3 'iVg6 (now Black is ready for ei- ther ... fS or ... hS with ... g4) 16 g4!? (putting a stop to ... fS) 16 ... ~xe4! (Black decides not to wait around, and trades the queen for sufficient material) 17 lbfS ~xfS 18 .l:i.xe4 ~xe4 19 c4 c6 20 dxc6 ~xc6 21 'iVxd6?! (a little greedy; 21 h4 improves) 2l...lbeg6 22lbel .l:i.ad8 23li'a3 e4! 24 ~e3 lbeS 2S 'ilYb3 .l:i.d7 26 .l:i.dl .l:i.fd8 27 .l:r.xd7 .l:i.xd7 and Black obviously had a good deal of pressure in view of White's many weak- nesses. c) 7 lba3 (intending either lbc4 or lbc2 and keeping the diagonal open for his bishop on c 1) 7 ... eS 8lbc2 ~g4!? 9 h3 ~xf3 lO li'xf3. Here lO ... dS!? would strike back in the centre before White completes his development and consoli- dates the position to the benefit of his bishop- pair; for example, 11 ~gS! exd4 12 cxd4 dxe4 13 ~xe4 h6 14 ~xc6 bxc6 IS ~d2lbdS. Then Black has a strong knight blockading the iso- lated d-pawn, although White can still play for pressure down the c-file. 7 ... e5 8 dxe5 dxe5 9 lbc4 lbh5 10 .l:i.ellbf4

(D)

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 89

11 .Bxf4!? White gives away his good bishop to rid himself of the intrusive knight on f4 and gain the initiative in the centre. This doesn't yield anything; nor did 11 .Bf1 ii'xdl (or 1l...'iie7) l2l:txdl .Bg4 with an equal position, as played in Wagner-Kasparov, Internet blitz 1998. 11 . exf4 12 e5!? .Be6! White's idea was probably 12 ... .Bg4 13 .Be4!. 13 ~e2 ii'e7 14 .Be4!? (D) 14 ii'e4 hits the f-pawn, but l4. . J:tad8 15 l:tadl .Bh6! followed by ... .Bd5 or ... .Bf5 and ... .Bg7 leaves White's own e-pawn vulnerable.

14. . ii'c5! 15lDcd2lDxe5 16 .Bxb7 nab817

lDxe5l:txb7! 18lDb3 ii'b5 19 'iixb5?! how dangerous the bishop-pair is in spite of Black's multiple pawn weaknesses. 20 lDc6 l:tb6 21lDcd4 .Bd5

21.. .. Bxd4! 22 cxd4 I:.d8! is an excellent

alternative, because White is tied down and ... a5-a4 looms. As the old saying goes, part of the advantage of having two bishops resides in the ability to exchange one of them advanta- geously. This opportunity arises more often than the chance to exchange a knight because the bishop has a longer reach. 22 1:te7l:.c8!? 23 ':'d7 .Ba8 24 ':'dl .Bf6 25 l:td2? White can only play solidly and hope to stay within drawing range; for example, 25 f3! c5 26 lDe2 c4 27lDbd4l:.xb2 28 ':'xa7. 25 .. 'it>f8? Black has successfully used the' Steinitz Re- striction Technique' of White's knights, deny- ing them any forward squares. Now is the time to drive them away from the defence: 25 ... c5! 26 lDf3 (26 lDe2 f3 is clearly undesirable) 26 ... c4 27lDbd4.l:Icb8! 28 ':'xa7 .Bxf3 29lDxf3 nxb2, etc. 26lDc5? White holds steady after 26 f3 c5 27 lDe2. 26 ... 1Le7! (D) It's always risky to go into a two knights vs W two bishops position when the board is open and queens have been exchanged. 19 .. l:txb5 (D) w Black attacks the knight on e5 and contem- plates ... a5-a4. In the next few moves we see Now Black threatens the knight on c5, as well as 27 ... .Bd6, trapping the rook. 27 nxe7?! Desperation. Nevertheless, 27lDdb3 .Bd6 28 f3 .Bc6 29 l:t7xd6 cxd6 30 .llxd6 lIe8 isn't enough of an improvement. 27 .. /J;;xe7 28 :e2+ 'it>d6 29 b4 .Bc6 30 h4 a5 31lDxc6 ~xc6 32 a3 'it>d5 and Black went on to win.

90 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Averbakh Variation Finally, we take a brief look at 1 e4 g6 2 d4 i..g7 3 c4, which is sometimes called the Averbakh Variation (not to be confused with the Aver- bakh System in the King's Indian, which arises after 1 d4 liJf6 2 c4 g6 3 liJc3 i..g7 4 e4 d6 5 i..e2 O-O 6 i..g5). This is White's most impor- tant alternative to the lines above, and in fact, for some players 3 c4 has been a disincentive to using 1 ... g6 at all. It's a set-up that may well ap- peal to those who play 1 d4, since 1 d4 g6 2 e4 i..g7 3 c4leads to the same position, and the re- sulting pawn-structures will be familiar to most of them. In fact, the game will very often trans- pose to a King's Indian Defence (if Black plays an early ... d6 and ... liJf6) or a Benoni-related defence if Black plays ... c5 and White replies d5; then Black may continue ... d6, ... e6 and ... exd5 as in the Modem Benoni and offshoots, or ... d6 and ... e5, a structure from various lesser- used lines. In addition, Black can choose from a variety of unique, non-transpositional lines, a few of which we'll identify in the following game. 1 e4 Sashikiran - Kakageldiev Asian Team Ch, Esfahan 2005 Another way to get to our main line is 1 d4 g6 2 c4 (or 1 c4 g6 2 d4) 2 ... i..g7 3 e4. If White plays 3 liJc3 instead, 3 ... c5 4 d5 i..xc3+!? 5 bxc3 f5 is one of those eccentric variations that has been around for many years. Black tries to show that his knight-pair and White's weak- nesses are sufficient compensation for his op- ponent's bishop-pair and influence on Black's vulnerable dark squares. This line has never re- ally caught on at the top levels, but can make for creative and instructive chess if you're looking to experiment.

1...g6 2 d4 i..g7 3 c4 (D)

3 ... d6 After 3 ... c5, 4 liJf3 cxd4 5 liJxd4 liJc6 is a Maroczy Bind Sicilian Defence, and 4 d5 d6 may transpose into some form of Benoni. In the latter case, Black may not arrive at one of the more dynamic lines, however, particularly be- cause if he plays the moves ... e6 and ... exd5,

White has the option of recapturing with his e- pawn. 4 liJc3 liJc6 4 ... liJf6 directly transposes to the King's In- dian Defence. 4 ... liJd7 can go every which way; the most important reaction is 5liJf3, if only be- cause in many cases, the move liJf3 has already been played on one of the moves 1-4. Then there are some unique lines after 5 ... e5 6 i..e2 (D).

Now 6 ... liJgf6 will almost certainly trans- pose to a line ofthe Classical King's Indian De- fence. Alternatively: a) 6 ... liJh6?! might be a handy way to sup- port ... f5, but it runs into 7 h4!. It's always im- portant for Black to watch out for this move when he can't respond to it by ... h5 or ... h6 (in order to answer h5 with ... g5). There can follow 7 ... f6 (7 ... exd4 8liJxd4liJf6 9 h5 doesn't solve anything) 8 h5 (8 i..xh6 i..xh6 9 h5 is also good; White has ideas of liJh4 and i..g4) 8 ... c6

9 d5 liJf7 10 liJh4 and White has space and

pressure on the light squares.

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 91

b) 6.Jbe7 (D) has been used a lot over the years, but White has generally done well. w Black's idea is to enforce ... fS without play- ing ... ltJf6 and then having to move the knight again before being able to move the f-pawn. Al- ternatively, he can play for ... exd4 and ... ltJc6. The strategy is in itself logical enough, but without a knight on f6, White's centre isn't sub- ject to much pressure and Black's pieces are a bit cramped; for example, his queen can't use the e7-square. In addition, White gains ideas of h4-hS, whereas the useful move ..te3 (perhaps planning dxeS and cS at some point) isn't sub- ject to counterattack by ... ltJg4. Here are a few, brief, examples of the main lines: bI) 7 O-O O-O S ..te3 h6?! (S ... fS?! is risky when ltJgS is available; for example, 9 ltJgS ltJf6 10 dxeS dxeS 11 cS! 'ilVxd 1 12 ..tc4+ ~hS 13l:taxdl and White stands significantly better; the uninspiring S. .. exd4 9 ltJxd4 ltJc6 may be Black's best) 9 'ii'c2!? (not bad, but 9 dxeS! is strong regardless of how Black recaptures; for example, 9 ... dxeS 10 'ii'd2 ~h7 11 l:tadl ltJc6 12 'ii'c2) 9 .. .fS?! 10 dxeS dxeS 11 l:tadl f4 12 ..tcS l:tf7 13 ..ta3 ltJc6 (13 ... ..tf6 14 cS!) 14 cS (opening up the a2-gS diagonal) 14 ... ~hS IS ..tc4 l:tfS, Ilyin-Zemtsov, Kaluga 200S. White has space and activity, and among other moves, 16ltJdS lands Black in an utterly passive posi- tion. b2) 7 dS O-O S h4ltJf6 (S ... h6 9 hS gS 10 g4! dooms Black to suffering on the queenside, where White has a natural advantage; notice how White's pawns on dS and hS prevent a knight from getting to f4) 9 ..te3!? ltJg4 10 ~d2 hS 11 ltJgS (this is White's basic idea: the knight can't be kicked away from gS except by ... f6, after which the move ltJe6 forces ... ..txe6 and creates very serious light-square weak- nesses in Black's camp) 11...c6 12 f3 ltJf6 13 ..te3 cxdS 14 cxdS ..td7 IS 'ii'd2 a6 16 O-O-O! with the idea ~bl and l:tc1, when White con- trols the play on the queenside, Kiselev-Kant- sler, Ljubljana 1992. The theme of O-O-O, ~b 1 and l:tc1 is common in the Sfunisch Variation of the King's Indian Defence. b3) 7 h4 hS (7 ... h6 S ..te3 exploits the trade- off h4 vs ... h6, because the pawn on h6 is a tar- get) S ..tgS f6 9 ..te3 ..th6 10 ..txh6 l:Ixh6 (we've seen before that exchanging one's bad bishop by ... ..th6 or ... ..ta6, while sometimes effective, can also weaken squares of its colour and interfere with castling; in this case, the neg- atives outweigh the positives) 11 'iVd2l:thS 12

O-O-O (D).

Black has his usual deficit in territory. Prusi- khin-Burnett, Budapest 2003 continued 12 ... b6 (played to stop cS; for example, 12 ... c6 13 cS! exd4 14 'iWxd4 dxcS IS 'ilVd6!, when White has a dominant position, with ideas of ..tc4-e6, eS and in some cases 'iVg3) 13 dxeS fxeS? (after 13 ... dxeS, 14 l:th3!? ..tb7 IS l:tg3 is one good continuation) 14ltJgS ltJf6 IS f4ltJc6 16 cS!. Black's position is being tom apart, especially in view of the line 16 ... bxcS 17 ..tbS ..td7 IS ..txc6 ..txc6 19 fxeS. We now return to 4 ... ltJc6 (D):

5..te3

S dS allows S. .. ltJd4 with the idea 6 ..te3 cS, which is a complex and theoretically unclear variation. S ~e3 prevents that. 5  e5 6 d5 ltJce7

92 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Black wants to play ... f5 quickly, since his f- pawn isn't blocked by ... lbf6, as in the King's Indian Defence. But ... f5 lacks punch without a piece controlling e4, and White is able to carry out c5 much faster than in the corresponding King's Indian positions. After 6 ... lbd4 7lbge2, Black can't maintain his knight on the outpost and has to grant White a lead in space and development after 7 ... lbxe2 8 .Bxe2 (D).

8 ... f5?! (8 ... lbe7 9 c5!) 9 exf5 .Bxf5?! 10 g4 .Bd7 11 h4 'WIe7 12 'iYb3! b6 13 O-O-O lbf6 14 l:thg1 h5 15 gxh5 lbxh5 16 .Bd3!? O-O-O? (or 16 ... .Bf5 17 'iVc2!) 17 c5!! dxc5 18 d6!, Med- una-M.Konopka, Czech Ch, Lazne Bohdanec

1999. White wins in view of 18 ... cxd6 19lbd5

~e6 (19 .. :iXh4 20 lbxb6+ axb6 21 ~xb6) 20 .l:.xg6! lbf6 21 .Bc4, etc. 7 g4 The point of this move is to discourage Black's essential break ... f5. White has numer- ous alternatives here, including 7 'iVd2, 7 .Bd3, 7lbge2 and the attractive 7 f3, when 7 .. .f5 8 g4 transposes to 8 f3 below. However, the most uncompromising choice is 7 c5, with the kind of accelerated queenside attack that Black is subject to in the Modem Defence. Neverthe- less, White's own centre also comes under fire after 7 .. .f5 8 cxd6 cxd6. Then: a) 9 .Bb5+ ~f8! 10 f3 .Bh6 11 .Bxh6+ lbxh6 gives Black the better bishop and a solid game, unless White makes an early pawn-break f4; then things become extremely complex and of- ten tactical. Whatever the correct assessment, Black has held his own in practice. b) 9lbb5!? is another option for White (of many), with the idea 9 ... a6 10 'iWa4 ~f7 11 'iYa3. c) 9 'iWa4+ (D) has scored very well for White over the years. Black will soon have to move his king, but the fight continues:

c1) 9 ... ~f7?! 10 lbf3 (threatening lbg5+ followed by lbe6) 1O ... h6 11 .l:.c1lbf6 12 .Bd3 1:.f8 13 'iYb3!? fxe4 (13 ... f4 14 .Bc5! ~g8 15 .Bb4! with ideas of 'WIa3 and lbb5) 14 lbxe4 left White with better piece placement and targets in Gausel-A.Karlsson, Gausdal1997. c2) 9 ... ~f8!? 10 'iVa3! lbf6 11 f3 fxe4 12 fxe4lbg4 13 .Bg5!? (13 .Bd2 .Bh6! 140-O-O .Bxd2+ 15 .l:.xd2 lbf6 16 lbf3 ~g7 is fairly solid; then White does well to attack on the queenside) 13 ... .Bh6 (13 ... .Bf6 14 .Bd2! leaves the knight stranded on g4) 14 .Bxh6+ lbxh6 15 lbb5 (a direct attack on d6 and c7; the alterna- tive is 15 lbf3 ~g7 16 .Be2, when White can play on either side of the board) 15 ... lbf7 16 l::tcl 'WIb617lbc7 .l:.b8 18lbf3 ~g7 19 .Be2l:tf8 20 lIfl, Hellborg-Chernin, Stockholm 1997.

MODERN KINGSIDE FIANCHETTO 93

This position is quite awkward for Black in view of ideas such as tiJe6+ and tiJg5. c3) 9 ... .Bd7 has only been played in a cou- ple of low-level games, but is definitely worthy of consideration; for example, 10 tiJb5 (10 .Bb5 tiJf6 11 tiJge2 fxe4 12 .Bg5 is unclear; 10 'iVb4 tiJf6! has the idea 11 'iVxd6 tiJxe4 12 tiJxe4 fxe4 with ... tiJf5 next; this seems satisfactory for Black) 1O ... ~f8! 11 ~a3 .Bxb5 12 .Bxb5 tiJf6

13 f3 with unclear prospects.

7 ... fS (D) w 8gxfS 8 f3!? (or 7 f3 f5 8 g4) is an interesting twist. The idea is prophylactic: Black is challenged to find a way to make progress on the kingside, whereas White, after suppressing his oppo- nent's play on that wing, can eventually tum to the other. Karpov-Werk, Hockenheim (simul) 1994 went 8 ... f4?! (closing the kingside is at best a pessimistic strategy; 8 ... tiJf6 seems a better option, when there might follow 9 g5!? tiJh5 10 'ii'b3 O-O 11 O-O-O with the eventual idea of c5, ~bl and ncl) 9 .Bf2 tiJf6 10 h4! (claiming more space before turning to the queenside) 1O ... h6 11 b4!? (11 'ii'c2 a5 120-O-O b6 13 ~blleaves Black short of options, and 11 c5 is also good) ll...b6 12 a3 0-013 .Bd3 tiJd7 14 tiJge2 a5 15 ~d2!? .Bb7 16 'ii'b3 'ii'b8 17 nhbl. White has plenty of time to expand and break through on the queenside. 8  gxfS 9 'ii'hS+ tiJg6! 9 ... ~f8 10 .Bh3 tiJf6 11 'ii'f3 is positionally undesirable for Black. 10 exfS 'ii'h4 11 ~f3! Many games have shown that 11 'iWxh4 tiJxh4 is satisfactory for Black. 11  tiJ6e712 tiJbS ~d8 (D) w 13 'iVg2! White has tried several moves here, but this one stands out. 13 .. .Bh6 14 tiJf3 'iVf6 IS J::!.gl!? 15 tiJg5! is a strong alternative: 15 ... tiJxf5 16 h4 tiJge7 17 .Bd3 .Bd7 180-O-O gives White the safer king and greater control of the board, Acevedo Villalba-Bjazevi6, ICCF email 2007. IS .. .ixfS?! 15 ... tiJxf5! is more natural; perhaps White stands a bit better after 16 .Bg5 .Bxg5 17 'ilVxg5, but this looks quite manageable. 16 tiJgS ~d717 O-O-O IU8? 17 ... a6 is best, although White stands well after either 18 tiJc3 or 18 tiJa3 with the idea c5 and tiJc4. 18 cS! .ixgS 19 .ixgS 'iVg6 20 tiJxa7 h6 21 .ibS+ ~d8 22 .Be3 'iVxg2 23 ~xg2 White has an extra pawn and the better game. In this game and notes, we see various irreg- ular set-ups for Black versus the 'Averbakh' formation with c4, d4 and e4. While playable, they all suffer from the same defect: a lack of space. Whether Black stands objectively worse or not, most leading players don't want to deal with the difficulties that this presents in prac- tice, and either avoid it, or take the opportunity to transpose to the King's Indian.

4 Modern Queenside Fianchetto

In this chapter I'll be examining modem queen- side fianchetto systems, primarily those with ... b6 on one of the first two moves, but also I b3. These aren't extremely popular at the very top levels, but they have been played consis- tently by strong grandmasters as well as mas- ters. With ... b6 and ... i.b7, Black's play tends to be concentrated upon controlling the central light squares with moves such as ... e6, ... f5, . ..'Df6/e7 and ... i.b4; if he succeeds in doing so, his bishop on b7 will gain in strength. White will often challenge those squares and try to limit the bishop's influence by d5, e4 and/or f3, supported by tt:'lc3, i.d3 and "VJiIe2/c2. A comparison with 1...g6 of the last chapter is interesting. Perhaps the most significant dif- ference is that ... b6 doesn't contribute to early castling, which is a traditional opening prior- ity. On the other hand, in the critical lines,

1...b6 and an early ... i.b7 attacks an unde-

fended pawn on e4. This imparts a certain forcing quality to it and limits White's op- tions. By contrast 1...g6 and 2 ... i.g7 attacks a pawn on d4 that is naturally protected by the queen on d 1, so White is afforded more leeway in his development. When White plays 1 b3, his opponent doesn't necessarily feel obliged to play for an initia- tive and frequently refuses to present the broad target that White usually does versus 1...b6. You should remember that White's view of the chess opening is different from Black's, in that he doesn't want to arrive at an equal position at too early a stage of the game. Therefore 1 b3, while respectable and sporting a considerable body of theory, isn't used as often as one might expect by the same leading players who are willing to enter into ... g6 and ... b6 systems as Black. Nevertheless, a loyal band of 1 b3 devo- tees have developed ways to emerge from the opening with unbalanced positions. That out- come will satisfy players who are more con- cerned with having an original game than achieving an advantage from the opening. Owen Defence

1 e4 b6 2 d4 i.b7 (D)

Obviously White could have begun with 1 d4 as well, and in fact many games go 1 d4 e6 2 e4 b6 (2 ... d5 is a French Defence) and 3 ... i.b7. With either move-order, playing ... b6 and ... e6 on the first two moves has a few subtleties, as we'll see in the first few games. w In the eyes of traditional theory, 1...b6 has a varying reputation depending upon White's first move. For example, 1 c4 b6 (the English Defence) is a respectable unbalancing contin- uation. There have been thousands of master games with it, and recent theory is extensive, with books and lengthy articles devoted to its intricacies.

1 e4 b6, the Owen Defence, is a different

matter. It was looked at askance by masters for most of the 20th century, in spite of having the- ory associated with it which goes as far back as the 19th. Even after the kingside fianchetto of the last chapter, 1 e4 g6, achieved respectabil- ity, the queenside fianchetto was still frowned upon when White retained full freedom with his central structure. In the past two decades, however, 1 e4 b6 2 d4 i.b7 has been used by a fair number of strong grandmasters and has re- ceived renewed attention from theoreticians.

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 95

As mentioned above, White's e-pawn is un- der attack. In the majority of cases, he will de- fend it while developing by 3 i.d3 or 3 ttJc3. Assuming that White doesn't follow 3 i.d3 with an early ttJc3, these two methods are fun- damentally different, although they often lead to types of positions that you may recognize from other openings. Let's begin with a classic game. I've adjusted the opening move sequence so as to address some basic move-order issues straightaway. Dorfman - Miles Tilburg 1992

1 e4 b6 2 d4 i.b7 3 i.d3 (D)

3 dS e6 isn't dangerous, because Black will succeed in breaking up White's centre (with ... ttJf6 and ... c6, if necessary), but I'm surprised that I can only find a handful of very low-rated games with 3 eS, since 1 b3 eS 2 i.b2 e4 is a legitimate line in which ... dS is played soon thereafter. The idea is that after 3 eS d6 (to dis- solve the cramping e-pawn) 4 ttJf3, Black's queenside light squares are weakened. Finally,

3 f3 is logical, erecting a barrier against the b7-

bishop. Then Black has many ways to go; for example, 3 ... e6 (3 ... g6!?) 4 ttJc3 (4 c4 is a line of the English Defence, examined below) 4 ... ttJf6 (4 ... ttJh6!? intending .. .fS) S i.e3 and now S. .. cS or S. .. dS.

3  ttJf6 The ... b6 systems are flexible, so you see a wide variety of moves at nearly every juncture. This move and the main alternative, 3 ... e6, con- test the light squares, which is consistent with Black's strategy as a whole. The differences between them are important enough to warrant a fairly lengthy digression, and Black has a couple of other options. As always, it's impor- tant to understand move-orders in order to get the position you want: a) 3 ... cS?! is positionally suspect due to 4 dS, hemming in Black's queen's bishop. Black has forfeited the option of attacking dS by means of ... c6. b) Black plays 3 ... e6 more frequently than 3 ... ttJf6. It can variously transpose to any of the next few games. Importantly, however, it gives White the option of 4 c4, which is the main line of the English Defence section below (I c4 b6 2 d4 e6 3 e4 i.b7 4 i.d3). An independent line after 3 ... e6 is 4 ttJf3, and now: bl) 4 ... ttJf6?! (probably too provocative) S eS ttJdS 6 a3! cS 7 dxcS i.xcs (D). w This resembles the note to 8 a3 below, except that White hasn't played c3 and therefore can play c4 in one move rather than two. One exam- ple went 8 O-O (8 M i.e7 9 c4 is also good) 8 ... fS!?9c4ttJc71Oi.gS?! (10M!) 1O ... i.xf3! 11i.xd8 i.xd112 i.xc7 ttJa6? (l2. .. i.hSlooks fine) 13l:txdl ttJxc7 14 i.e2! as (versus M) IS ttJc3 <3;e7 16 l:tabl a4 17 l:td2 l:taS 18 Itbdl Itd8 19 i.f3 and there's nothing good to be done about i.c6, Cullip-Ravikumar, British Ch, Eastbourne 1990. b2) 4 ... cS is potentially important, when S c3 ttJf6 6 'iie2 transposes to our main game. Al- ternatively, White can play S O-O and allow the Sicilian variant S. .. cxd4 6 ttJxd4. In that case, S. .. ttJf6 6 eS ttJdS 7 l:e1 leaves White better de- veloped.

96 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

c) 3 ... fS? was debated for many years but now it's established that 4 exfS .txg2leads to a losing position after the sequence S 'iihS+ g6 6 fxg6 .tg7, and here the 'traditional' refutation is 7 'iWfS tbf6 (7 ... .tf6? 8 g7 .txg7 9 'iigS forks the bishops on g2 and g7) 8 .th6!!. This does in fact lead to a winning position after 8 ... .txh6 9 gxh7, but the analysis is complicated, and Spin- hoven shows that 7 gxh7+! 'iitf8 8 tbf3! is clearer; for example, 8 ... tbf6 (8 ... .txhl 9 tbeS! .txeS 10 dxeS) 9 'iig6 .txf3 (9 ... .txhl 10.th6 .l:txh7 11 tbgS) 10 .l:.gl .l:txh7 11 'iig3 .te4 12 .txe4 tbxe4 13 'it'f3+ 'iitg8 14 ~xe4 dS IS ~e6+ 'iith8 16 tbc3 c6 17 .tf4. d) An original and infrequently-tested vari- ation (which has been analysed at length by Maurits Wind in Kaissiber) is 3 ... tbc6 (D), at- tacking the d-pawn and intending ... eS. Notice that this is a dark-square strategy, unusual for the Owen Defence. w White has an array of responses to this move, and I'll leave it to the reader to investigate it in depth. Some ideas: dl) 4 dS tbeS S .te2 e6 breaks up White's centre. If he overextends by 6 f4?! tbg6 7 c4, then among other good moves, 7 ... .tb4+ 8 .td2 'Wie7leaves White's centre further exposed. d2) 4 tbe2 tbb4 forces the exchange of White's bishop; considering his extra space, this is not bad for White (for example, S c4 e6 transposes to the English Defence, discussed below), but ceding the bishop-pair may not be to his taste. d3) 4 c3 (Martin gives this an '!') 4 ... eS (the point) S tbf3! (S dS tbce7 goes back to the games of Owen in the 1890s! Black intends ... tbg6, ... .tcS, ... tbf6 and ... c6 in one order or another; S tbe2 dS! is Wind's idea, so as not to cede White the powerful centre and smooth de- velopment that would result from S. .. exd4 6 cxd4 tbb4 7 tbbc3 tbxd3+ 8 'iixd3; after S. .. dS 60-0, both 6 ... tbf6 and 6 ... tbge7 are playable) S. .. exd4 6 cxd4 tbb4 (D) and now: w d31) 7 O-O tbxd3 8 'iixd3 tbf6 9 tbc3 and after 9 ... .te7, as played in Blackburne-Owen, Manchester 1881, 10 dS! would have been strong. Wind suggests 9 ... dS; then Black is walking a narrow path after 10 exdS tbxdS 11 .l:tel+ .te7 12 'iie2 'iid7 13 tbxdS (13 tbeS 'iWe6) 13 ... .txdS 14 .td2 .txf3! IS gxf3 'iitf8, but with the moves ... .td6 and ... hS, he obtains equal chances. d32) 7 .tc4! dS! (after 7 ... .txe4, 8 O-O is "enormously strong", according to Wind, al- though 8 tbc3! may prove to be even better, since 8 ... tbc2+ 9 'iitfl is turning sour for Black) 8 exdS .txdS 9 .te2! (after 9 .txdS tbxdS, nei- ther 10 tbc3 tbxc3 11 bxc3 .td6 nor 100-0 .td6 11 .l:.el + tbge7 is dangerous for Black) 9 ... .tb7!? 10 a3 tbdS. Now BUcker analyses 11 tbeS!? to a moderate advantage for White after ll...c6 (ll...tbge7 12 .tg4!) 12 O-O .td6 13 .thS!? g6 14 .l:tel 'iitf8 IS.tf3 f6 16 tbc4 .tc7 17 tbc3 'iitg7. d4) 4 tbf3 tbb4 also appears to eliminate a bishop, but S .tc4! escapes, in view of S. .. .txe4 6 .txf7+! 'iitxf7 7 tbgS+ 'iite8 8 tbxe4, etc. So the normal response would be S. .. e6. Now Wind analyses 6 tbc3 (Martin gives only the relatively harmless 6 c3 dS 7 exdS tbxdS, al- though after 8 O-O, his 8 ... tbgf6 allows 9 tbeS!, so 8 ... .td6 is better; 6 'iie2 can be met by

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHE1TO 97

6 ... ~xe4!? 7 'iixe4 d5 8 'iie2 dxc4) 6 ... d5 (per- haps 6 ... ttJf6 7 a3 d5 8 ~b3! ttJc6 is the best Black can do) 7 exd5 ttJxd5 8 ttJxd5 (unfortu- nately, White also has 8 ttJe5! ttJxc3 9 bxc3 with ideas of ~b5+ and 'iVh5) 8 ... ~xd5 9 ttJe5 ttJe7 (9 ... ~xc4 10 'iif3! f6 11 'iic6+ ~e7 12 'iixc4!) 10 ~b5+ (or 10 ~xd5 'ii'xd5 11 O-O) 1O ... c6 11 ~d3 with the idea 11...~xg2 121Igi 'iid5 with great complications. Black could use some improvements here. You might want to compare 4 ... ttJc6 below. Let's return to 3 ... ttJf6. 4 'iie2 (D) White definitely should avoid 4 e5? ~xg2. We shall see 4 ttJd2 in the next game, and 4 ttJc3 e6 transposes to lines covered via 3 ttJc3 below (in the game K.Nikolaidis-Minasian). 4 "ilke2 causes unique problems.

4 ... e6 Black has some move-order issues to worry about. He can try 4 ... c5, when 5 c3 e6 heads for the game. If White plays 5 d5 e6 and follows up with 6 c4, Black can reply 6 ... d6 with the idea of ... exd5; for example, 7 f4 exd5 8 cxd5 g6 sets up a sort of Benoni in which neither ... ~b7 nor ~e2 are particularly good moves; this should be perfectly playable for Black. Alternatively, he can try 8 ... ~e7 with the idea ... O-O. White can instead play 6 ttJf3 and transpose to the note to 6 c3 below. The developing move 4 ... ttJc6!? threatens d4 and has the idea of winning White's bishop by ... ttJb4. What is presently the main line runs

5 c3 e5 6 ttJf3 (6 d5 ttJe7 7 ttJf3 ttJg6 8 O-O c6 9

c4 i.c5 with equality due to Black's relatively free piece-play, A.Stein-A.lvanov, Foxwoods 2005) 6 ... exd4 7 e5 ttJd5 8 ~e4!. Then I think 8 ... ttJde7! 9 cxd4 d5 yields attractive counter- play; for example, 10 ~c2 g6 11 ttJc3 ~g7 12 0-00-0 13 a3 (versus ... ttJb4 and ... ~a6) and now 13 ... ~d7 or 13 ... ttJa5. As usual, you have ample opportunity to expand upon such raw material. 5 ttJf3 (D)

5 ... c5!? 5 ... d5 6 e5 ttJfd7 introduces variations from the next game, but allows 7 ttJg5. Then Black may stand all right, but has to know very specif- ically what to play; see the notes there. 6c3 White can play 6 d5! here, threatening c4 with a bind. This seems to leave White with the better game; for example, C.Bauer-Minasian, New York 2000 continued 6 ... exd5 7 exd5+ "ilke7 8 c4 b5?! (however, 8 ... 1i'xe2+ 9 ~xe2 d6 10 .l:!.el ~e7 11 ~f1 puts pressure on Black's position) 9 b3 'fi'xe2+ 10 ~xe2 b4 11 .l:!.el d6 12 ~f1 + ~e7 13 ~f4 with space and initia- tive. Black may be able to improve upon this; oth- erwise he might want to use a 3 ... e6 move- order, or look into deviations from the game such as 4 ... ttJc6 or 5 ... d5. 6 ... ~e7 This position too can arise via several move- orders. 70-0 To confuse matters, White can play ttJbd2 from move 3 onwards. At this point, 7 ttJbd2 d5 (7 ... ttJc6 8 a3 is the game) 8 e5 ttJfd7 9 O-O ttJc6 transposes into the next game. 7 ... ttJc6 (D)

98 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Sa3!? Playing this move before ttJbd2 has certain advantages (see the next note). It also has draw- backs, however, in particular the weakening of b3. Instead, S e5 (S dxc5 transposes if, after either recapture by Black, White plays 9 e5) S. .. ttJd5 9 dxc5 has done well for White, but with accurate play, Black's development and central pawns should more or less make up for his structural problems, as follows: a) After 9 ... bxc5 10 c4, Bauer analyses 1O ... ttJb6! 11 ttJc3 O-O 12 ~e4 (12 .Jif4 f5!?) 12 ... g6 13 .Jih6 l:!.eS, which might mildly fa- vour White following 14 ~f4! (14 .lte2 f6!) 14 ... d6 15 l:t.adl, but 15 ... ttJxe5 16 ttJxe5 dxe5 17 ~xe5 iVd4!? keeps things within bounds; for example, IS fIIc7 fIIh4 19 .ltf4 .ltdS! 20 ~xb7 ~xf4 and the opposite-coloured bishops help Black. b) 9 ... .ltxc5 10 b4 i.e7 11 a3 is more inter- esting. White intends c4 and .ltb2 and has more space. Black should challenge his central con- trol by l1...f5! (D). w With his cramped position, Black wants to stake out some kingside territory. 11 ... f5 covers the key e4-square and cuts off White's light- squared bishop from a potential kingside at- tack. Whether this works against White's con- siderable space advantage is another matter; I suspect that Black gets just enough play. The instructive game Rosandic-Filipovic, Zadar 2001 continued 12 c4 (12 exf6?! .ltxf6 and ... O-O gives Black two long diagonals, central- ized knights and the f-file to make up for his lack of space) 12 ... ttJc7 13 .ltb2 O-O 14 ttJbd2 g5! (a theme to remember in this variation, and in fact in various other openings with this ... e6/ ... f5 pawn-structure) 15 l:!.fdl g4 16 ttJel .ltg5 (clearing e7 for his knight) 17 b5 ttJe7 IS ttJb3?! (1S a4!) IS ... ttJg6 19 g3 (versus ... liJf4) 19 ... h5 20 a4 h4!? 21 a5 (21 f3!? 'iVe7! with the idea 22 fxg4? hxg3! 23 gxf5 'iVh7! 24 fxg6? .lte3+) 21...l:i.bS 22 .ltc2l:!.f7 23 axb6 axb6 24 J:!.d6?! ttJeS 25 l:!.d4 hxg3 26 fxg3 ~c7 27 J::!.ddl? l:i.h7 2S i.d4liJf4! 29 gxf4 i.xf4, win- ning due to the threats of both 30 ... g3 and 30 ... l:t.xh2. We now return to S a3 (D):

S.. ttJaS! Black threatens to occupy b3. Setting up a French structure with S. .. d5 is thematic in these positions, but watch out for the timing: 9 e5liJd7 10 b4! and Black has neither ... liJa5 nor ... a5 and ... .lta6 to exploit the queenside holes, nor even ... c4 and ... b5-b4. In the French Defence, Black might play ... f6, but here the bishop is on b7 and doesn't defend e6, so after 1O .. .f6? 11 exf6 White wins the e-pawn. 9liJbd2 c4! 10 .ltc2

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHE1TO 99

10 liJxc4 cedes a centre pawn for a flank pawn, which tends to be undesirable, although White does command more space following 1O ... liJxc4 11 eS!? (11 iLxc4 liJxe4 12 1i.d3 liJf6 13 iLf4 O-O and ... d6 is solid) ll...dS!? 12 exf6 iLxf6 13 iLxc4!? (13 iLf4 confers a nomi- nal edge, but no more) 13 ... dxc414 ~xc4 iLxf3 IS gxf3 O-O and Black has structural compensa- tion for the pawn. 10. :iVc7 nliJeS bS 12 f40-0 13liJg4liJxg4 14 'iUxg4liJb3! IS iLxb3! Instead, ISliJxb3?! cxb3 16 iLd3 iLxe4! 17 iLxe4 fS leaves Black ahead in development with much the better bishop. Up to this point, Dorfman had been follow- ing the game Ki.Georgiev-Miles, Bie11992: IS .I:!.b1?! liJxd2! (White's knight is more valuable than his bad bishop) 16 iLxd2 iLxe4! 17 1i.xe4 fS 18 Wif3 fxe4 19 ~xe4. Now Miles should have prevented his opponent from playing fS, since that's White's best way to free his prob- lem bishop, by 19 ... g6!; for example, 20 %:tbel (20 dS?! nae8!) 20 ... .l:tae8 with no defensive problems. w IS .. cxb316 fS exfS (D) 17 exfS?! Or: a) Upon the obvious 17 l::txfS, Black has the shot 17 ... dS! 18 liJxb3 (18 exdS can be met by 18 ... iLc8 or 18 ... g6!?) 18 ... iLc8 19 'iUf4 (19 iLh6 iLf6 20 exdS 'ilYc4!) 19 ... iLd6! 20 eS iLe7 with the idea 21 nhS?! 'ilYc4 22 liJd2 'ilYe2! 23 'iVf3 'ilYxf3 24 gxf3 g6 2S l::th6 f6!. b) White should settle for 17 'ilYxfS!, when after 17 ... dS?! (17 ... iLd6! 18 eS iLe7 19liJxb3 .idS 20 liJd2 f6 is better, with compensation) 18 eS f6 19 'iVe6+ ~h8 20 exf6 iLxf6 21 Wie2 l:tae8 22 ~d3 he wins a pawn without apparent retribution. 17  iLd6! 18liJe4?! It's premature to cede a pawn. True, Black is taking control after 18 h3? .I:!.fe8, and his bishop-pair gives him a plus after 18liJf3 f6! 19 1i.h6.Un 20 .I:!.ae1 ~h8 21 iLd2l':tff8. Probably 18liJxb31i.xh2+ 19 Whl is the best course. 18  .txe4 19 iYxe4 .txh2+ 20 Whl ':ae8 21 'iVf3 'iVg3 Black went on to convert his extra pawn, in spite of some inaccuracies:

22 a4 ~xf3 23l':txf3 ..td6 24 iLe3 gS!? 2S

g4 .!:te4 26 axbS .!:tfe8 27 .txgS .l:te2 28 Wgl .I:!.xb2 29 .l:tf2 .i':f.ee2 30 b6l:i.xf2 31 bxa7 l:tg2+

32 Wfll':tbf2+ 33 ~el .I:!.gl + 0-1

In the following games, Black plays ... dS, to establish a position much like the French De- fence. Bakre - Popchev Belgrade 2001

[diagram]
4liJd2 e6 sliJgf3 dS 6 eS liJfd7 is very simi- lar to the game, although the substitution of liJbd2 for "iVe2 makes some difference after 7 O-O cS 8 .l:tel!? (after the more common 8 c3, rather than 8 ... liJc6, Black can reply 8 ... iLa6 9 iLxa6 liJxa6 10 Wie2 liJc7, when his better bishop at least partially compensates for White's space) 8 ... liJc6 9 c3 ..te7 10 liJn (a very com- mon plan in the analogous French positions: White swings his pieces over for a kingside at- tack) 1O ... cxd4 11 cxd4 as (D). w

100 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black would like to play ... liJb4 and ... i.a6. Exchanging his bad bishop in this fashion is a major theme in the 'French-Owen', and White usually makes sure to prevent it: 12 a3 i.a6 13 i.bl .l:tc8 14 'ilVd2!? (heading for f4 and g4) 14 ... a4! (fixing the light squares) 15 i.c2 (15 'Ylif4liJa5!) 15 ... b5 16 i.d3 and Black played the relatively solid 16 ... liJa5 in Trygstad-Gawehns, Bergen 2000. He might have tried 16 ... 'iYb6, in order to attack the d-pawn and prepare ... b4; for example, 17 'Ylif4 h6 18 'iY g4 g6 with ... h5 to follow. In general, the play looks balanced in this line. 4 ... e6 5 liJf3 d5 If Black is heading for ... d5 structures, this is the obvious timing, but not risk-free. We saw 5 ... c5 6 d5! in the notes to the previous game. Again, it may be that Black should prefer a move-order with 3 ... e6 and an early ... c5 if he wants to avoid the problems described in the note to White's 7th move.

[diagram]
A critical juncture. 7liJg5 (D) is both aggres- sive and logical.

White not only brings the queen to the king- side to create threats, but he frees his f-pawn to advance. liJg5 is another move that pops up re- peatedly in the French Defence, but in that opening Black's attack on the centre or queen- side is already underway. After 7 liJg5, White has the immediate threat of 8 liJxe6 fxe6 9 'ilVh5+. Black is really forced to play 7 ... i.e7 (7 ... h6? 8 "iVh5 threatens f7 as well as 9liJxe6, but after 8 .. .'iVe7?, 9 liJxf7! wins anyway) 8 "iVg4! (8 h4 c5 9 z:th3!? is an alternative, after which Gawehns analyses 9 ... "iVc8 and 9 ... cxd4 10 liJxe6 fxe6 11 'ilVh5+ ~f8 12 .l:tf3+ i.f6 to equality) 8 ... h5 (White was threatening liJxe6 followed by 'ilVxg7, and a cute line is 8 ... c5? 9 liJxh7 .l:tg8 10 "iVxe6! fxe6? 11 i.g6#; Gawehns suggests that the strange-looking 8 ... liJf8 might be OK - the idea is to stabilize the kingside and get in the favourable move ... i.a6; for example,

9 O-O h5 10"iV g3 i.a6 or 9 'ilVh5 i.xg5 10 i.xg5

'iVd7 and ... i.a6) 9 'ilVg3 (D). 9 ... liJf8?! (Conde-Gawehns, COIT. 2003 saw the modest but real improvement 9 ... h4! 10 'irVg4liJf8 llliJf3 g6 12 h3 i.a6; Black has a lit- tle more kingside room in that case and later played .. JIh5, ... liJfd7 and ... ~f8-g8) 10 O-O (Khalifman's suggestion 10 liJf3 is also promis- ing; then 1O ... g6 11 i.g5 wins the dark squares; the inclusion of 9 ... h4 would also help in that case because ... .l:th5 challenges the g5-square) 1O ... .Ba6! 11 i.xa6 liJxa6 12 c3 c5 13 .l:tdl!? (13liJa3) 13 ... c4!? (13 ... .l:tc8) 14 .l:tel .l:tc8 15 h4 and in Deep Junior-Akopian, Dortmund 2000, the computer was happy. The line with 7 liJg5 is promising for White; Black can examine ideas such as 7 ... i.e7 8 'iV g4 liJf8, or 9 ... h4! in the main line, although the whole position is difficult and requires prepara- tion. One interesting point made by Gawehns is that with the moves ... c5 and c3 included, 8 liJg5 i.e7 9 "iVg4 isn't so intimidating due to 9 ... i.a6!; in fact, a little analysis will indicate that this is acceptable for Black. So ifBlack isn't happy with the lines in this note, he might want to go back and look at those ... c5 move-orders from the previous game; for example, 3 ... e6 4 liJf3 c5. 7 .. c5 8 O-O liJc6 (D)

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHEITO 101

We see 8 ... ~e7 in the next game, with many of the same ideas. w 9a3 After 9 lbbd2, 9 ... ~e7 may well transpose. 9 ... cxd4l0 cxd4lbb4 also has to be considered, but 11 ~bS! is a good reply, as 11 ... a6 12 ~a4 ~c8 13 a3 lbc6 14 b4 is comfortable for White. A better choice is 1l...~c6!? 12 a3 ~xbS 13 'itVxbS a6! 14 'itVe2 lbc6 IS lbb3 ~e7 16 ~d2 O-O 17 ~fc 1 with only a small pull for White. The most important thing to remember about all lines with ... cxd4 is that Black gives up the option of a later queens ide attack by ... c4. Such attacks tend to be important in these variations, so you need to be sure that ... cxd4 accomplishes something concrete before playing it. 9 ... ~e7 Note that 9 ... c4 10 ~c2 should probably be followed by 1O ... ~e7 anyway, because after 1O ... bS lllbgS! White threatens various king- side attacks. 10 lbbd2 (D)

10 b4 is met most naturally with 10 ... O-O,

which can be followed up by ... ~c8 and ... ffic7, while ... ~ae8 and ... f6 is a possible alterna- tive strategy. Black can instead lash out with 1O ... gS!?, as in the main game; this has been analysed in some depth. A brief extract is 11 bS (11 ~bd2 c4 12 .tc2 ~f8! intends ... ~g6, as does 11 ~b2 c4 12 ~c2 lbf8; different possi- bilities arise from 11 ~e3lbf8 12 bS!? lbaS 13 lbbd2 c4 14 ~c2 hS, which is analysis by Herbrechtsmeier) 11...lbaS 12 lbbd2 c4 13 ~c2. Thus far Khalifman. Now Gawehns sug- gests the familiar 13 ... lbf8 and appends 14lbel lbg6 with the idea IS 'iVhS lbf4. This seems reasonable, and in general, these lines look fun to play for both sides.

... g5!? This advance comes up repeatedly in the 'French-Owen', just as it does in the related French Defence positions. Black is not merely launching a kingside attack, but preparing to reorganize his pieces. In particular, ... lbf8-g6 can be surprisingly effective, as in the previous note. Be aware, however, that the correspond- ing attack with ... gS in the French Defence is backed up by moves such as ... 'itVb6, making ... g4 a continual threat to win White's d-pawn. That's not true in the Owen version, so the threat to White's centre is minimal. On the other hand, Black has one significant advantage here: if White plays dxcS, he doesn't gain the d4- square for a piece because Black can reply with ... bxcS. This is all hard to assess, but it's worth noting that the safer 10 ... O-O is also playable. 11 'iUe3 White might look into 11 b4 hS!? 12 ~b2. 11 ... lbf8!? 12 J:.dl g4 13lbel cxd4 The less committal 13 ... hS may be a slight improvement. 14 cxd4 ~g5!? 15 'iVe2 h516lbb3lbg617 ~a6? 17 ~xg6!? fxg6 18 'ilVd3 r3;f7 19 g3 favours White slightly due to Black's loose kingside. ... ~xa6 18 'ii'xa6 O-O 19 ~b7 ~c8 20 ~xg5 'ii'xg5 21 :tac1 'ii'e7! Now White faces some challenges. 22 'ii'a6!? ~c7 Here 22 .. .6! 23 exf6 ~xf6 exerts real pres- sure, because both ... lbge7-fS (targeting d4) and ... h4-h3 are dangerous ideas.

102 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

23 nc3lDb8 Perhaps the last chance to gain a pull was 23 ... .l:.fc8!. 24 'iYd3 .l:f.fc8 25 .l:.del

11.Bc2 (D)

The game is even now, and a draw eventually B resulted. Dautov - C. Bauer European Team Ch, Gothenburg 2005

[diagram]
lDf3 d5 6 e5 lDfd7 7 c3 c5 8 O-O .Be7 (D) w Black reasons that he'll make this move in any case, so why not now? The knight on b8 might still be used to support ... .Ba6.

9.Be3

White gets his bishop out before blocking it by lDbd2. Otherwise: a) Grosar-Filipovic, Ljubljana 2000 saw 9 lDbd2 lDc6 10 a3 (with the idea b4), and now we see the standard queenside attack 1O ... c4! II .Bc2 bS 12 l:!.e 1 !? (McDonald mentions 12 lDel!? g6!? 13 f4, when 13 ... aS with the idea ... b4 offers possibilities for both sides) 12 ... aS 13lDf1 b4 14lD3d2 hS! IS f4 g6 and Black has blocked the kingside, so he can tum to the other wing. b) Similarly, 9 a3 can be answered by 9 ... c4. Instead,9 ... aS 10 a4! secures the bS-square and ruins Black's queenside play; this positional trick is worth filing away. 9 ... lDc6 10 a3 c4 In the last game, we saw lines with ... gS, and the move is playable here as well. But the text- move is more careful, and guarantees queen- side play. 11 .. b5 Black can also clamp down on White's queen- side by l1...lDaS and then prepare for ... O-O-O by ... h6 and ... "fiIc7. 12 lDbd2 a5 13 lDel White prepares f4-fS, the thematic kingside attack. 13 ... h5! This all-purpose move prevents 'iVg4 and 'iVhS, and also prepares to block the advance of White's f-pawn by preventing g4.

14 f4 g6 15lDef3 b4 16lDg5!?

White will try to exploit Black's newly- created dark-square weaknesses resulting from ... g6 and ... hS. 16  .Bxg5 17 fxg5 b3!? A big decision: by closing the queenside, Black announces that he's content with a draw. The alternative was to protect the kingside and play for open lines on the queenside, but White has enough resources on that side of the board to hold his own. 18 .idl lDb6 19 'iVf2 'iVe7 20 g4 hxg4 21 .Bxg4lDa4 22 nabl nh7 Ultra-safe. 23 'iUf6 ~d7 24 nf2 nah8 25 lDn lDa7 26 'iVf3 lDb5 27 .iel Neither side can do much against careful de- fence, and indeed the game was drawn after further manoeuvring. Black can enter an entirely different French- like set-up if White plays lDc3. This time the re- sulting structures will be a mix of the Winawer and Classical Variations of the French, along

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 103

with a couple of formations that more resemble a Trompowsky Attack (1 d4 tiJf6 2 .igS). K. Nikolaidis - Minasian Panormo Zonal 1998

[diagram]
The defensive-looking move 3 f3 is remark- ably rare, perhaps because it gives Black too much leeway. I'm going to leave it to the reader to think about, but you should know that 3 ... e6 is normal, when the obvious ... dS soon thereaf- ter has the advantage that if White plays eS, the pawn on f3 will have to move again to f4, both to support eS and to clear f3 for the king's knight. That constitutes a loss of tempo, al- though it has compensating benefits. An inter- esting alternative to ... dS is to combine ... tiJh6 and .. .fS, or ... g6, ... .Bg7 and ... tiJe7, delaying the choice of pawn-breaks. In fact, 3 ... dS!? is also a reasonable reply. Then Black intends to answer 4 tiJc3 with 4 ... e6, which has the posi- tional ideas of ... tiJf6 and ... .Bb4, as well as an opportunistic .. :iih4+ to disturb White's build- up. Versus 4 exdS, Black can play 4 ... ~xdS; e.g., S c4 "it'd7. Finally, the move 4 eS can be logically answered by 4 ... e6 or 4 .. :~d7!?, with an eye towards ... .Ba6 and/or ... cS. 3 ... e6 (D) w When White plays 3 tiJc3, he develops more freely than in lines where he supports his centre with c3 and plays tiJd2. For one thing, his dark-squared bishop doesn't have to wait for the middlegame to come into play. In addition, Black has to be aware that an early ... cS can of- ten be answered by dS, and that in some cases the move ... dS can be favourably countered by exdS. On the flip side, the knight on c3 can be pinned by ... .Bb4, which adds to the pressure on e4 exerted by Black's queen's bishop. Further- more, White's inability to bolster the centre with c3 means that a properly-timed ... cS can create more difficulties than we saw in the pre- vious two games. 4 tiJf3 There are two important alternatives for White here: a) 4.Bd3 (the other move-order is 3 .Bd3 e6 4 tiJc3, which gives Black the option of3 ... tiJf6, as above). Now: al) 4 ... g6 (as used by Spas sky) is a legiti- mate way to play chess and avoid theory; Black often sets up the 'Hippopotamus' formation with ... .Bg7, ... tiJe7, ... d6 and so forth. Not sur- prisingly, most top players will prefer White in that case: he has space, development, and no weaknesses. Nevertheless, several grandmasters have shown that it's not easy to crack Black's position. Black has two more conventional approaches after 4 .Bd3: a2) The straightforward 4 ... tiJf6 can be an- swered by S tiJge2, when Black is faced with the question of how to challenge the centre: S. .. dS!? (S ... cS 6 dS! should become a familiar theme to you; if Black grabs the d-pawn by 6 ... exdS 7 exdS tiJxdS S tiJxdS .ixdS, both 9 tiJf4 ti'e7+ 10 .Be3 and 9 O-O followed by 10 tiJf4 are promis- ing) 6 eS tiJfd7?! (Gawehns prefers 6 ... tiJgS!, when the direct 7 f4 looks appropriate) 7 tiJf4!, threatening S tiJxe6!. Peters-Sahovic, Lone Pine 1977 continued 7 ... .Be7 S 'iVg4 g6 9 tiJxe6! fxe6 10 .Bxg6+ hxg6 11 'iVxg6+ WfS. Now the game's 12 h4 with the idea l:th3 wasn't clear, but Gawehns analyses 12 .Bh6+ .l:[xh6 13 'iVxh6+ Rf7 14 "iVh7+ WeS IS 'iVg6+ WfS 16 h4! with a strong attack. a3) 4 ... .Bb4!? reserves the possibilities of ... tiJf6 or ... tiJe7 (perhaps with .. .fS to follow in the latter case): S tiJe2 (S tiJf3 transposes to the main game), and then: a31) S. .. dS 6 O-O is an important point of S tiJe2, with an edge for White. a32) S. .. cS?! can be comfortably answered by R.Lutz's suggestion 6 O-O .Bxc3 7 tiJxc3 cxd4 S tiJbS! d6 9 "it'g4! with the idea 9 ... tiJf6

104 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

10 lbxd6+!, or by 6 dS! exdS 7 exdS ii.xdS 8 O-O with moves like .:tel and ii.f4 to come. a33) After S ... lbc6!? 6 ii.e3 eS!? 7 dSlbce7, Flear points to Black's potential breaks ... c6 and ... fS. He gives 8 a3 ii.cs 9 ii.d2 (9 ii.xcS! bxcS 10 O-O with the idea f4 may well im- prove) 9 ... lbg6 10 b4 ii.e7 11 'ii'cl h6, intending ... ii.gS. In general, however, White's chances look better after S ... lbc6. a34) Probably S ... lbe7! is best, after which White's greater command of territory confers an edge, but the plan of ... O-O and ... fS is in the air. b) 4 a3 prevents ... ii.b4 and has gained a fol- lowing. 4 ... lbf6 (D) (here's a case in which 4 ... g6 is more attractive than usual, because White's a3 plays no significant part in the re- sulting position; in contrast, White has clearly the superior pawn-structure after 4 ... dS?! S exdS! exdS). w The play can go in many directions now, but the following seem particularly instructive: w It's always difficult to tell whether this 'bad bishop' exchange is productive or seriously weakens the queens ide light squares. In this case, the latter cannot be exploited: 10 lbf4 (10 ii.c2 lbc6 11 O-O.:tc8) 1O .. :iYc8! 11 O-O ii.xd3 12 'ii'xd3 'ii'a6 13 'ii'dl lbc6 14 ii.e3, Ehlvest-Blatny, New York 2004, and now sim- ply 14 ... .l:l.c8 followed by ... O-O is fully satis- factory. b3) S eSlbe4! 6lbxe4 (6 'ii'f3 dS 7 ii.bS+!? c6! 8lbxe4 dxe4!? 9 'ixe4 'ii'c7 with the idea of an early ... cS and ... cxd4 gives Black good com- pensation) 6 ... ii.xe4 7lbe2 (7 'ii'e2! ii.b7 8 ii.e3 and O-O-O is a more enterprising idea) 7 ... ii.b7 8 lbf4!? d6 9 exd6 ii'xd6!? (Tisdall mentions 9 ... .ltxd6 10 "iVg4 O-O, when Black is doing fine) 10 ii.e3 lbc6 11 'ii'g4 O-O-O 12 O-O-O, Mrdja-Lovric, Montecatini Terme 2001, and now 12 .. .'~b8 leaves Black with at least equal- ity. 4 .. ii.h4 5 ii.d3 lbf6 (D) bl) S ii.gS h6 6 ii.xf6 'ixf6 resembles the Trompowsky Attack variation 1 d4lbf6 2 ii.gS w e6 3 e4 h6 4 ii.xf6 'ixf6 S lbc3 b6; in such a position, a3 is virtually wasted and Black can set up by some combination of ... d6, ... a6 and ... lbd7. Now 7lbf3 d6 with the idea ... gS is one possibility, while a natural-looking sequence after 7 'ii'd2 is 7 ... lbc6 8 eS!? 'fie7 9 f40-O-O 10 O-O-O d6 with equality. b2) S ii.d3 dS 6 eS lbfd7 7 lbf3 (if White plays 7 lbce2, in order to shore up his centre with c3, Black does well to offer the exchange of his queen's bishop; compare what follows) 7 ... ii.e7 8lbe2 cS 9 c3 .lta6 (D). 6 ii.g5

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 105

The main alternative is 6 'iie2 dS 7 eS (7 exdS ~xdS 8 O-O .Bxc3 9 bxc3 O-O 10 .Bf4 ~c8 11 .l:!.fel cS 12 dxcS ~xcS 13 c4 ttJbd7 equalized in Bareev-C.Bauer, Enghien-Ies-Bains 2001) 7 ... ttJe4 8 .Bd2 (8 O-O!? can be answered safely by 8 ... .Bxc3 9 bxc3 ttJxc3 10 1'Be3 ttJe4, intend- ing to return the pawn in order to gain the light squares after 11 .Ba3 ttJc6!) 8 ... ttJxd2 (8 ... .Bxc3 9 bxc3, and now 9 ... cS or 9 ... h6Iooks satisfac- tory, whereas Gawehns's more daring 9 ... ttJd7!? 10 .Bxe4 dxe4 11 ttJgS h6 12 ttJxe4 ~h4 13 g4 O-O-O yields a lot of compensation for a pawn) 9 ~xd2 .Be7 10 h4!? .Ba6 (the naturallO ... cS 11 O-O-O ttJc6 equalizes) 11 ~f4 .Bxd3 12 cxd3 cS 13 O-O ttJc6 with mutual chances, E.Berg- Blatny, Bermuda 2003. 6 ... h6 7 .Bxf6 1'Bxf6 8 O-O .Bxc3 9 bxc3 d6 10 ttJd2! g5!? (D) This may seem strange, but it discourages White's main plan of f4. Next, Black will play ... eS to try to force a decision from White about what to do with his d4-pawn. The alternative 10 ... eS 11 f4! has been thor- oughly tested, with an almost certain advantage for White if the game proceeds ll...exd4?! 12 eS!. Instead, 11...1'Be7 has a decent reputation; for example, 12 ~g4! O-O 13 ttJc4 and instead of 13 ... ttJd7 14 ttJe3!, when Black should have been in trouble in A.David-C.Bauer, French Team Ch, Port Barcares 200S, Black can play 13 ... exd4 14 cxd4 bS IS ttJd2 ttJc6!? with the idea 16 dS fS! 17 exfS "iVe3+ 18 .l:!.f2 ttJe7 19 .ixbS .ixdS 20 .Bd3 .l:!.ae8. White can probably find a modest advantage somewhere in this line, but it shouldn't amount to much. w 11 'iie2 (D) Nothing else is terribly impressive here: a) 11 f4 gxf412 g3 (12 ~g4 eS) 12 ... .:.g8 13 ~hl eS. b) 11 eS?! appears too ambitious after sim- ply ll...dxe5 12 ttJe4 and either 12 ... 'iVg7 or 12 ... ~e7 13 dxe5 ttJd7. c) 11 a4 is slightly irritating, but Black can cope after ll...eS (1l...a6!? 12 ttJc4 ttJd7) 12 ttJb3 as 13 .ibS+ c6 14 .Bc4 ttJd7.

11 ... e5 12 ~e3 (D) Or: a) 12 ttJc4 is a clever concept: the idea is ttJe3-fS. The fS-square is potentially a signifi- cant advantage, although White's bad bishop and Black's solid position are compensating factors. Black may want to clarify matters by 12 ... ttJd7 13 ttJe3 exd4! 14 ttJdS i.xdS IS exdS+ ~f8 with a dynamic balance . b) 12 dxeS dxeS 13 ttJc4 cedes the cS-square to Black's knight when no piece can challenge it, with the likely follow-up 13 ... ttJd7 14 ttJe3 O-O-O IS ttJfS ttJcS 16 a4 as.

106 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

12  lLld7!? Bauer mentions 12 ... lLlc6!, which is more pointed. If White counters the threat on d4 by 13 dS, 13 ... lLle7 14 a4 as IS .ibS+ 'it>f8 is safe, and White has no way through on the queen- side. Black proceeds with moves such as ... lLlg6 and ... 'it>g7, with ... hS and ... .Bc8 as needed. 13 .Bb5 O-O-O A little risky; the alternative was 13 ... c6 14 .Bd30-0.

14 a4 a5 15 l':tabl ~he8 16 ~fel ~g6 17

'ii'd3 'it>b8 18 .Bxd7!? Gawehns analyses 18 .Ba6 lLlcS! 19 dxcS dxcS 20 ~bS .Bxa6 21 ~xa6 l:txd2 22 ~xaS ~c6 with a positional plus for Black. ... l:txd719 ~b5l:tee7? (D) This proves to be too slow. 19 ... lIde7! threat- ens ... exd4 and a capture on e4. Then Nikolaidis gives the by no means compulsory 20 dS 'it>a7 21 lLlc4 .Ba6 22 ~b3 with complications; it's not clear what White's plan would be. w 20 lLlc4 exd4 21lLlxa5 White also has the upper hand after 21 cxd4 dS 22lLleS.

21...d5

2l....Bxe4 22 cxd4 .Ba8 23 dS! threatens lLlc6+. 22 lLlxb7 'it>xb7 23 exd5? 23 cxd4! (with the idea eS) is extremely strong, in view of 23 ... dxe4?! 24 dS! with the idea as. ... ~xel+ 24 ~xell:td6 25 a5?! ~xc2 26 cxd4 ~c3 27 a6+ ~a7 28 l:tdl f5 29 h3 g4 30 hxg4 fxg4 Now the game is equal; it was eventually drawn. English Defence The English Defence is defined by the moves ... b6 and ... e6 versus White's c4. In the great majority of cases, Black also plays ... .Bb7 and White d4, but occasionally Black plays ... i.a6, and White sometimes foregoes d4 in order to avoid central exposure. In general, I would characterize the English Defence as one of the most exciting and instruc- tive modem fianchetto openings. It embraces an extraordinary number of highly tactical varia- tions, which unfortunately requires a lot of prep- aration from Black (and an unusually detailed exposition on my part). However, most of those tactics grow out of distinctive positional roots. What's more, the hypermodern theme of attack- ing an occupied centre from the flank will sel- dom express itself more clearly.

1 c4 b6 (D)

1...b6 is more popular versus I c4 than I e4

or 1 d4, for reasons that become clear next move. Nevertheless, I should note that 1 d4 e6 is appropriate for a French Defence player, be- cause 2 e4 dS leads to the French Defence itself and 2 c4 b6 brings us back to the English De- fence. The other popular move-order after I c4 is

1.. .e6; for example, 2 d4 b6 transposes to the

main line. 2lLlf3 is an independent move-order that often transposes to another opening; for ex- ample, 2 ... dS (Queen's Gambit or Reti), 2 ... cS (Symmetrical English), 2 .. .fS (Dutch), or vari- ous Indian formations with 2 ... lLlf6 (notice that this kind of transposition isn't possible after I d4 b6 2 e4). w

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHEITO 107

2d4 The alternative 2ltJf3 il.b7 3 g3 i.xf3 is dis- cussed below, in the notes to Marjanovic-Ivan- isevic. 2 ... e6 Of course, 2 ... il.b7 is playable as well. With 2 ... e6 Black leaves himself ready to play an early ... il.b4. He might also want to hold off on 2 ... il.b7 in order to retain options for the bishop if White plays slowly. For example, 2 ... e6 3ltJf3 ltJf6 is a Queen's Indian Defence, when the modem main lines involve the move ... il.a6. Fur- thermore, the move 3 d5!?, which would directly block off the bishop after 2 ... il.b7, can now be answered by 3 ... il.a6 (4 e4ltJf6!), 3 ... ltJf6 4 a3 (to avoid ... il.b4) 4 ... il.a6, or the bizarre-looking 3 ... iVh4 (hitting c4), whose theoretical reputa- tion is not bad. 3e4 If there's a way for White to get a substantial advantage against the English Defence, this has to be it. Establishing a broad centre conforms with our usual 'stress test' of any black defence that doesn't itself establish a central pawn pres- ence. I should say that the slower approach with

[diagram]
i.b7 3ltJc3 e64 a3, with minor move-order is- sues) has been a deterrent to some prospective players of the English Defence, particularly at grandmaster level, because it's easy to fall into a cramped position. Nevertheless, Black has plenty of ways to develop his pieces and will not have to fear being steamrollered by pawns, so the a3 lines are not to be feared in the way that 3 e4 is. I'll take this up in a game below (Sher-Lempert). 3  il.b7 (D) w This position constitutes the starting point for the most frequently-played and most challeng- ing variation of the English Defence. Black is in the strange circumstance that he has a remark- able number of moves at his disposal for each of his early moves, but that they tend to be the same moves: ... il.b4(+), ... 'iVh4(+), ... f5 and ... ltJe7 (or ... ltJf6, normally not before ... f5). Naturally, Black makes other piece moves and pawn-breaks (sometimes the light-squared break ... d5, for example, but rarely ... c5 or ... e5). Nev- ertheless, the basic attacks on White's centre are strangely similar for a move as noncommittal as ... il.b7. The implementation of these moves depends upon White's own set-up, of course, but right at this moment he settles much of the question by his choice, which is usually either 4 il.d3 or 4 ltJc3. White's general strategy is straightfor- ward: support of his centre, development, and a pawn advance. He can play f3 or 'ilVc2 to further the first goal, although the latter move tends to be ineffective. Pressing forward with d5 cuts off Black's bishop on b7, but it uses a valuable tempo and opens up some squares for Black's pieces - see the next note. The prospect of White's d5, however, accounts for the fact that Black seldom commits to ... ltJf6 before ... f5; that is, he wants to have the move ... f5 available to break down White's c4/d5/e4 phalanx. 4 ii.d3 This bishop development is the most impor- tant move, although 4 ltJc3 has been played more often and is discussed in games to follow. The drawback to 4ltJc3 is that it grants Black's dark-squared bishop an immediate and effec- tive role following 4 ... i.b4. By contrast, 4 ii.d3 il.b4+ lets White avoid doubled pawns by 5 il.d2 and can even speed his development; 4 ... ii.b4+ is a rare choice for Black, but a legiti- mate one with its own ideas, and we'll cover it in the next game. Some lesser continuations: a) 4 d5 has more than one good reply, but an attractive one is 4 ... ltJf6, recommended by Langrock, because Black takes the initiative. Then 5 e5?! ltJe4 threatens ... il.b4+ and ... ii.c5, and 5 il.d3 exd5 6 exd5 c6 or 6 cxd5 c6 is easy for Black to play. That leaves 5 ltJc3 il.b4 6 il.d3, which may even leave White in the worse position: 6 ... exd5 7 cxd5 (7 exd5 c6 8 dxc6!?

108 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

ttJxc6) 7 ... .Bxc3+!? 8 bxc3 'fie7 9 'iVe2 O-O 10 c4 ne8 11 f3 c6!; this leaves White no good way to defend against a double capture on dS, unless he tries 12 dxc6 ttJxc6, when Black has the possibility of an opportunistic ... dS and, failing that, ... ttJeS, ... .Ba6 and .. J:tac8. b) 4 ~c2 can lead to various traps after the primitive 4 ... 'iVh4! (D), attacking e4 twice and pinning the f-pawn that might otherwise protect it. w Then S ttJc3 .Bb4 is seen below under the move-order 4 ttJc3 .Bb4 S ~c2 ~h41. Other- wise: bl) S .Bd3? is actually a bad mistake in view of S. .. ttJc6!, which threatens not only 6 ... ttJxd4, but also 6 ... ttJb4 and 7 ... ttJxd3+, winning the e-pawn! Since 6 ttJf3 ~g4 attacks g2 as well, and 6 dS ttJb4 7 ~e2 ttJf6 8 eS ttJg4 is a double attack on f2 and eS, only 6 g3 ~f6 7 dS seems playable, until you find that 7 ... ttJb4 8 ~e2 'iVd4! 9 .Bc2 .Ba6! wins. An amazing example of pure piece-play, which triumphs without any help from the pawns! b2) S ttJd2 is best. After S. .. .Bb4 6 .Bd3, 6 ... fS!? 7 ttJf3! .Bxd2+ 8 .Bxd2 ~g4 9 ttJeS ~xg2 10 O-O-O fxe4 11 .Be2 is a much-played gambit. Upon l1...ttJf6, Odes sky suggests 12 l:i.hgl! 'fixh2 13 .Be31. Because playing in this manner is so risky for Black, it seems better - or at least more practical- to play 6 ... ~ g4, hitting the g-pawn immediately: 7 ~fl (7 g3 fS 8 f3 'iVhS) 7 .. .fS 8 f3 (8 ttJgf3 .Bxd2 9 .Bxd2?? fxe4 10 ttJeS 'iVxg2+!; 8 h3 ~g6 is difficult to assess or work out) 8 ... ~h4 9 exfS, Levitt-Ehlvest, New York 1994, and here 9 ... ttJc6! 10 fxe6 dxe6 gives Black at least adequate compensation according to separate analyses by Levitt and Odessky. c) 4 f3 can be answered by the typically dy- namic 4 ... fS! S exfS ttJh6! (this resembles 4 ttJc3 .Bb4 S f3 fS 6 exfS ttJh6! below), a gam- bit based upon 6 fxe6 ttJfS! with an attack. In- stead, 6 .Bxh6 'iVh4+ 7 g3 'iWxh6 wins the dark squares; for example, 8 fxe6 .Bb4+ 9 ~f2 O-O with a strong initiative. After 4 .Bd3, Black's main replies are 4 .. .fS and 4 ... ttJc6. Let's begin our investigation with a game that came 20 years after the same oppo- nents brought attention to 4 ... fS on the interna- tional scene: Browne - Miles Reno 1999

[diagram]
This leads to wild and forcing play. We'll see 4 ... .Bb4+ in the next game. Periodically writers recommend 4 ... 'iWh4 (D), but there are at least two good answers: w a) White can sacrifice a pawn with S ttJf3 ~g4 6 O-O .Bxe4 7 .Bxe4 'fIxe4 8 ttJc3, which yields a powerful attack, Plaskett-Forintos, Ramsgate 1981. b) S ttJd2! wins time by attacking the queen; for example, S. .. fS (S ... .Bb4 6 ttJf3 ~g4 7 O-O .txd2 8 ~xd2! is awkward, since White wins after 8 ... .Bxe4?? 9 h3 'iWfS 10 ttJh4 'iVhS 11 .Bxe4 dS 12 cxdS exdS 13 ttJfS!) 6 ttJgf3 'iVg4 7 O-O .Bxe4 (or 7 .. .fxe4 8 h3 'iVfS 9 g4! 'iVg6 10 ttJeS, when 1O ... 'iVh6? fails to 11 .Bxe4 i.xe4 12 ttJxe4 'it'xh3 13 ttJgS "iVh4 14 ~f3!) 8 ttJxe4 fxe4 9 h3 'iVfS 10 ttJh4! (10 .Bc2 is also very

MODERN QUEENSlDE FIANCHETTO 109

strong) 1O ... 'iH6 11 i.xe4 d5 12 'Yi'a4+! c6 13 cxd5 'iVxh4 14l:!eI with a killing attack. We now return to 4 ... f5 (D): w S exfS! White takes up the challenge. Otherwise Black just piles up on the e-pawn by ... liJf6 and ... i.b4, whereas 5 f3?! fxe4 6 fxe4 i.xe4! has the idea 7 i.xe4? 'iVh4+.

... i.xg2 Black in tum wins the rook on hI, knowing that he will face a dangerous attack. We'll see 5 ... i.b4+ in the next game. 6 'iVhS+ g6 7 fxg6 i.g7 Forced. First, 7 ... liJf6? will lose if White finds 8 g7+ liJxh5 9 gxh8'iV liJf6 (9 ... i.xhI 10 'iVxh7) 10 liJf3! i.xhI 11 i.g5 i.xf3 12 i.xf6, etc. And 7 ... i.b4+?, leaving g7 undefended, is no better: 8 liJc3 ~f8 9 i.h6+! (or 9 g7 + ~xg7 10 'iVg4+ 'it>f8 11 'iVxg2) 9 ... liJxh6 10 'iixh6+ ~e7 ll1Wg5+ ~e8 12 'iVxg2 threatening 'iVxa8 and g7. 8 gxh7+ ~f8 (D) w The key starting position for what has been called the 'Whole Hog Variation', in honour of Black's unashamed greed. White is about to be a rook down for two pawns, in return for obvi- ous attacking chances against Black's loose king. This extraordinarily tactical line has long been a theoretician's nightmare, and I'll try to show a complete solution with a minimum of details. 9liJe2! White develops and forces Black to capture on hI; this knight will head for f4. I won't go into the details about 9 hxg8'Yi'+?! ~xg8, but Black's activity gives him at least equality. 9 i.g5 is sometimes regarded as more accu- rate than 9liJe2, often transposing after 9 ... liJf6 10 'iVh4 .i.xh 1 11 liJe2. In fact, this was the ac- tual move-order Browne used in the game. In- stead, 11 liJd2 prevents the tricky move ... .i.f3 that we see below. But 11 liJd2 in tum forfeits the opportunity for liJc3 at some point, which contributes to White's victory in our main game. Fortunately (for simplicity's sake), it turns out (at least in my opinion) that Black is essentially lost after either 11 liJe2 or 11 liJd2, and that 9 i.g5 is therefore just as strong as 9liJe2. A key transposition to lines below is l1liJd2 'iie7 12 liJe2 if7 13liJf4 (13 O-O-O isn't as good due to 13 ... liJxh7!). 9 . .i.xhll0 i.gSliJf611 'iih4 (D)

11 .. :ii'e7 Often cited as the toughest defence. Other moves: a) 11...i.f3 was long thought to be adequate (although the 9 i.g5 line with 11 liJd2 would prevent it anyway), but some lengthy forcing

110 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

lines have apparently put it to rest: 12 lLlf4 lLlc6 13 lLld2 J..g4 14 lLlg6+ 'it>f7 IS lLleS+ lLlxeS 16 dxeS J..fS 17 J..xfS exfS 18 exf6 J..xf6 19li'hS+ rt;g7 20 'ifh6+ 'it>f7 and here the game Bagins- kaite-Miles, Philadelphia 1999 concluded in a draw following 21 'ifhS+ 'it>g7 22 ~h6+. How- ever, various analysts (including Yermolinsky) found that 21 lLlf3! wins. Without going into detail, the main line is 2l...'ife8+ 22 rt;f1 J..g7 23 ~h4 'iVe4 24 'iVhS+ 'it>f8 2S l:i.el l:.xh7! 26 'iVxh7 li'xf3 27 .l:!.e3 li'hl + 28 rt;e2 'iVbl 29 J..h6! 'iVxb2+ 30 ~f1 J..xh6 31 'ifxfS+ and White wins. b) After 11...lLlc6, the stem game Browne- Miles, Tilburg 1978 went 12 lLlf4?! 'it>f7?! (12 ... lLlxd4 13 lLlg6+ rt;e8 14 'iixd4 .l:!.xh7 IS lLleS ':xh2! seems fine for Black) 13 J..g6+!? <j;e7? (13 ... 'it>f8!) 14 lLlhS ~f8 IS lLld2 eS 16 O-O-O lLlxd4 17 ':xh 1 lLle6 18 f4 and White won easily. In view of Black's improvements in this line, the correct move is 12 lLld2!, which has been analysed exhaustively for many years, leading to a substantial advantage for White. To get the whole story, you'll have to refer to the books, but one tricky line goes l2 ... bS!? (Black produces some chaos; after 12 ... eS 13 O-O-O! e4

14 J..xe4 oitxe4 IS lLlxe4l:!.xh7 16 'iVf4 <j;f7, 17

.l:!.d3! is easiest) 13 cxbS (13 lLlf4 is also good) 13 ... lLlb4 14 oitg6 oitb7 IS lLlf4 'it>e7 16 lLlhS ~f8 17 dS! lLlxdS 18 lLle4 and White is win- ning, Flear-Plaskett, British Ch, Torquay 1982. 12 lLlf4 'iff7 (D) w 13 lLlg6+ This probably supersedes other moves at this stage, but 13 lLld2 in particular is important as White could already have played lLld2 earlier: a) 13 lLlc3 is a comparatively recent devel- opment: 13 ... lLlc6!? 14 lLlg6+ 'it>e8 IS lLlxh8 J..xh8 16 O-O-O and instead of 16 ... J..f3? 17 .l:i.gl!, as in Doric-B.Kovacevic, Rijeka 2006, Black has to try 16 ... lLlb4 17 J..bl J..b7, when White can keep up the pressure with 18 dS. b) 13 lLld2? ! (D) is a position that can also arise from the move-order 9 J..gS lLlf6 10 li'h4 oitxhl 11 lLld2li'e7 12 lLle2li'f7 13 lLlf4.

Objectively, Black should play 13 .. Jhh7!, when 14 J..xh7 lLlxh7 IS li'xh7 J..xd41ed to a draw in W.Taylor-Haugen, corr. 1995. Some writers have held out hope for Black after 13 ... lLlc6?!, since 14 J..g6 gets hit by 14 ... l:.xh7 IS oitxh7?! (1S 'ifg3! 'iVg8 160-O-O with an at- tack - Odessky) Is ... lLlxh7 16 li'xh7 lLlxd4! with a dynamic balance, Vegh-Zlovilov, Sankt Augustin 1990. But White can play 14 lLlg6+!, when I see nothing better than 14 ... 'it>e8 IS lLlxh8 J..xh8 16 O-O-O (16 J..xf6!?) 16 ... lLlb4 (otherwise the bishop has no good squares) 17 oitbl J..b7 18 dS! with the idea 18 ... exdS 19 It.e 1+ <j;d8 20 l:!.eS! and .l:!.fS. Let's return to the game: 13 ... <j;e8 14 lLle5 'iif815 lLlc3! d6 16 O-O-O!

(D)

16  dxe5 Widely criticized, but the purported improve- ment 16 ... oitb7 17 oitg6+ 'it>e7 18 lLlg4 lLlbd7 is refuted outright by Bucker's 19 dS; for exam- ple, 19 ... eS 20 lLle4 and J..fSxd7 follows. 17 dxe5 White is winning. 17  'it>e7?! But 17 ... lLlbd7 18 exf6 J..xf6 19 l:.xh 1 is only a small improvement. Over the course of

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHEITO 111

the next 15 moves, neither side plays perfectly, but White's superiority isn't in doubt: 18 .l:.xhl ttJbd7 19 .l:.el ttJxe5 20 ~xe5 <t>d7 21 'iYh3 l:te8 22 .Jtg6 l:te7 23 ~bl <t>c8 24 nxe6 24 .l:.e3! intending .l:.f3 is cleaner.

24. .. ~b8 25 .Jtxf6 .Jtxf6?! 26 ttJd5 ~xe6 27

'iVxe6 .Jtg7 28 f4 'iWc5 29 'ii'g8+ 'ii'fS 30 ttJe7! c6 31 ~e6! 'iWxf4 32 ttJxc6+ ~b7 33 'ii'e7+? A catastrophe in time-trouble. One win for White among others was 33 a3 ~xh2 34 'ii'f7+! 'iWc7 35 ttJe7! and White has too many threats. 33  ~c7 34 .Jte4 'iHxe7 35 ttJxe7+ ~c7 36 ttJg8 ~d7 37 ~c2 a5 38 a3? The opposite-coloured bishops may draw anyway, but 38 .Jtg6 would at least keep the king from e8. 38 .. ~e8 39 .Jtg6+ ~f8 40 b4 axb4 41 axb4 l:txg8 42 hxg8'iW+ ~xg8 Ih-1fl The variation with 4 .. .f5 5 exf5 .Jtxg2 is a testament to the creativity of brilliant players and analysts. Theory seems to indicate that it comes up short for Black (in fact drastically so), although I suppose that in the masses of varia- tions he may yet find a saving grace. Likavsky - Bunzmann lenbach 2008

[diagram]
The much less radical 4 ... i.b4+ is played fairly often, although it doesn't immediately break up White's centre after 5 .Jtd2 (D) (in- stead of 5 ttJc3, which we'll see later by trans- position). White seems to have a small, conventional advantage; however, there's much that remains

to be discovered here, as in any such ultra- flexible line: a) 5 ... iLxd2+ 6 ~xd2 (or 6 ttJxd2 with the idea 6 ... 'ii'g5?! 7 ttJgf3!, and after the consistent 7 .. :~xg2?!, White establishes a meaningful lead in active development following 8 l:!.gl ~h3 9 'uxg7 ~h6 10 ~g3; 6 ... ttJh6 improves, and I'd assess White as marginally better for classical reasons, but modernists may wish to dispute that) 6 ... ttJh6 (6 .. .f5 7 ttJc3 ttJf6 falls slightly short of equality following 8 f3 ttJc6 9 exf5!? ttJxd4 10 ~e3 c5 11 ttJge2 ttJxe2 12 ttJxe2; for example, 12 ... O-O 13 fxe6 :le8 14 ttJf4 or 12 ... 'ii'e7 13 fxe6 with the idea 13 ... O-O 140-0 dxe6 15 'iVe5) 7 ttJc3 f5 8 ttJf3 O-O and now both

9 O-O and 9 O-O-O favour White.

b) 5 ... ttJc6 has the point that 6 iLxb4 ttJxb4 will force the exchange of White's bishop on d3. But in the first place, 6 ttJf3 should give White some pull; for example, he stood better after the forthright 6 ... ~f6 7 d5 .Jtxd2+ 8'ii'xd2 in Dautov-Speelman, Lippstadt 2000. And has Black gained anything from 5 ... ttJc6 if White plays 6 ttJe2? For example, 6 ... 'iYf6 (6 ... .Jtxd2+ 7 'iWxd2 'iYf6 8 d5 ttJe5 9 O-O) 7 .Jtxb4 ttJxb4 8 ttJbc3 and 8 ... ttJxd3+ is a slightly improved version for White of the main line, whereas 8 ... ttJe7 9 .Jtbl!? O-O 10 a3 ttJbc6 11 O-O looks promising. I should emphasize that both sides have tried other moves in the lines following 4 ... .Jtb4+, and although I lean towards White, it's not clear that Black can't keep things approximately level ifhe employs the proper move-order and strategy. 5 exf5 .Jtb4+ In this manner, Black manages to steer clear of White's terrifying attack in the previous

112 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

game, and initiate some aggression of his own. But he'll have to give up some material to do that. 6'iWl (D) White protects his g-pawn. It's easy to con- firm that if White interposes a piece, say, 6 .ltd2?, Black can exchange and play 7 ... .ltxg2. Then 8 'iVh5+ is wholly insufficient because of 8 ... ~f8.

[diagram]
MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 113

(Wind's suggestion 14 f3 is more promising) 14 .. .l:tab8 IS h4!? (IS llJbd2 is another can of worms) lS ... llJxcS! (D). w 16 "iVc2 llJe4 17 bxaS llJd4 18 llJxd4?! (18 "iVd3 or 18 "iVd11eaves everything to be played for) 18 ... "iVxd4 19 i.a6, Lindinger-Langrock, Hamburg 200S, and the game's 19 ... llJxf2!? should suffice for a draw, but 19 ... llJg3+! 20 fxg3 .l:txb2! is even better: 21 i.xb2 .l:txfS+ 22 "iVxfS i.c4+! 23 i.xc4 "iVxc4+ 24 'It>gl exfS 2S '>fi>h2 cS and Black's pawns hope to carry the day. Apologies for all the convoluted lines; they go with the territory. White has an awfully stark choice in this variation: the relative sanity of 7 llJf3 versus the craziness (but real promise) of 7 cS. 7 ... 0-08 a3 i.d6 9llJc3 (D)

White's pieces are harmoniously placed and he has an extra pawn, but with that poorly- placed king on a potentially half-open file, he has to play carefully. 9 . "iVe8! Apparently White keeps some edge in any case, although hardly an overwhelming one: a) 9 ... exfS 10 i.xfSllJc6 (1O .. :i!Ve8 11 i.d3) 11 .i.gS "iVe8 12 i.xf6! .l:txf6 13 .i.e4. b) 9 ... llJc6 10 i.gS 'tli'e8 11 fxe6! dxe6 12 i.xf6 ':xf6 13 .i.e4l:ld8 14 lli'a4 i.a8 IS .l:te1 and Black is tied down, Dautov-B.Filipovi6, Swiss Team Ch 2004.

10.i.g5!?

10 fxe6! looks risky because of the open f- file, but in fact it opens lines for White as well; for example, 10 ... dxe6 11 ~e2 with the ideas of .i.gS and llJbS, and if 11 ... .i.xf3 12 ~xf3llJc6, then 13llJe4! llJxd4 14llJxf6+ .l:txf6 lS'ilVe4. 10  exf5! 11 c5! i.e7 Not ll...bxcS?? 12'ilVb3+ and ~xb7. 12 .i.xf5 'It>h8 Or 12 ... 'ilVhS!? 13 h4 .i.xf3 14'ilVxf3 (14 gxf3 bxcS IS dxcSllJc6 16llJdS is a decent option) 14 ... "iVxf3 IS gxf3 bxcS 16 dxcS i.xcs 17 .l:tdl and White probably has some advantage with his active bishops, but it can't amount to much. 13 cxb6 axb614 h4?! (D) 14 .i.c2 ~hS IS h4 looks more accurate. White stands a bit better in these lines.

14  J:ta5?! 14 ... llJdS! finally achieves the trade on f3 that Black has been seeking. Then IS ~c2 llJxc3 16 bxc3 .i.xf3 17 gxf3 g6 18 i.e4 .l:taS 19 dS is still unresolved. 15 i.c2 .i.d6 16 'it>gl ~h5 17 .l:th3 White has consolidated and remains with a healthy extra pawn. 17. llJc6 18 i.xf6 gxf6 19 llJe4 i.f4 20 llJeg5?!

114 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

20 ttJg3! 'iff7 21 ttJe2 is safe and sound. 2o . Jlkg4?

20. .. fxg5 21 hxg5 'iff7 22 g6! is very danger-

ous for Black, but 20 ... l:!.g8! 21 ttJxh7 'iig4 gives Black some chances. 21 'iid3! f5 22 l:.el :d5 23 i..b3l:!.d6 24 d5 ttJa5 25 i..a2 h6 26 b4 ~g8 27 bxa5 hxg5 28 hxg51-0 After all those tactics, let's tum our attention to a positional answer to 3 e4 and 4 i..d3: w Shirov - Kengis Gausdal1991

1 c4 b6 2 d4 e6 3 e4 i..b7 4 i..d3 ttJc6 (D)

This move looks rather silly until you realize that if White defends his d-pawn with a piece, 5 ... ttJb4 exchanges his bishop on d3 and wins the bishop-pair. On the other hand, this leaves White with a clear lead in space and develop- ment. In other words, a typical opening trade- off. 5 ttJf3 This is often considered inferior to 5 ttJe2 (see the following game), because it blocks the f-pawn. Still, White has more central control and decent chances for a pull. a) A clever suggestion (of what origin I'm unsure) is 5 i..e2!?, protecting d4 with the queen and avoiding the exchange of the king's bishop. Then anything goes; for example, 5 ... ttJa5!? hits e4, an attack that can be fortified by ... 'iih4 and/or ... ttJf6, while .. .f5 can be a theme. b) After 5 d5 ttJe5 6 i..e2? (6 ttJc3), 6 ... ~h4! hits the e-pawn and White already has to be careful: 7 'iic2?! (7 ttJc3 i..b4 8 'iid4! d6 9 ttJf3 ttJxf3+ 10 i..xf3 'iif6 stays level) 7 .. .f5! 8 ttJc3 i..b4, Bosboom Lanchava-Stefanova, Gronin- gen (women) 1999. Black is winning the e- pawn, so White should mix it up by 9 i..d2 fxe4

10 O-O-O.

5  ttJb4 6 ttJc3 This is the most important move, because now White retains the choice of castling on ei- ther wing. 60-0 ttJxd3 7 'iixd3 ttJe7 8 ttJc3 ttJg6 is sound for Black, who develops his pieces and plans to establish a central presence later. 6 .. ttJxd3+ 7 'ifxd3 (D)

7 .. d6 Black's calmest move, but not necessarily his best: a) The ... ttJe7-g6 manoeuvre doesn't seem to work so well here in view of 7 ... ttJe7 8 d5 (Elianov-Ponomariov, Kharkov 2009 saw White trying to stop ... ttJg6 by 8 h4, but 8 ... d5! 9 cxd5 exd5 10 e5 ~d7 11 h5 ttJc6 12 a3 f6 13 exf6 gxf6 14 i..f4 O-O-O gave Black enough play) 8 ... ttJg69 h4!. At this point, Scherbakov-Gor- batov, DeCin 1996 went 9 ... i..d6 10 ttJb5!? (or

10 h5 ttJe5 11 ttJxe5 i..xe5 12 f4 .Bxc3+ 13

~xc3) 1O ... i..b4+ 11 i..d2 i..xd2+ 12 'iVxd2 a6 13 ttJc3 d6?! 14 h5 ttJe5 15 ttJxe5 dxe5 16 h6 g6

17 O-O-O with more territory and the upper

hand. b) 7 ... i..b4 is Odessky's recommendation, intending ... i..xc3+: 8 d5 (8 i..d2 ttJe7 9 O-O i..xc3 10 i..xc3 d5! immobilizes the bishop on c3, Cherepov-Bokiej, Ostroda 2006) 8 ... ttJe7 9 i..d20-0 10 a3?! (White uses valuable time; 10 O-O! is more determined) 1O ... i..xc3 11 i..xc3 c6! 12 h4 (12 d6 ttJg6 13 O-O c5 is unclear; 12

MODERN QUEENSlDE FIANCHEITO 115

'it'd4 may be best) 12 ... cxdS 13 cxdS exdS 14 eS ttJg6 IS ttJgS? (1S O-O-O is necessary) IS ... h6, Scherbakov-Bischoff, Linares 1996. White had probably missed that 16 ttJxf7 fails to 16 ... ttJf4, but after 16 ~fS? hxgS 17 hxgS ne8 18 'ilVh3 d6, he ended up with no attack.

8 O-O

White could consider 8 .i.gS .i.e7 9 h4 !? pre- serving the option of O-O-O, or 8 .i.e3 ttJf6 9 h3, doing the same. 8 ... .i.e7 8 ... ttJf69 dS! has the points 9 ... eS 10 cS! and 9 ... .i.e7 10 ttJd4. Another idea is 8 ... g6, since after 9 .i.gS!?, 9 ... 'it'd7! is possible, rather than 9 ... .i.e7 10 .i.e3. 9 dS! eS? 9 ... ttJf6?! 10 ttJd4 'it'd7 11 "iVg3 is promising for White, but 9 ... .i.f6 with the idea ... ttJe7 may improve. 10 cS! ttJf6 1O ... dxcS 11 ttJxe5 gives White much too strong a centre. The other logical idea is to pre- serve castling rights by 1O ... a6!? 11 c6 .i.c8, but you have to like White. 11 "fibS+ ~f8 12 c6 .i.c8 13 a4 as 14 ~e2 g61S ttJel White also stands better following IS .i.h6+ ~g8 16h3. IS .. ~g7 16 ttJd3 .i.a6 17 f4! exf4 18 .u.xf4 hS 19 h3 h4 20 .i.e3 ttJhS 21 .i.d4+ ~g8 22 IU2 .l:!.h7 23 ttJbS White is fully in charge, although the game later got out of control. Ehlvest - Kraai Philadelphia 2003

[diagram]
(D)

This is the more popular modem move, leav- ing White's f-pawn free to advance. That will prove relevant in some lines that follow. S  ttJb4 If Black doesn't gain the bishop-pair, his set-up doesn't make sense. 6 ttJbc3 Epishin-Ehlvest, Novosibirsk 1993 saw some typical themes for White: 6 O-O ttJxd3 7 "fixd3 d6 (innocent-looking, but ... d6 is often slightly weakening; 7 ... ttJe7 is more flexible) 8 ttJbc3 ttJf69dS!.i.e71OttJd4"fid711 b3!?(11 "fig3!?

also gives White some advantage, with the idea

11...O-O 12 .i.h6 ttJe8 13 f4! or ll...cS! 12 dxc6

~xc6 13 l:te 1 O-O 14 .i.h6 ttJe8 IS .l::.ad 1) l1...c6 12 dxc6 .i.xc6 13 .i.a3 a6 14 l:.adl .i.b7 IS 'ilVg3 "ilc7 (1S ... O-O? 16 eS) 16 l:.fel (D).

It's useful to compare this to the Hedgehog Variation of the English Opening and similar formations in the Sicilian Defence. In fact, all the differences favour White. First, his bad light-squared bishop is gone, which is a huge plus. Then he is ahead in development in com- parison with those variations, and his queen on g3 is beautifully placed. Finally, Black's pawn on d6 is much weaker than usual. The game continued 16 ... g6 (Epishin analyses the depress- ing alternative 16 ... O-O 17 eS dxeS 18 i..xe7 ~xe7 19 "fixeS; and after 16 ... ttJhS 17 ~g4 g6?, 18 eS! dxeS 19 ttJxe6! fxe6 20 Wixe6 can't be defended by Black) 17 eS ttJhS?? (but White is in charge anyway; e.g., 17 ... dxeS 18 .i.xe7 with the idea 18 .. .'ihe7 19 ~xeS O-O 20 ttJdS!) 18 .i.xd6 fid7 (18 ... "fixd6 19 exd6 ttJxg3 20

116 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

hxg3 leaves White a pawn up with much the better position) 19 'iVg4 .llxd6 20 exd6 O-O 21 tba4!? l:tae8 22 tbc2 'iVd8 23 d7 l:.e7 24 'iVd4! and Black could have resigned. 6  tbxd3+ 7 'iWxd3 .llb4 7 ... tbe7 and 7 ... g6 are alternatives, although in the latter case 8 h4 looks bothersome.

8 O-O tbe7 9 tbdl! (D)

A creative move that leaves the bishop look- ing silly out on b4, and also threatened with capture by 10 a3 and eS. 9 a3 is a little slow, and Black seems to get good counterchances fol- lowing 9 ... .llxc3 10 tbxc3 O-O; for example, 11 .llgS f6 12 .llh4 dS 13 f3 'iid7 14 nfdl .lla6 IS b3l:.ad8, Chuchelov-Teske, Cappelle la Grande 1998.

9  tbg6?! This doesn't appear to work out. Langrock provides analysis of this otherwise untested po- sition: a) Versus 9 ... fS, he suggests 10 f3! (10 eS tbg6 holds together; White mustn't overex- tend by 11 a3 .lle7 12 f4 O-O 13 dS d6!, when his big centre crumbles) 1O ... fxe4 (versus 11 a3 .lld6 12 eS) 11 fxe4 tbg6 12 cS!? (12 tbdc3 ~h4 and ... O-O-O might drum up some counter- play) 12 ... bxcS 13 a3 c4 14 'iUxc4 j.e7 IS dS exdS 16 exdS and Black still can't castle. b) Thus Langrock recommends that Black play 9 ... c6, freeing c7 for his bishop in the event of 10 a3 .lld6 11 eS. Play might continue 10 eS!? (White has a good alternative in 10 'iVg3 tbg6 11 a3 .lle7 12 f4) 1O ... tbg6 11 f4!? 0-012 tbe3 j.e7 (12 ... fS! looks better) 13 fS exfS 14 tbxfS d6 (thus far analysis by Lindinger) IS exd6 .llxd6 16 tbeg3 .llc8! (16 ... cS 17 tbxd6 'iVxd6 18 tbfS) 17 b3 f6 18 .llb2 with a small advantage for White.

10 f4 f5 11 exf5 exf5 12 tbg3 (D)

12. O-O?

12 ... tbh4 comes up short to 13 a3 (or 13 tbxfS tbxg2 14 tbxg7+) 13 ... .lle7 14 tbe3 with the idea 14 ... g6? IS dS! O-O 16 tbe2 followed by g3. 12 ... 'iVf6 13 tbxfS O-O 14 a3 .lle7 IS tbxe7+ tbxe7 16 tbc3 also favours White, but Black has the bishops and a certain amount of counterplay. 13 c5! a5 13 ... bxcS 14 a3 .llaS IS dxcS threatens both

16 b4 and 16 ~b3+, so IS ... .lle4 is forced, los-

ing a pawn after 16 tbxe4 fxe4 17 'iVc4+ dS 18 cxd6+.

14 a3 .lla615 'iVb3+ ~h816 axb4 .llxf117

tbxf1 ~e7?! But two pieces for a rook was too much any- way. 18 bxa5 bxa5 19 tbc3 and White had no trouble converting his ma- terial1ead into victory. The most investigated lines in the English Defence (although no longer the most impor- tant) begin with 4 tbc3, about which a fair-sized book could be written. I'll make the not-so- bold claim that Black's play is adequate in ev- ery line, and therefore show only one full-game example. However, because this variation is so thoroughly dependent upon specifics, you might want to supplement this coverage with other books and database searches, particularly if the English Defence becomes one of your primary weapons.

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 117

w Gorbatov - Ehlvest St Petersburg 1994

1 c4 b6 2 d4 e6 3 e4 ~b7 4 liJc3 ~b4 (D)

The funny thing about this position is that White goes into it more than any other, and yet it is the easiest for Black to play and the most difficult for White to defend. The trade-off of liJc3 for ... ~b4 seems to favour Black, since ... ~b4 clears the way for ... f5 (with f8 free for the king, White's exf5 and 'iih5+ attack is no longer strong), and brings Black closer to cas- tling. In the meantime, White's knight on c3 doesn't add to the defence of e4, and is subject to capture with the attendant doubled-pawn issues. It's worth comparing this with the Nimzo- Indian Defence, in which Black plays the same move with the idea of controlling and some- times occupying e4. The biggest difference is that in the Nimzo-Indian, White has no pawn on that square to defend, and thus needn't tie his pieces to it. In the English Defence, White has to scramble to ward off the direct attack on e4 and can't find time to pursue other goals. 5~d3 This is the most-frequently played move by some margin. Here are the major alternatives; notice how many traps White has to be wary of: a) 5 'iVc2 was popular when the English De- fence was first played, but the primitive attack 5 ... 'iih4 ! (D), hitting the e-pawn and preventing its defence by f3, caused it to fade from the scene. The tactics are entertaining: al) 6 ~d3 f5 7 g3 'iVh5 (7 ... 'iie7!?) 8 f3 liJc6!? forces White to do something about d4, w and the natural 9 ~e3?! fxe4 10 ~xe4 liJf6 leaves Black with the better of it. a2) 6 d5!? isn't as bad as it has been made out to be, but Black should equalize after 6 ... ~xc3+ (6 .. .f5!? 7 exf5 exd5 8 liJf3 'iie4+ 9 ~dl! ~xc2+ 10 ~xc2) 7 bxc3 f5 (7 ... 'iie7!?) 8 exf5 exd5 9 cxd5 ~xd5 10 liJe2 liJe7. b) 5 d5 is well answered by 5 ... 'iVe7! 6 ~e3 (6 liJe2 exd5 7 exd5 liJf6; 6 ~e2 liJf6 7 f3 exd5 8 cxd5 c6 9 dxc6 liJxc6 10 liJh3 d5 11 exd5 O-O-O with more than enough attack) 6 ... f5! 7 exf5 exd5 8 cxd5 (8 'ilVh5+ ~f8) 8 ... liJf6, win- ning back material with the initiative; the key line is 9 ~c4 'ilVe4! 10 'iUe2 ~xg2 11 ~d4+ 'it>d8. c) 5 f3 is White's most important alternative to 5 ~d3; it serves both to strengthen White's centre and to reduce the effect of Black's bishop on b7. There's nothing wrong with 5 ... liJe7 (in- tending .. .f5 or in some cases ... d5), but the most aggressive reply is 5 .. .f5 6 exf5 liJh6! (a gambit, with the idea ... liJ(x)f5, which in tum threatens ... 'iVh4+ and the pawn on d4; 6 ... exf5 is also playable, if duller) and now: c1) 7 ~xh6 'Yi'h4+ 8 g3 'ii'xh6 gains the bishop-pair with pressure on the dark squares like e3 and d4; for example, 9 'Yi'd2 'iUxd2+ 10 ~xd2 liJc6! 11 liJge2 (Heimberger-Teske, Linz 1995) and now Odessky suggests 11...O-O-O with the idea 12 fxe6 dxe6 13 ~e3 liJxd4! 14 liJxd4 ~c5. c2) After 7 fxe6 liJf5 the highly-charged main line runs 8 ~f4! (to counter ... 'ii'h4+; 8 exd7+ is not necessarily unplayable, but hardly anyone will want to fall so far behind in devel- opment after 8 ... liJxd7) 8 ... dxe6 9 'Yi'a4+ liJc6

118 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w c21) After 10 O-O-O liJxd4 llliJbS?! O-O! 12 .i.xc7, Odes sky finds adequate counterplay in 12 ... ~gS+ 13 f4 'iVh6! 14 liJxd4l:.xf4!. c22) 10 dS exdS?! (1O ... .i.xc3+ 11 bxc3 exdS 120-O-O 'iVf6100ks safer) 11 O-O-O d4!? 12liJdS .i.d6 13l:tel+ rJi;f7 14 cS (14liJh3!?) 14 ... l:te8 with a satisfactory game (Odes sky). All this is extremely messy, and indicates that S f3 is one direction for White to look in if he wants something different. Black can avoid this level of brinkmanship with S ... liJe7. S. .. fS (D) w Black is naturally willing to play this when 6 exfS?? truly loses the rook to 6 ... .i.xg2. 6 'iVhS+ This check gets Black to weaken himself by ... g6, but that move also strengthens his hold on fS, so the trade-off isn't easy to assess. White has many alternatives here, of which 6 'iVe2 is the most important. None of the others are terri- bly impressive: a) 6 ~c2?! liJf6 7 f3liJc6! (D). w 8liJe2! (not great, but everything else practi- cally loses on the spot! An incredible line is 8 eS liJxd4 9 'iVa4liJg4!! 10 "iVxb4 "iVh4+ 11 g3 liJxeS!, and 8 .i.e3 fails to 8 ... fxe4 9 fxe4liJg4!) 8 ... fxe49 fxe4 eS! 10 dSliJd4 11 "iVdl O-O and Black has very active pieces; he is aided by the idea 12 O-O? liJg4! 13 liJxd4 "iVh4 14 h3 .l:txfl + IS'iVxfl .i.cs and Black wins. b) 6 f3 ~h4+! 7 g3 "iVhS puts pressure on the long diagonal and is unpleasant for White. c) 6 dS fxe4 7 .i.xe4 'iVh4! (D) already places White in a precarious spot: w Now White should certainly avoid 8 iof3? .i.xc3+ 9 bxc3 'iVxc4, 8 'iVf3?! liJf69 iod3 O-O and 8 'iVd4? liJf6 9 .i.f4liJxe4 10 'iVxe4 O-O. A more serious option is 8 'iVd3 exdS, when White should avoid 9 cxdS?! liJf6 10 i.f3 O-O 11 g3 .i.xc3+ 12 'iVxc3 'iVa4 with the idea ... .l:te8+, and play instead 9 i.xdS i.xdS 10 'iVxdS c6 11 ~eS+ liJe7; then Black is only slightly better. Also after 8 'iVe2 liJf6 9 .i.f3 O-O White is still behind in development and Black threatens to

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 119

open the e-file by ... exdS, while 10 dxe6lbc6! is also tough to handle. d) 6 ~e2 lbf6 is often played; it's vital to W know the specifics: dl) 7 .JtgS fxe4 (7 ... O-O is a playable alter- native, and even 7 ... h6 8 .Jtxf6 ~xf6 secures a fair share of the play) 8 .Jtxe4 (D) (not 8 i.xf6?? exd3! 9 ~hS+ g6).

8 ... lbxe4?! (this sacrifice is often recom- mended, but is perhaps too speculative; instead, 8 ... .Jtxe4! 9 .Jtxf6 ~xf6 10 ~xe4 O-O 11 lbf3 ttJc6 120-0 .Jtxc3 13 bxc3 ~fS! has proven to equalize for Black) 9 .Jtxd8 lbxc3 10 1\Vg4! ttJa4+ (l0 ... ttJe4+ 11 'it'e2! 'it'xd8 12 f3) 11 'it'f1 'it'xd8 12 ~xg7 1:.f8 13lbf3! .Jtxf3 14 gxf3 and Black is coming up a little short. d2) 7 f3lbc6! 8 .Jte3 (8 eS?! introduces a fa- mous trick: 8 ... ttJxd4! 9 ~f2 ttJhS 10 ~xd4?? .JtcS) 8 .. .f4!? (or 8 .. .fxe4 9 fxe4 eS 10 dSlbd4- compare the game) 9 .Jtf2 (9 .Jtxf4 lbxd4 10 ~d2 is structurally sounder; Black nevertheless develops quickly after 10 ... ~e7 I1lbge2lbxe2 12 .Jtxe2 O-O) 9 ... eS! 10 a3?! (10 dS lbd4 11 1\Vd2 O-O is roughly level after 12lbge2! lbxe2!? 13 .Jtxe2 ~e7 14 a3 .JtcS) 1O ... .Jtxc3+ 11 bxc3 d6 (D). For Black, this is a pleasant version of a Samisch Variation of the Nimzo-Indian De- fence, since White is unable to do anything on the kingside. In Bercys-Rahman, Philadelphia 2004, White tried to free his passively-placed bishops by 12 cS!? dxcS 13 dxcS, but his queen- side weaknesses showed after 13 ... O-O 14 ~c2 1\Ve7 IS ttJe2 'it'h8 16 1:.bllbd7! 17 cxb6 axb6 18 a4lbcS 19 .JtbS lbaS (Black is taking over the light squares) 20 ttJc 1 1:.ad8 21 O-O ..tc8! 22 .l:Iel .Jte6 with an obvious positional superior- ity. 6 .. g6 7 ~e2 ttJf6 8 f3 8 .JtgS is similar to the line 6 ~e2 lbf6 7 .JtgS above, but this time, apart from the nor- mal move 8 ... h6, the queen sacrifice 8 ... fxe4 9 .Jtxe4 (9 .Jtxf6 exd3) 9 ... ttJxe4! 10 .Jtxd8lbxc3 is sound; for example, 11 bxc3 .Jtxc3+ 12 'it'f1 .Jtxal 13 .Jtxc7 .Jtxd4 14 .Jtd6 ttJc6 might fol- low. 8 .. lbc6! 9 .i.e3 9 eS? lbxd4! 10 ~f2lbhS! 11 ~xd4?? .JtcS actually occurred in Adorjan-Spassky, Toluca Interzonal 1982. 9 ... fxe4 10 fxe4 e5 11 d5 11 lbf3 exd4 12 lbxd4 O-O 13 O-O .i.xc3 14 bxc3 "fiIe7 puts pressure on e4 and secures an outpost on eS. 11 ... ttJd4 (D) w

12.Jtxd4

It's a pity to give up this good bishop, but White is faced with some poor options:

120 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) 12 'ti'dl? liJxe4! 13 ii.xe4 'ti'h4+ 14 Rf1 ii.xc3 IS bxc3 'ti'xe4 16 ~xd4 exd4 17 'ti'xd4 O-O+ 18 liJf3 .l:tae8 (or 18 ... .l:txf3+!) is simply winning; White's pawns are too weak and his pieces can't coordinate. b) 12 'iVd2liJg413 ~gS ii.e7 14 ii.xe7 'iVxe7 followed by ... O-O leaves Black with much the better pieces, and it's hard to expel the knight on d4 without concessions, as shown by the line IS liJbS O-O 16 liJxd4 exd4 17 liJf3 cS 18 dxc6 dxc6 19 O-O liJe3. 12 . exd4 13 a3 ii.xc3+ 14 bxc3 dxc3 IS liJf30-0 At first sight, White's centre looks danger- ous, but it is vulnerable along the e-file, and in the meantime, White is still a pawn down. 160-0 "fIe7 17 eS Else ... .l:tae8 will force this advance anyway. 17. lIaeS IS .l:tael "fIcS+ Or 18 ... 'iVxa3! with the idea 19 'iVc2 'iVcS+

20 WhlliJg4 21 ii.xg6l:te7!.

19 'iYf2 'iVxf2+ 20 lIxf2liJhS 21l:tc2 c6! 22 d6 cS 23 .t!.xc3 ~xf3 24 gxf31If6!? (D) Black threatens ... .t!.xd6 and is already fore- seeing a productive exchange sacrifice. Never- theless, 24 ... :f4! was probably more practical, when moves such as .. JId4 and ... liJf4-e6 keep a firm grip. w 2S ii.e4 .l:i.xeS 26 ii.dS+ .t!.xdS 27 .l:i.eS+ Rg7 2ScxdS ':xd6 White's d-pawn will fall. The play now be- comes a little wobbly. 29 .l:taS as? 29 ... .l:txdS 30 .l:.xa7 liJf4 leaves Black with two passed pawns in the centre.

30.l:tbS?!

30 .l:ta6! would just about equalize. 30  liJf4! 31 Rf2 gS 32 a4 Now, instead of the game's 32 ... .l:th6?, Black could have played 32 ... liJxdS!, gaining a third pawn for the exchange. Perhaps he feared the pin with 33 .l:td3, but there's no way to exploit it after 33 ... Rf7. As the game went, White es- caped with a draw after some inaccuracies. The whole variation after 4 liJc3 ii.b4 con- tains many specific points that have to be known by Black, but White should probably look else- where for his weapon versus the English De- fence. White's best 'slow' strategy after 1 c4 b6 2 d4 e6 is 3 a3 ~b7 4liJc3 (D), which is equiva- lent to 2 ... ii.b7 3 liJc3 e6 4 a3.

As mentioned in the first game of my cover- age of the English Defence, some players are discouraged by the lack of prospects for Black after these moves, although the evidence is mixed in that regard. White's idea is to play dS, gaining space while limiting the range of Black's bishop. It's easy to see that allowing Black to play ... ii.b4 robs that advance of its effectiveness by making the dS-pawn a target; hence the pre- liminary a3. For his part, Black can argue that a3 does little in lines where Black plays ... g6, and indeed, 4 ... g6 is a popular way of returning the game to a long-term struggle between White's space and Black's attempts to chip away at the centre. In this context, I should mention that with the move-order I c4 b6 2 d4 e6 3 a3, Black will sometimes play 3 ... g6 and 4 ... ii.g7, delay- ing the development of his queen's bishop, which may end up on a6 or elsewhere.

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHE1TO 121

I suspect that White retains some theoretical advantage in the ... g6 set-up, which probably doesn't mean much in practice. Here's a game which illustrates a more confrontational strat- egy by Black: Sher - Lempert Erevan open 1996

[diagram]
The most aggressive players are attracted to this move. 4 ... tiJf6 also stops S e4. Then S tiJf3 is a Queen's Indian Defence (Petrosian Varia- tion), but S dS is a more ambitious idea. It is of- ten answered by the quick-developing S. .. .Jid6 (with the idea ... .JieS and ... .Jixc3) 6 tiJf3 O-O

w In practice, Black has gained equal play here; for example: a) 7 g3 c6 8 .Jig2 cxdS 9 cxdS exdS 10 O-O tiJa6 11 tiJh4 tiJc7 12 e4?! (12 tiJfS should maintain the balance) 12 ... .JieS 13 tiJxdS, Marin- C.Bauer, European Team Ch, Batumi 1999, and here 13 ... tiJfxdS! 14 exdS fif6 gives Black the upper hand. b) 7 e4 exdS 8 exdS c6 9 .Jie2 cxdS 10 cxdS tiJa6 11 O-O.!:te8 12 .JigS h6 13 .JiM tiJcs 14 tiJd4, Knaak-Planinc, PolanicaZdroj 1979, and now both 14 ... tiJce4 IS tiJxe4 .!:txe4 16 tiJfS .JieS and 14 ... .!:tc8 IS tiJfS .Jif8!? are complex but look perfectly satisfactory for Black.

[diagram]
After S. .. .Jie7 6 g3 .Jif6 7 .Jid2 tiJe7 8 .Bg2, Chemyshov came up with the rather bizarre manoeuvre 8 ... tiJc8!? 9 tiJh3 tiJd6 10 b3 tiJa6 followed by ... tiJcs controlling e4. Worth a try! 6g3 White intends .i.g2 and either tiJf3-d4 or tiJh3-f4. 6 ... tiJa6 6 ... g6 is a standard English Defence response to dS, since White has cleared the long diagonal for Black's g7-bishop, but here (unlike the lines below with ... .Jid6-eS), Black's bishop has no direct contact with c3, which means that the crucial manoeuvre ... tiJa6-cS is no longer pos- sible after 7 .Jig2 .Jig7 8 tiJh3! 0-09 O-O tiJa6 10 b4! (D).

The knight on a6 has no moves: 10 ... tiJe4 (White is about to play .l:Ibl or .Jib2 with spatial domination, and 1O ... tiJxdS 11 tiJxdS exdS 12 .JixdS+ .JixdS 13 ~xdS+ ~h8 14 .JigS doesn't help matters) 11 tiJxe4 fxe4 (1l....JixaI12 .JigS lie8 13 ~xal fxe414 .Jih6 .~.f7 ISl:.dl! threat- ens tiJgS, .Jixe4, dxe6 and general mayhem; the knight on a6 is useless) 12 .!:tbl exdS 13 cxdS ~e7 14 tiJgS ~h8 IS tiJxe4 with an extra pawn and positional superiority, Piket-Plaskett, Mon- dariz 2000.

7.Jig2

Now White can't deny the knight cS by 7 b4 without allowing Black dynamic counterplay by 7 ... exdS (or 7 ... cS) 8 cxdS cS!, intending 9 bS? tiJc7 10 .Jig2 .Jid6. A pawn will soon fall after ... .JieS, or ... fie7 and ... .JieS. 7  tiJc5 8 tiJh3 White keeps dS directly supported by the g2- bishop and plans tiJf4 at some point. He tried the older 8 tiJf3 in Elianov-Delchev, French Team Ch, Gonfreville 2006, but it cedes e4, and Black reached easy equality by 8 ... tiJce4 9 O-O tiJxc3 10 bxc3 .Jics 11 tiJd4 O-O! 12 dxe6 .Jixg2 13

122 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

~xg2 'fiIe7 14 exd7 'fiIxd7, with more than ade- quate compensation. 8  i.d6 (D) w 90-0 1\\'0 valid alternatives are 9 i.f4 and 9 ttJb5 i.e5 10 f4, the latter winning the bishop-pair, albeit with a loss of time. 9 ... i.e5 The point of ... i.d6. Now White always has to be on the lookout for ... i.xc3 and ... exd5. 10 "iVe2 There are legitimate alternatives at this junc- ture as well, such as 10 i.d2 and 10 ttJb5!? with the idea 1O ... a6?! 11 f4!.

10 . O-O (D)

w We have arrived at a kind of main line for the 4 ... f5 variation, and it has been played in a re- markable number of games. White shouldn't ignore earlier options, however, since Black seems to hold his own here. l1~dl White sometimes plays 11 i.d2, but his most common alternative to the text-move is 11 ttJf4 'fiIe8!? (Black should avoid positions like

11...'fiIe7 12 i.d2 c6?! 13 dxe6 dxe6 14 ~ad1

~ad8 15 b4 i.xc3 16 .Bxc3 ttJce4 17 i.a1! with an unopposed bishop on the powerful long di- agonal, LSokolov-Rahman, Istanbul Olympiad 2000) 12~b1 a5! 13 b4axb414axb4ttJce4and everything gets liquidated: 15 ttJxe4 ttJxe4 16 i.xe4 fxe4 17 'fiIxe4 i.xf4 18 i.xf4 exd5 19 'fiIxe8 ~axe8 20 cxd5 d6 21 llfcl llf7 22 l:tb2 i.xd5 23 ~bc2 nee7 24 f3 h6 1/Z-1f2 Miladino- vic-C.Bauer, Nancy 2005. 11 .. :~e7 12 i.e3!? A simple and clever idea: White wants to prop up d5 but also oppose Black's bishop by i.d4 at the right moment. 12 ... ttJee4!? Morozevich came up with the typically cre- ative 12 ... nab8, simply defending b8, versus Kasparov (Frankfurt rapid 2000), and equalized nicely after 13 llacl ttJce4?! (13 ... a5! looks more accurate) 14 ttJxe4 ttJxe4 15 ttJf4 (15 i.xe4!? fxe4 16 ttJg5) 15 ... c5! 16 dxc6 i.xc6 17 ttJd3 i.f6 18 f3 ttJc5. 13 ttJxe4 ttJxe4 14 nael Odessky analyses 14 i.xe4 fxe4 15 'fiIxe4 i.xb2 16 ttJg5 at length and thinks that best play is 16 .. J:tf5 17 ~a2 i.e5 (17 ... i.f6 18 ttJxh7!) 18 f4 (18 d6 'fiIxd6!) 18 ... i.d6 19 g4 nxg5 20 fxg5 .l:tf8 with extremely active pieces; for example,

21 a4 ~e8! threatens 22 ... exd5.

14 ... e5! 15 dxe6 dxe6 16 i.f4 i.f6 17 ~d3 e5! 18 i.e3 g5! Not precise, but bold and effective. The sim- ple 18 .. J:tad8 19 ncd1 ~xd3 would leave Black with the more comfortable position. 19 nedl ~ad8 20 ~xd8?! Heading for an inferior endgame. 20 f3! forces the pace: 20 ... f4 21 fxe4 fxe3 22 ~xe3, and White should hold the balance.

20. . J:hd8 21 ~xd8+ 'fiIxd8 22 'fiId3 h6 23

g4? An oversight. Odessky suggests 23 'fiIxd8+ i.xd8 24 f4 exf4 25 gxf4 g4 26 ttJf2 ttJd6 27 i.xb7 ttJxb7 28 i.d2 ttJd6 29 b3, but this is pretty awful after 29 ... i.h4 30 ttJd 1 ttJe4. Maybe 23 ~f1 is best, if somewhat depressing. 23 ... 'fiIxd3! 24 exd3 ttJd6 25 i.xb7 ttJxb7 26 f3 (D) Black's point is 26 gxf5? g4.

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHE1TO 123

26 ... e4! 27 gxf5 Or 27 fxe4 fxe4 28 b3 exd3 29 lbf2lbaS. 27 ... exd3 28lbf2 iLxb2 29lbxd3 iLxa3 30 h4lbd6 31 hxg5lbxc4 32 iLf4 hxg5 33 iLxg5 lbd6 34 f6 c4 35 lbe5 c3 36 'it>f2 lbf7 37 lbc4 iLc5+ 38 iLe3 c2 0-1 Certainly 4 .. .fS qualifies as the most dynamic and perilous of Black's 4th-move choices ver- sus 3 a3, while 4 ... lbf6 looks less exciting but more reliable. Theory shuttles back and forth between verdicts of equality and a modest ad- vantage for White. The main appeal of 3 a3 is that it steers clear of the dramatic counterat- tacks that Black can play versus 3 e4. For his part, Black will have a relatively safe position, but he will often have to be satisfied with oper- ating from a position with less space and fewer tactical possibilities. You'll find that positional skill is at a premium in these lines. Finally, White can head for many other set- ups if he plays 2 lbc3 or 2 lbf3, as seen in the following game: Marjanovic - Ivanisevic Yugoslav Ch, Subotica 2000

[diagram]
Upon 2lbf3 iLb7, Black can always opt for a Queen's Indian set-up with ... e6 and ... lbf6, or enter into a Symmetrical English with ... cS. However, he has an important alternative plan when White plays g3 on this or the following move: a) 3 g3 (this is equivalent to 2 g3 iLb7 3 lbf3) and now 3 ... iLxf3!? 4 exf3 cedes the bishop-pair for positional compensation. Black usually continues with 4 ... cS (D) (he can also play 4 ... e6, with ... c6 and ... dS to come). w I won't go into the very lengthy details, but 3 ... .i.xf3 can be a good psychological weapon because it interferes with White's common in- tention to playa 'simple' English set-up with g3, iLg2, lbc3 and e3 or e4. The advantage of 4 ... cS is that it controls the weak point on d4. In response, White can develop by some combina- tion of lbc3, .i.g2 and O-O, but in doing so, he allows Black to fortify his grip on d4 and gain a strong outpost there by, for example, ... lbc6, ... g6 and ... iLg7. Since that is highly unattrac- tive, White almost always plays 5 d4!. Now S. .. cxd4 6 ~xd4lbc6 transposes to line 'b', or something very similar, but Black has the op- tion of S. .. lbc6!?, a provocative attempt to con- test d4 directly. Play usually goes 6 dS lbd4 7 iLe3lbfS. While White has tried several moves here, Black seems to equalize versus all of them, including the most frequently-seen 8 iLd2 g69 iLc3 .i.g7 10 iLxg7 lbxg7; for example, Knott-Summerscale, British Ch, Millfield 2000 went 11 iLh3 lbh6 12 O-O lbhfS 13 lba3 lbd4 14 lbc2 lbgfS IS lbe3 lbd6! 16 f4 O-O 17 b4 WIIc7 18 a4 fS 19l:ta3lbe4 20 .l:i.d3 eS with a fine position for Black. b) 3lbc3 (this is thought to be more precise than 3 g3) 3 ... e6 4 g3 .i.xf3!? (again, conceding a bishop to gain more control over d4; 4 ... lbf6 S .i.g2 cS would transpose into one of the Hedge- hog lines of the English Opening - see Volume 3) S exf3 cS 6 d4! cxd4 (this time 6 ... lbc6 7 dS lbd4 is regarded as inferior after 8 iLe3 lbfS 9 iLh3!) 7 ~xd4 lbc6 8 'ilfdl .uc8 (D) (not the only move, but it indirectly targets the c4-pawn).

124 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Again we have a case of White having the bishop-pair and open e- and d-files, which offset his weaknesses (the doubled f-pawns and the central squares d3 and d4). Play can continue 9 .i.f4!? .i.M 10 ':c1 tDge7 11 a3 .i.xc3+ 12 .l::txc3, as in Fridman-Mainka, Recklinghausen

2002. Now the easiest course is 12 ... O-O!, em-

phasizing Black's lead in development and plan- ning ... dS. White should stop that with 13 .i.d6! l:.e8 14 .i.h3 (to prevent 14 ... tDfS) 14 ... tDaS! IS 'iYd3, when Black can equalize with either IS ... ~c6 or IS ... tDb7 16 .i.xe7 (160-0 tDxd6 17 ~xd6 J:Ic6 18 ~d3 dS 19 cxdS ':xc3 20 'iYxc3 tDxdS gives Black a strong knight) 16 ... 'iYxe7 170-0 tDcS! 18 "iVc2 as, intending to meet 19 b4? (19 f4 a4 20 .i.g2) with 19 ... tDa6! 20 bxaS bxaS and Black has the cS outpost in front of the isolated pawn. Black's primary motivation in this line is that White doesn't get to play mechanically with g3, .i.g2, O-O, etc., as he may like to do versus other set-ups. 2  .i.h7 3 e4 e6 (D) w 4tDf3 Or: a) 4 tDge2 tDf6 tempts White into S eS?! tDg4 6 d4 'ii'h4! with the idea 7 g3? tDxh2! 8 tDf4 (8 gxh4?? tDf3#) 8 ... tDf3+ 9 'ii'xf3 'ii'xhl. b) 4 g3 fS S .i.g2 tDf6 6 d3 fxe4 7 tDge2 tDc6! equalizes, Smejkal-Kengis, Bundesliga 1999/00. 4  .i.h4 As usual, Black wants to put pressure on e4 immediately. 4 ... cS S d4 cxd4 6 tDxd4 is a kind of Sicilian offshoot. S .i.d3 With this move, White signals his intention to play .i.c2 and d4. S 'ii'b3 tDa6! (D) can lead to a cute trick and in any case to double-edged action: w a) 6 a3?! falls into 6 ... tDcS! 7 ~c2 (7 ~xb4?? as 8 ~bS c6 traps the queen!) 7 ... .i.xc3 8 ~xc3 tDxe4 9 'V/Bxg7 ~f6 10 'iYxf6 tDgxf6 with pres- sure; for example, 11 b4 as! 12 .i.b2 axb4 13 axM ~xal + 14 .i.xal ~e7 intending ... l:ta8 next, when the activity of Black's pieces is more important than White's bishop-pair. b) 6 d3 is a bit slow and might allow Black to attack via 6 .. .fS 7 exfS .i.xf3 8 gxf3 Cf':,e7!? 9 fxe60-0! 10 exd7 'iVxd7 with compensation for two pawns in the form of outposts, develop- ment and play against White's weaknesses. c) 6 .i.e2 tDe7 (better than 6 ... .i.xc3 7 'iYxc3! .i.xe4? 8 d3! .i.b7 9 ~xg7 "iVf6 10 .i.h6!, when White wins material - a common tactic) 7 O-O 0-08 d3 tDg6 (8 ... dS 9 exdS exdS 10 d4!) 9 a3 tDcS! 10 ~c2 (not 10 "iVxb4?? as) 1O ... .i.xc3 11 'Yi'xc3 dS! (with two knights versus a bishop- pair, you will often want to blast open the

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 125

position) 12 cxd5!? exd5 13 e5 d4! 14 lLlxd4 lLlxe5 with dynamic counterplay. 5 ... lLle7 (D) W w As often happens in the English Defence, Black wants to attack White's centre with ... f5. 6lLle2!? This actually threatens to win Black's bishop by 7 a3! .i.d6 8 e5 .i.xf3 9 exd6 .i.xe2 10 dxe7, etc. Nevertheless, the healthier choice is 6 O-O 0-07 .i.c2! with the idea of d4. That has various possible replies, including the thematic 7 ... f5, 7 ... c5!? and the Indian-like 7 ... lLlg6 8 d4 .i.xc3 9 bxc3 d6 intending ... e5. Then 10 h4! lLlxh4 11 lLlg5 h6 12'ikh5 is a lively response; for exam- ple, 12 ... hxg5 (l2 ... e5 can be met by 13 c5!? or 13 'ikxh4) 13 .i.xg5 f6 14 .i.xh4 'iHe8 15 'iHe2 and White gets the nod. 6 ... lLlg6!? 6 .. .f5 7'ikc2 .i.d6!? is double-edged. 7 a3 Or: a) 70-00-0 (or 7 ... lLlh4) 8 .i.c2 f5! has the idea 9 exf5 .i.xf3 10 gxf3 lLlh4. b) Agrest-Atalik, Bled Olympiad 2002 saw 7 i.c2 lLlh4 8 a3 .i.d6 9 lLlxh4 'ikxh4 10 lLlg3, when both 1O ... lLlc6 and 1O .. .f5 yield equal and double-edged play. 7  .i.d68 .i.c2 f5! (D) This standard break once again increases the power of Black's queen's bishop, the heart of the English Defence. 9lLlc3 Or: a) 9 exf5?! lLlh4! 10 lLlxh4'ikxh4 11 d40-0

12 d5 exd5 13 cxd5 lLla6 and ... .l:tae8 leaves

Black too active. b) Sorokin-Lalic, Calcutta 2000 went 9 d4 .i.xe4 10 .i.xe4 fxe4 11lLlg5 .i.e7 12lLlxe4 d5 with an easy game for Black. 9  lLlh4! 10 d4lLlxf3+ 11 'iHxf3 ~h4 12 g3 ~h3 13 .i.f4lLlc6 14 O-O-O?! After 14 lLlb5 O-O 15 .i.xd6 cxd6 16 'ike3, Black has 16 ... lLla5!? 17lLlxd6 .i.xe4 18 .i.xe4! fxe4 19 b4 'ik g2! 20 l:i.fllLlc6, with ... e5 coming and in some cases ... l:i.f3. 14  fxe415lLlxe4?! But 15 WVxe4lLld8 16 d5lLlf7 is comfortable for Black. 15  O-O! 16 lLlxd6 cxd6 17 'iVc3 lLla5! 18 i:thel Play is forced after 18 .i.xd6!? .l:tf3 19 .i.d3 lLlxc4! 20 'iVxc4 l:tc8 21 .i.c7 .:tf7! 22 ':'hfl .i.d5 23 'iHc3 d6.

18. . .l:!.ac819 c5

19 b3?? loses to 19 .. Jhf4!. 19  dxc5 20 'it>bl i.d5 21 .i.d6i:tf3 22 l:i.d3 .l:txf2 Black is simply winning. 23 dxc5 lLlc4 24 ':'xd5 exd5 25 l:i.e7 ~f1 + 26 'it>a21::tf7 27'ikd4? lLlxd6 28 .i.b3 .l:txe7 0-1 Larsen's Opening: 1 b3

1 b3 (D)

White himself may wish to take advantage of the benefits of a queenside fianchetto by play- ing 1 b3, sometimes known as Larsen's Open- ing, or the Nimzowitsch-Larsen Attack. As I've mentioned, the top-level players use this move relatively infrequently, because Black has con- servative set-ups which neutralize White's pos- sibilities. Nevertheless, we'll look at a few of

126 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the more lively lines, with a couple of games that illustrate the paradoxes inherent in reversed positions. But first, let's walk through some initial moves.

[diagram]
If Black can play this most cooperative of moves and get away with it, especially in con- junction with ... d5, that's not a good sign for White's ambitions as a whole. We'll test that theory in a couple of games. But first, let me de- scribe, without serious analysis, just a few of the many other ways that play can develop, with an emphasis on themes that cross over from opening to opening: a) 1...ttJf6 2 .i.b2 g6 (not the only move, of course) 3 .i.xf6!? (most other moves allow a comfortable King's Indian position following ... .i.g7, ... O-O and ... d6) 3 ... exf6 4 c4 (D).

Compare this position with the English De- fence variation I c4 b6 2 ttJf3 .i.b7 3 ttJc3 .i.xf3 4 exf3 c5! from the previous section. In that case, Black had a more interesting game than White does here, because d4 was a weakness and White had some looseness in his position. This happened because of White's move c4, whereas ... c5 isn't present in our reversed line. I should also mention that I b3 c5 2 .i.b2 ttJf6 3 c4 g6?! (more commonly arrived at via I c4 c5

2 b3 ttJf6 3 .i.b2 g6?!) 4 .i.xf6! exf6 5 ttJc3 fol-

lowed by g3 and .i.g2 combines the best of both worlds for White, because Black cannot carry out ... d5. Anyway, in the diagram position after 4 c4 (in the I b3 version), White's position is sound enough. Nevertheless, Black has no serious weaknesses, and can develop naturally by .. .f5 and ... .i.g7 or even win space by 4 ... d5!? 5 cxd5 'iVxd5 6 ttJc3 'iVa5, as played successfully in several contests. b) 1...c5 2 .i.b2 ttJc6 (D) and now: w bI) 3 ttJf3 d64 d4 (otherwise 4 ... e5) 4 ... cxd4 5 ttJxd4 .i.d7 and now 6 g3?! permits the ad- vance 6 ... e5! with the idea 7 ttJb5 ~a5+ 8 ttJIc3 d5! 9 'iVxd5 .l:.d8 and White is in trouble, be- cause ... .i.e6 and ... a6 is threatened. That illus- trates the danger of permitting your opponent a central majority. b2) 3 e3 d6 (3 ... e5 4 .i.b5 ttJge7 and 3 ... ttJf6 are also options) 4 ttJe2 (Odessky's recommen- dation, rather than 4 d4 cxd4 5 exd4 d5!) 4 ... e5 (after 4 ... ttJf6 5 d4 cxd4 6 ttJxd4 e5 or 6 ... g6, Black has few problems and his central major- ity may come into play) 5 d4. Now 5 ... cxd4 6 exd4 'iVa5+!? with the idea 7 .i.c3 ~d5 is one route. Another is 5 ... exd4 6 exd4 ttJf6!, since 7 d5 ttJb4 followed by ... .i.f5 and sometimes ... 'iVa5100ks good, but so does 7 dxc5 d5!, with the kind of isolated pawn position in which

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHEITO 127

Black's activity is at least sufficient for equal- ity. c) l...dS 2 .i.b2 has another large complex of possibilities attached to it; we shall examine just a couple. White would often like to see something along the lines of 2 ... cS!? 3 e3 (3 lZ'lf3?! f6! is a famous positional trick, when Black achieves ... eS; then 4 d4?! is a poor re- sponse in view of 4 ... cxd4 followed by ... eS) 3 ... lZ'lc6 4 .i.bS, with a reversed English De- fence a tempo up in which he reserves the op- tions of lZ'lf3, lZ'le2 and/or f4. After 2 ... cS, we often get positions resembling those of the Nimzo-Indian and Queen's Indian Defences. Of course, 2 ... lZ'lf6 is safe and sound, as is 2 ... .i.fS; play may enter the realm of the Reti Opening if White combines g3 and c4. Another popular defence begins with 2 ... .i.g4!?, trying to get the bishop out in front of the pawn-chain following ... e6. This can go in many directions, such as 3 g3 c64 .i.g2lZ'lf6 SlZ'lf3, when S ... e6 6 O-O lZ'lbd7 7 c4 leads to a Reti Opening, with an optional d4. But Black can also play independ- ently for ... eS; for example, S. .. lZ'lbd7 6 O-O (6 d4) 6 ... .i.xf3!? 7 .i.xf3 eS. Finally, Odes sky analyses the rare gambit 3 f3 with the idea e4; for example, 3 ... .i.hS 4 e4 dxe4 S ~e2! threat- ening to win a piece with 6 ~bS+. Apparently this was even played by Kasparov! Let's return to 1...eS (D): w 2 .i.b2lZ'lc6 Naturally, 2 ... d6 can't be bad; then 3 e3lZ'lf6

4 c4 (4 d4 exd4 and after S exd4 dS White's

bishop is not happy on b2, but following S .i.xd4 lZ'lc6 Black will win the bishop-pair or gain more time; 4lZ'lf3 cS!? has the idea S d4?! cxd4 6 exd4 e4 7lZ'lfd2 dS) 4 ... lZ'lc6 S lZ'lc3 g6, and White will want to develop slowly, since 6 d4?! exd4 7 exd4 dS or 7 ... .i.g7 is at least equal for Black. 3e3

3 c4 is of course possible; it is an English

Opening with the less-than-inspiring b3 and .i.b2 thrown in. 3 ... d5 3 ... lZ'lf6 is a well-known continuation. A few ideas: a) 4 c4 dS S cxdSlZ'lxdS 6 a3! (D) prevents ... lZ'ldM and is a useful Sicilian Defence move in its own right.

al) Here I think that 6 ... g6! has been under- rated. White is supposed to gain the upper hand by 7 i.bS i.g7 8 lZ'lf3, putting direct pressure on eS and c6. A few games have proceeded 8 ... i.g4, when both 9 'iVc2 and 9 h3 favour White. But here the pseudo-sacrifice 8 ... O-O! turns things around; for example, 9 .i.xc6 bxc6 10 lZ'lxeS (10 i.xeS .i.xeS 11 lZ'lxeS "V$ gS 12lZ'lf3 'iVxg2 13 J:tgl 'iVh3 14 J:tg3 ~d7 IS ~c2 J::te8 and White's light squares are weak) 1O ... ~gS lllZ'lf3 'fixg2 12l:.g1 'iVh3 13 .i.xg7 <3;;xg7 14 lIg3 'fifS, and the combination of ... .i.a6 and ... l:.fe8 causes White difficulties. a2) The main line goes 6 ... .i.d6 7 'iVc2 O-O 8 lZ'lf3 'fiIe7 9 d3 fS 10 lZ'lbd2 <3;;h8!? (10 ... .i.d7 11 .i.e2l:.ae8) 11 .i.e2 .i.d7, and here instead of 12 O-O .l:.ae8, Odes sky recommends 12lZ'lc4 with a kind of dynamic eqUality. Some players will enjoy this Sicilian Defence structure as White. b) 4 .i.bS .i.d6!? (a surprising number of games and much analysis have been devoted to this move; although I should say that 4 ... d6 S

128 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

ttJe2 {so as not to block the f-pawn} 5 ... i.d7 is satisfactory for Black, with the idea 6 O-O g6; upon 6 d4, Black can play 6 ... exd4 7 ttJxd4 i.e7 or 6 .. :~e7 7 O-O g6) 5 ttJa3 (D) with the idea ttJc4.

Now there are all kinds of crazy lines with 5 ... ttJa5!? (to stop ttJc4) 6 i.e2 a6 7 c4 O-O, and 5 ... a6 6 i.e2; for example, 6 ... i.e7 7 ttJc4 e4. In Walti-Shabalov, Suhr 1992, Black played the fascinating move 5 ... e4!? (with the idea ... i.e5 or ... ttJe5), leading to 6 ttJc4 i.e7 7 i.xc6 (7 ttJe2? ttJb8! and ... a6 or ... c6) 7 ... bxc6 (7 ... dxc6 gives active play and equality) 8 ttJe2 O-O 9 ttJg3?! (Odessky suggests 9 d3 d5 10 ttJd2) 9 ... d5 10 ttJe5 'iVd6?! (1O .. :~e8! with the idea ... i.d6 may produce some advantage) 11 f4! ttJe8, and now 12 c4! with the idea 12 ... f6?! 13 c5! 'i:lxc5 14.l:'tc 1 would favour White slightly. Let's return to 3 ... d5 (D): w Here we have the Owen Defence Reversed, surely a position in which White can play for advantage. Of course, as with many reversed openings, you'll find that White's extra move will sometimes tip Black off to the appropriate defence. For a more thorough discussion of this phenomenon, see Chapter 6. 4i.b5 This pin is consistent with everything we learned from the Owen. If White is reduced to 4 c4 d4 (4 ... ttJf6 5 cxd5 ttJxd5 is a playable Re- versed Sicilian), then he's admitting to having achieved nothing with 1 b3. And 4 ttJf3 can be met by 4 ... f6, or simply 4 ... e4 5 ttJd4 ttJxd4 6 i.xd4 a6!? (versus i.b5+, which would follow if Black played 6 ... c5) 7 d3 (7 i.e2 'iVg5!) 7 ... c5 8 i.b2 ttJf6 9 i.e2 i.e7 10 O-O O-O, with even chances.

4. . i.d6 5 f4

This is certainly the usual continuation in both the Owen and English Defences: when the f-pawn can't be captured, it makes sense to use it to break up the opposing centre. If Black de- fends e5 with pieces, then an exchange on e5 establishes a central majority. However, with the advance f4 come some problems, namely, a lack of development and exposure of the king- side, so it's worth noting that White has several less critical and less explored moves: a) 5 ttJf3 f6 6 c4 (6 d4!? is interesting; for example, 6 ... e4 7 ttJfd2 f5 8 ttJc4!? with the idea 8 ... dxc4 9 d5) 6 ... a6 7 cxd5?! (7 i.xc6+ bxc6 8 ttJc3) 7 ... axb5 8 dxc6 bxc6 with the bishop-pair and good central control. b) 5 ttJe2 ttJe7 6 O-O O-O 7 f4 i.e6 8 ttJbc3 f6 and both sides have plenty of play. In fact, 5 ttJe2 would be a good starting point for your in- vestigations. c) 5 c4 dxc4 (or 5 ... ttJe7) 6 bxc4 (6 i.xc4 'iUg5!? 7 ttJf3 ~g6 is an interesting set-up) 6 ... i.d7!? (6 ... ttJe7 is also logical and sound) 7 ttJf3 ttJb4!? (a remarkable move that seems to work; Palliser disapproves of 7 ... 'iUe7 8 c5! i.xc5 9 i.xc6 i.xc6 10 ttJxe5, when White has a central majority, but Black has a bishop-pair after 1O ... i.d5 and this really isn't much) 8 i.xd7+ 'i'xd7 9 O-O ttJd3! 10 'iUb3 ttJc5 and the exciting 11 'iVc2 e4! 12 i.xg7? exf3! gave Black a superb attack in Van Arkel-Posch, COIT. 1987. Instead, 11 'i'c3 needs to be tested, to which the best response is again 11...e4!, when a long forcing line would be 12 ttJe5! (12 'i'xg7 exf3 13 'iUxh8 O-O-O gives obvious compensation)

MODERN QUEENSlDE FIANCHETTO 129

12 ... ~fS! 13 4:Jxf7! '*lVxf7 14 ~xg7 ~hS IS h3 O-O-016 '*lVxh8 4:Je7 17 ~f6 4:JfS! 18 f4! l:Ig8 19 ~h2! iLe 7 !? 20 '*lVeS ':'xg2 + 21 ~xg2 4:Jh4+ 22 ~hl ~e2 23 l:.tgl ~f3+ 24 ~h2 ~f2+ 2S ~hl ~f3+ with a draw by repetition. We now return to S f4 (D): After S f4, we'll look at two different games, each with defences borrowed from the white side of the Owen and English Defences. Hassler - Pineault carr. 1988

[diagram]
White seeks to weaken Black's kingside and at the same time soften up the al-h8 diagonal. However, this is not necessarily his best course: a) 6 fxeS?! fxeS 7 iLxc6+ bxc6 8 iLxeS?? is a blunder: 8 .. :~h4+ (8 ... iLxeS 9 ~hS+) 9 g3 'iVe4 10 iLxg7 ~xhl! (l0 ... iLg4 11 4:Jc3! iVg6 12 iLxh8 iLxdl 13 4:Jxdl is almost equal!) 11 ~hS+ ~e7 and White can't make his attack work, especially because 12 ~f2 fails to the cute 12 .. .i Lxg3+!' b) 6 4:Jh3 (D) is completely logical, devel- oping and defending f4 without getting in the way of the queen's path to hS. If you've looked at the English Defence lines above, you'll recognize that after 6 ... iLxh3?! 7 '*lVhS+ g6 8 ~xh3, White controls the light squares and has good chances. Versus 8 ... exf4, Odessky's 9 4:Jc3! fxe3 10 dxe3 (10 ~xe3+! looks better still) with the idea O-O-O gives White more than enough for the pawn. Unfor- tunately, Odes sky ultimately (and overdramati- cally) gives 6 4:Jh3 a '?!' because of the line

6 ... 4:Jge7 7 fxeS fxeS 8 O-O iLfS!, which he thinks can't be cracked. Surely White can get as much play here as in any other equal position. True, Odes sky is convincing in his dislike for 9 ~S+ iLg6 10 iVf3 'id7; nor is he a fan of 9 iLxc6+ bxc6 10 4:Jf2 O-O 11 d3 4:Jg6 12 e4 iLe6. But White should attack the centre by 9 c4 a6 (9 ... O-O 10 cxdS 4:Jb4 11 4:Jf2! a6 12 iLe2) 10 iLxc6+ bxc6 and now 11 d4!?, threatening cS, or 11 ~S+ g6 12 'iib4. As far as I can see, 6 4:Jh3 is one of White's best opportunities in this S. .. f6Iine. 6 .. g6 7 'iVh4 Now White has potential or actual threats to win the eS-pawn, which Black usually liqui- dates right away: 7 ... exf4 (D) 84:Jf3 This move hasn't scored brilliantly. Two al- ternatives are critical, and perhaps better: a) 8 exf4 ~f7!? 9 4:Jf3!? (a big decision; 9 iLxc6?! bxc6 10 4:Jf3 ~g7! 110-0 4:Jh6 with the

130 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

idea ... liJfS already favours Black, but speeding things up by 9liJc3! a6 10 .txc6 bxc6 11 O-O-O looks absolutely playable, and could even make Black uncomfortable) 9 ... liJce7!? (here 9 ... liJb4! looks promising; Black neglects his develop- ment, but attacks c2 and prepares to kick the bishop with ... a6, in some cases followed by an early ... cS) 10 liJeS+? (10 .td3! .tfS 11 O-O! is very unclear) 1O ... ~g7, Gonsior-Novak, Czech- oslovakia 1979. Suddenly Black threatens ... liJfS and he's also ready to fortify the centre with ... c6; the knight on eS isn't doing much. b) Odessky suggests that 8 liJe2 may be best. Then Fontana Sotomayor-Palomar, Aragon 1992 was a short affair: 8 .. .fxe3! (8 ... ~f8!? pre- vents liJxf4 and intends ... ~g7, but Black has to be careful following 9 O-O! gS 10 'iVf2) 9 O-O (D) (9 dxe3 .teS holds the pawn comfortably).

Let's look at the game first: 9 ... id7!? 10 dxe3 'iVg4 11 "iVf2 liJh6?! (Black should stand well enough after ll...a6 or 11.. ..td7 12 liJf4 O-O-O with the idea 13liJxdS?? 'iVhS) 12liJbc3 O-O?? 13 ltJxdS ~hS 14 liJef4 .txf4 IS "iVxf4 'iVxdS 16 .i.c4 and White won shortly. The problem with this line (and, perhaps, with 8liJe2) is 9 ... .td7!, which frees the knight to go to eS or b4 while clearing the way to castle queenside. A sample line would be 10 liJf4 (10 dxe3?! liJb4! 11 .txd7+ 'iYxd7; 10 .txf6?? liJxf6 11 'iVxf6 "iVxf6 12 ':xf6 .i.eS) 1O ... liJeS 11 .txd7+ 'iYxd7 12liJxdS e2 13 ':'el O-O-O 14 ':'xe2 liJg4 IS h3 .tcS+ 16 ~hl, and Black keeps the upper hand after 16 ... liJf2+ 17 ':'xf2 .txf2 18 "iVxf2 iVxdS 19 "iVxa7 iVc6, or by 16 ... hS with the idea 17 hxg4?! ~xdS 18 liJc3? 'ii'gS !. 8  ~f7!? (D) 8 ... fxe3 9 O-O increases the pressure on f6, but Black is temporarily two pawns up and may be able to consolidate: 9 ... .tcS (9 ... ~f8 10 dxe3 iVe7 11liJc3!? iVxe3+ 12 ~hlliJce7 13 ':!'ael iVh6 is unclear) 10 ~hl (or 10 liJd4 iVd6 11 dxe3 .td7) 10 ... 'iYd6 11 dxe3liJge7!, return- ing one pawn for development. 90-0 liJce7!? 9 ... liJb4! is a good option, hitting c2 but also preparing ... a6. 10 g4?! To guard fS, but 10 .td3! is much better, giv- ing White fully-fledged chances. ... h5! 11 exf4 .txg4 (D) w 12liJe5+ White didn't fare better with 12 liJgS+?! in Cataudella-Loiacono, COIT. 1983: 12 ... ~g7 (or 12 ... fxgS 13 fxgS+ liJfS 14 .txh8liJgh6!) 13 fS liJxfS! 14 liJe6+ ~h7 IS .u.xfS iVe7 16liJgS+ fxgS 17 lIxgS .tcS+ 18 d4 iVe3+ 19 iVf2 iVxgS

MODERN QUEENSIDE FIANCHETTO 131

20 dxcS d4 21 ~xd4 ~h3+ 22 ~hl l:H823 ~d2 ~dS+ 24 ~gll:f.f4 0-1. 12  ~g7 13 lLlxg4 hxg4 Black also has the better game following 13 ... ttJfS. 14 ~xg4lLlfS IslLlc3l:f.h4 16 'iVg2 ~xf4? Now things become unclear. Black is virtu- ally winning after 16 ... c6! 17 ~d3lLlgh6 (threat- ening ... l:f.g4) 18 ~xfS lLlxfS with ideas of ... 'iVb6+ or ... ~c7 and ... l:f.ah8. 17 l:f.xf4l:f.xf4 18 lLlxdS l:f.h4 19 ~d3 ~h7 At this point, 20 ~hl lLlg3+ 21 ~gl lLlfS draws by repetition, as does 20 lLle3! lLlgh6 21 lLldS lLlg8. In the game, Black gained a small advantage and eventually won. Now let's see a positional variation, with re- sults that are more to White's taste. Ljubojevic - Portisch Teesside 1972

[diagram]
'iVh4+ Apart from the S. .. f6 of the previous game, S. .. ~e7 is also played, with the same ideas as in this game. There are trade-offs, but I suspect that S. .. ~h4+, weakening White's kingside, is slightly better.

6 g3 ~e7 (D)

w 7lLlf3 ~g4 7 .. .f6 is widely-played and recommended, but I think that the English Defence/Owen De- fence idea 8 lLlc3! is harder to meet than has been evident in actual games: 8 ... ~e6 9 O-O lLlh6 (the only move played in practice) 10 fxeS fxeS 11 e4! (D).

11...d4 (11...dxe4 can be answered by 12

lLlxe40-0 13 'iVe2 or 12 ~xc6+ bxc6 13lLlxe4 O-O 14 \\Ve2 with a pleasant positional advan- tage in both cases; for starters, note Black's iso- lated e-pawn and the outpost on e4) 12 lLldS ~d7 (12 ... ~d8?? is met by the pretty combina- tion 13 lLlxeS! ~xeS 14 ~hS+ lLlf7 IS IZ.xf7! ~xf7 16 'iVxeS+, and now 16 ... ~f8 17 ~a3+ or 16 ... ~d7 17 fHxg7 ~f8 18 ~xd4, etc.) 13lLlgS! (or 13 c3) 13 ... .tg4 (13 ... O-O-O 14lLlxe6 \\Vxe6 IS \\VhS) 14 ~e2 ~xe2 IS ~xe2 O-O-O 16 c3 with a central attack. This isn't hopeless for Black, but he has a hard time getting his pieces to decent squares. 8fxeS

8 h3 ~xf3 9 'iVxf3lLlf6 saves Black a tempo.

8 ... ~xeS Watch out for the trick 8 ... ~xf3?? 9 exd6 fHe4 10 lLlc3!, with the idea 1O ... fHfS 11 .l:tfl ~xdI12l:txfS ~xc2 13 nf2! (Odessky's move), or 1O ... ~g4 11 ~e2 ~xe2 (ll...lLleS 12lLlbS!) 12 'iVxe2 'iVxe2+ 13 ~xe2lLlf6 14lLlbS (or 14 dxc7). 9 ~xeS ~xf3 10 ~xf3 'iVxeS lllLlc3lLlf6 12 ~xc6+ bxc6 13 O-O Zurek-Krajina, Czech Team Ch 1997/8 went 13 fHf4 ~xf4 14 gxf4 d4! IS exd4 O-O-O 16 lLle2l:f.he8 17 c3 cS! 18 dxc5lLle4! 191:!:dl! (the only reasonable move) 19 ... l:f.d3! with the idea of ... l:f.f3 and ... lLlf2, among others. Then 20 ktgl! ktf3 21l:f.xg7lLlf2 22l:f.allLld3+ 23 ~dl lLlf2+ would have drawn.

13 ... O-O (D)

This position has arisen many times over the years and gives White the kind of positional plus that he usually aims for when playing 1 b3. The hope is to win an endgame by exploiting

132 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w Black's doubled c-pawns and isolated a-pawn. White's f-file is useful in that regard, with ideas such as l:!f4-a4 in waiting. Black is certainly nowhere near losing, but he needs to be oppor- tunistic. 14 'iVf5 14 'ii'f4 has occurred more often. Then one of Odessky's anonymous Internet games shows typical themes: 14 ... ~d6 (14 .. .l::tfe8 15 ~xe5 Prusikin-Bossert, Rieden 1966, but White didn't have to permit all this.

[diagram]
16 ... 'iVc5 isn't necessarily bad, but the text- move is more aggressive.

17.l:.n

Odessky analyses 17 l:txa 7 'iVb6 18 l:!a4 d4 at length, with good counterplay for Black. 17  d4?! Probably too aggressive. 17 ... a6 is safe, pre- venting ttJb5 as well as .l:.xa7, and meeting 18 ~d3 with 18 .. J:te6. 18 exd4 cxd4 19 ttJb5 'iVb6 20 ttJxd4 c5 21 ttJf3 c4+ 22 'it>hl cxb3 23 axb3 .l:.e2 Odes sky calls this unclear, although White appears to stand better after, e.g., 24 .l:.c4, con- templating ~c8. 24 'iVd3!? .l:.fe8 25 .l:.d4 (D) White slips over the next few moves. Here 25 ttJd4 was good, meeting 25 .. .'iVb7+ by 26 'iVf3. l:!xe5 16 l:tf4 c5 17 l::tafl favours White, in part B because Black can't enforce ... d4; for exam- ple, 17 ... l:!d8 18 ttJb5!; 14 .. J!Ve7 has also been played) 15 'iVh4l:!ae8 16l:!f4 ttJd7 17 l:!.afl (17 l:!a4!? ttJc5!? 18 l:.xa7 ttJe4 19 ttJxe4 dxe4) l7 ... f6 18 IU5 (18l:!a4) 18 ... ttJc5 19 .l:th5 h6 in- tending ... t2Je4, with near equality. ... ~d615lIf4lIae8 (D) w 16 ~a4!? Odessky characterizes this as risky, as it grants Black the prospect of ... d4 in return for the a-pawn. 16 lIafl lIe5 17 'iVd3 lIg5!? 18 l::tf5?! l:!.xg3+ 19 hxg3 ~xg3+ was drawn in 25 .. h5 26 'it>gl a5 27 .l:.f2 .l:.2e7 28 ttJg5? lIel+ 29 'it>g2 'iVc6+ 30 'it>h3l::tle5!? 30 ... ~c8+ 31 'it>g2 'iVc6+ draws. 31l:!c4 'iVb7 32 'it>h4? 32 l:tf5! would have maintained a delicate balance. After White's actual move, 32 ... .l:.xg5! 33 ~xg5 ttJe4+ 34l:!xe4 .l:.xe4 would have led to mate or the win of major material, as the reader can verify. In the game, Black won only after further mistakes. This chapter has featured far more concrete analysis than has been customary in these vol- umes. If you have the patience to wade through it, however, you'll be pleasantly surprised with how much fun the variations are, as well as gaining new systems to use in your games.

5 Gambits

First, what is a gambit? In the broadest terms, it's the sacrifice of a pawn or two in the open- ing. Sometimes a piece sacrifice is also called a 'Gambit' (e.g., the Cochrane Gambit in the Petroff: 1 e4 e5 2lbf3 lbf6 3lbxe5 d6 4lbxf7), but I think that it's most accurate to restrict the term to pawn sacrifices, and to ones that arise in the early stages of the opening. Of course, there's a hazy line here between 'early stages' and later ones. In the Marshall Attack of the Ruy Lopez, for example, Black doesn't give up a pawn until his 8th move. Some might con- sider that more of a pawn sacrifice than a gam- bit. The distinction isn't important in that case; however, if you look at a long list of named gambits, you'll see that they almost all sacrifice a pawn within the first five moves, and very of- ten on the second or third move. Up to this point in the series, we haven't dealt with a great many gambits. To some extent, that's because they tend to be lacking in the standard themes that I've emphasized through- out. For example, we usually won't see much similarity in pawn-structures between a partic- ular gambit opening and the more conventional openings that we are used to. Nevertheless, when taken as a set, gambits share fundamental characteristics. We shall see, for instance, that almost every gambit emphasizes free piece- play. In addition, most gambits are designed to control the centre, whether by the influence of pieces or by a superior pawn presence. In gam- bits which depend upon early attacks, that cen- tral advantage is often cashed in for tactical gains; in positional gambits, it tends to persist for a while. Oddly enough, there are two fun- damentally opposed techniques by which a gambiteer tries to take charge of the middle of the board. In some gambits, a flank pawn is sacrificed for the opponent's central pawn, thus establishing a central majority. In others, para- doxically, the gambiteer sacrifices his centre pawns for the sake of rapid piece development, and then uses those pieces to control the central squares. Both approaches are perfectly legiti- mate; I'll talk further about this distinction be- low. What about the person on the other side of the board, who is charged with defending against a gambit? What techniques are avail- able to him? Broadly speaking, there are two basic approaches. Some players are happy to grab a pawn or two; they find that their extra material makes up for some temporary discom- fort, and fully expect the pressure to abate after they play some accurate defensive moves. Other players, however, don't want the bother of de- fending against an attack, or of suffering under positional constraints, so they'll decline many or all gambits. Similarly, some will accept the gambit pawn(s), but then return them soon thereafter, in order to catch up in development or improve the central situation. In fact, there are gambits that have disappeared from ordi- nary practice because declining or returning the material proves so effective. In any case, all three of these methods of defence are justified in the appropriate situations. How important are gambits? Because of their rarity at the highest levels, it's easy to underes- timate their influence and utility. For each gam- bit mentioned in this chapter there corresponds one or more books, and/or sections of books, devoted to its investigation, along with articles and masses of master games. With a few ex- ceptions, in fact, I can't possibly present a sig- nificant percentage of the theoretical details behind these openings because there is so much material. But I shall try to outline the most im- portant variations and subvariations, along with what I think are the most critical defences. More importantly, I want to describe the basic ideas behind selected gambits, and point out their positive and negative qualities. It's true that some gambits are of dubious or marginal worth if the opponent knows how to defend precisely. But others are perfectly sound, and your chess education will be seriously lacking

134 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

without exposure to this unique opening form. In that context, the words of Grandmaster Alex Yermolinsky are enlightening: "From the early days of my development as a chess-player I hated gambit play ... I just couldn't accept this as chess ... All classic gam- bits seemed to lead to the same scenario: White (in most cases, but sometimes it can be Black- anyway, a gambiteer) has to rush things up, has to try to transform his short-lived initiative into an attack against the black king. If it works out, he wins a beautiful game ... if not - I don't know, those games never seem to get published - maybe he loses? "Looking back I realize now, things were not so simple. My stubborn refusal to accept gambit playas an important part of chess strategy inevi- tably caused me to miss something. I missed a chance to learn how to play wide open posi- tions, when your pieces seem to be hanging in the air, and there are maybe 2-3 moves given to you to create something, before they get ex- changed or driven back. The hard work I had to put up to overcome this case of arrested devel- opment ... could have been easily avoided if I had given myself a little practice in my younger days." In what follows, I've looked at a few gambits in more detail than they would seem to merit from their frequency of use. That's because, in contrast with positional openings, the precise move chosen in a gambit is often the difference between life and death. Interestingly, it's some- times easier to discover original ways of play- ing .gambit openings, and defending against them, than it is to come up with new ideas in openings which are, at least superficially, under fewer constraints. I think that's mainly because gambits haven't undergone as thorough a reap- praisal with the assistance of computers as have a number of the more mainstream openings. It turns out that there are numerous flaws in the analysis which has been handed down from au- thor to author over the years, which is all the more reason to take an interest in this area. Primitive Gambits One large group of gambits consists of straight- forward attacking enterprises. Here structural issues and long-term gains are of considerably less concern than the immediate success of di- rect assault. Most of the time, this means that the gambiteer sacrifices a centre pawn for rapid development and open lines. I don't use the word 'primitive' in a derogatory sense; after all, direct attack can be very effective. Let's see some examples, starting with those classic gam- bits that Yermolinsky was referring to: Danish and Goring Gambits Many of the oldest gambits begin with 1 e4 e5, which is logical in view of the fact that 1 e4 is already the fastest developing move, and 1...e5 one of the most committal replies. The Danish Gambit is a fascinating attempt to jump all over Black from the outset, and you can certainly use it to play for a win, especially against oppo- nents within your own rating range or some- what higher. It's not the kind of opening to play casually, however; without a fair amount of study, there a risk that you either won't recover your material or that there will be an unfavour- able simplification. Fortunately, the positional and tactical ideas are great fun to go over, so you'll find yourself easily motivated. Linden - Maczuski Paris 1863

[diagram]
This move-order doesn't necessarily indi- cate that White wants to playa Danish Gambit, but it avoids the need to study openings begin- ning with 2 ttJf3like 2 ... d6 and 2 ... ttJf6. For ex- ample, the Goring Gambit begins 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 d4 exd4 4 c3 dxc3 5 ttJxc3, yet 2 d4 exd4 3 c3 dxc3 4 ttJxc3 will often come to the same thing. See the note to 4 i..c4 below. 2 ... exd4 3 c3 (D) With this move White makes it a gambit. 3 ttJf3 ttJc6 (other moves could be investigated) 4 ttJxd4 is a Scotch Game where White has by- passed the main-line Petroff. 3 'iVxd4 (the Cen- tre Game), while by no means bad, loses time after 3 ... ttJc6. For the consequences, I'll refer you to the standard theoretical sources. After 3 c3, White plans to sacrifice pawns in return for open lines and a direct attack on Black's king. Before getting into the details in

GAMBITS 135

the next few notes, it's worth playing over the main game itself in order to get a feel for this fundamental idea. 3 ... dxc3 Most gambits can be declined, and at this juncture Black has several instructive ways to do so; for example: a) 3 ... d5 4 exd5 Wixd5 5 cxd4 ttJc6 6 ttJf3 (perhaps the best way to keep the queens on is 6 i.e3, which Nigel Davies argues is more likely to produce complications; for example, an orig- inal piece placement arises after 6 ... ttJf6 7 ttJc3 i.b4 S ttJe2!?, intending a3; then the most criti- cal line is S. .. i.g4!? 9 h3!?, introducing another pawn sacrifice: 9 ... i.xe2 10 ..txe2 ~xg2 11 i.f3 Wig6 12 Wib3 followed by O-O-O, as sug- gested by Voigt and MUller) 6 ... ..tg4 7 ttJc3 ..tb4 S ..te2 (D).

This is a position that can arise from the Goring Gambit via 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 d4 exd4 4 c3 d5 5 exd5 Wixd5 6 cxd4 ..tb4+ 7 ttJc3 ..tg4 S ..te2. Oddly enough, it can also come up in the Chigorin Defence to the Queen's Gambit De- clined! That is, from 1 d4 d5 2 c4 ttJc6 3 ttJf3 ..tg4 4 e3 e5 5 cxd5 ~xd5 6 ttJc3 ..tb4 7 ..te2 exd4 S exd4. At any rate, the best-known solution was played by Capablanca: S. .. ..txf3 9 .txf3 ~c4, when White can't castle and c3 hangs, so he needs to commit: al) 10 ~b3 ~xb3 and now 11 ..txc6+ bxc6 12 axb3 transposes to the 10 ..txc6+ bxc6 11 'iYb3 line, while 11 axb3 ttJge7 has proven solid for Black in many games. a2) Marshall-Capablanca, Lake Hopatcong 1926 went 10 ..te3!? ..txc3+ (Black can also play 10 ... O-O-O, when 11 'iVb3 is pretty much forced anyway) 11 bxc3 'iYxc3+ 12 ~f1 'iVc4+ 13 ~gl ttJge7 14:tel ~xa2 15 l:tal ~c4 16 l::tcl lh-1f2. a3) 10 ..txc6+ bxc6 11 ~e2+ (l1lWb3 Wixb3 12 axb3 ttJe7 is thought to be equal; maybe all the weak pawns even out! But either side can press on with ambitions of winning) 11...~xe2+ 12 ~xe2 ttJe7 13 ..te3 ttJf5 14l::thdl O-O-O 15 l::td3l::theS 16 l:f.adl with balanced play, Velim- irovic-Ziatdinov, Kusadasi 1990. It's hard for either side to make real progress. Nevertheless, several positions along the way can be played for a win with either colour. b) 3 ... ttJe7 isn't played much, because Black seems to be cutting off his own pieces (the queen and fS-bishop). However, he wants to continue ... d5 and gain access to key light squares after White advances the e-pawn. A knight on the more natural square f6 would be subject to tempo-gaining e5 attacks. After 4 cxd4 d5 (D), White has to decide what to do about his e-pawn. w

136 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

One example out of many is S eS (S exdS ltJxdS leaves Black with the ideal blockade of White's isolated queen's pawn, and faster de- velopment to boot; S ltJc3 dxe4 6 ~c4!? has been suggested, when 6 ... ltJfS! 7 ltJge2 ltJd6 looks like a good reply) S ... ltJfS (a well-posted knight; Black can also play S. .. cS 6ltJf3 ltJec6 with pressure on White's centre) 6ltJc3 ~e7!? (6 ... ~b4 is more aggressive, with the idea of tar- geting White's d-pawn in a line like 7ltJf3 O-O 8 ~e2 ltJc6 9 a3 ~a5 10 O-O ~b6 11 ~e3 ~e6 and .. .f6, with chances for both sides) 7 ltJf3 O-O 8 ~d3ltJc6 9ltJe2 (here 9 ~c2! has kingside at- tacking designs) 9 .. .f6 10 a3? (White tries to stop ... ltJb4, but this is much too slow; 10 O-O is correct) 1O .. .fxeS 11 dxeSltJh4! (a standard idea, eliminating the defender) 12 ltJxh4 ~xh4 and White can't defend both his e-pawn and f-pawn in view of 13 ~f4 (13 g3ltJxeS 14 gxh4?? ltJf3+ IS 'iiii>f1 ~h3#) 13 ... ltJxeS! 14 ~xeS ~xf2+ IS 'iiii>d2 'iVgS+ 16 ~f4 ':'xf4 17 ltJxf4 'iYxf4+ 18 'iiii>c2.1i.g4 19 ~f1 cS with an overwhelming at- tack, Voigt-Hector, Hamburg 2000. Both sides have numerous ways to generate play in this line. Compare 2ltJf3 ltJc6 3 d4 exd4 4 c3 ltJge7 in the next game. c) 3 ... d3 removes some of the dynamism from the position, but it's a bit passive and there's a whole game ahead after 4 ~xd3ltJc6 (4 ... dS S 'iVe2 dxe4 6 .1i.xe4 ~e7 7 ltJf3 ltJf6 8 .1i.c2 O-O 9 O-O) S ltJf3 d6 6 O-O (or 6 i.c4!? ltJf6

7 O-O), when White has better central control.

d) I should mention that 3 ... ltJf6 4 eSltJe4 is very awkward for Black because of S "iWe2!. Compare the gambit in the next game, in which White has the same configuration but has com- mitted to ltJf3, meaning that the move f3 isn't available. 4~c4 White gives up a second pawn for space and development. 4 ltJxc3 is the important move- order mentioned above in the note to 2 d4, played by Alekhine and recommended by Nigel Davies. Then after 4 ... ltJc6, S ltJf3 is a Goring Gambit, of which the next game is an example. But White also has S ~c4 and can retain more flexibility by not committing his king's knight. After 4 ltJxc3, Black won't want to continue 4 ... ltJf6?! S eS! 'W/e7 6 ~e2. Note also that after 4 ... ~b4 S i.c4 ltJc6, 6 ltJf3 is the main line of the Goring Gambit (see the next game), but 6 ltJe2!? is a sensible alternative, protecting c3 and leaving White's f-pawn able to advance at a later time. 4 ... cxb2 5 ~xb2 (D)

5 .. ~b4+ It is considered that the Danish is theoreti- cally sound, and there's no way for Black to guarantee himself the better game. But there are a number of respectable alternatives that give satisfactory play, and some whose assess- ments are not established. Here is a selection: a) A miserly solution that used to be talked about in older books is S. .. c6 6ltJc3 d6 7 ltJf3 ltJd7!, with the idea of meeting 8 O-O with 8 ... ltJcS. I won't go into the details, but by means of ... i.e6, Black hopes to snuff out White's at- tack, while he is covering key squares such as dS and b3.It's difficult to believe that Black can play so slowly, but the line illustrates how well pawns that cover central squares can serve as de- fenders; in that respect, you might compare the Sicilian Defence. The other move that goes with this sequence is 8. .. ltJb6, to gain time on White's bishop, intending 9 ~b3 ~e6. Of course, White still has a dangerous attack, and also has many options on moves 6, 7 and 8; for example, he can try to combine ltJc3 and "fIie2/c2 with O-O-O, while ltJdS can be a sacrificial theme. Strange to say, although S ... c6 and 6 ... d6 used to be a standard recommendation, no modem source that I've seen mentions it. b) S. .. d6 can lead to all sorts of positions and transpositions. Since 6 ... ~e6 is a threat to break the attack, White often plays 6 ~b3 "fIid7 (6 ... ltJh6 is complex) 7ltJc3, intending 7 ... ltJc6 8 ltJdS, and if 8 ... ltJaS, then 9 "fIig3!. This may

GAMBITS 137

not be decisive, but it retains a strong attack for the two pawns. c) S. .. dS is a very well-known idea. Black can either give back both pawns and seek equal- ity, or try to hold on to one of them. Play contin- ues 6 i.xdS (D) (6 exdS blocks off White's attacking bishop, allowing 6 ... lLlf6 7 lLlc3 i.d6 with a solid extra pawn).

There is extensive theory here, and I'll try to present just enough for you to work with: c1) 6 ... lLlf6 is tricky: 7 i.xf7+!? (this seem- ingly devastating move only wins a pawn, but re-establishes a material balance; 7lLlc3!? lLlxdS S lLlxdS is an ambitious way for White to retain more chances - then S. .. lLld7! has the idea ... c6 and avoids the ancient trap S. .. c6? 9lLlf6+! gxf6 10 'iVxdS+ 'ittxdS 11 i.xf6+) 7 ... 'ittxf7 S'iVxdS i.b4+ (Black's point) 9 'iVd2 i.xd2+ 10 lLlxd2. This simplified position was once regarded as favourable for Black because of his queenside majority, but it is probably about equal (after all, White has a kingside majority!). Play can con- tinue 1O . ...l::.eS 11 lLlgf3 (or 11 i.xf6?! gxf6 12 ttJgf3 ttJa6 13 O-O b6! intending ... i.b7, ... lIadS and ... lLlcs; 11 f3 is a consolidating option, al- though eventually White would like to get his kingside majority moving with f4) l1...lLlc6 12 O-O i.g4 13 lIfel lIadS 14 h3 i.e6 with a bal- anced and unresolved position. c2) 6 ... i.b4+ and now: c21) 7 'It>f1?! is well answered by 7 ... lLlf6!, with the idea S 'iVa4+? lLlc6 9 i.xc6+ bxc6 10 'iVxb4?? (but after 10 eS 'iVd3+ 11 lLle2 i.a6 12 'iVxc6+ lLld7 Black wins at least a piece) 1O ... 'iVd1+ 11 'iVel i.a6+ 12 lLle2 i.xe2+ 13 'ittgl 'iVxel #. c22) 7 lLlc3 i.xc3+ S i.xc3 lLlf6, and once White has lost his attacking piece on dS, he may still have enough compensation for the pawn, but no more than that. His best line seems to be 9 'it'f3 lLlxdS 10 exdS O-O 11 lLle2, when in practice, the opposite-coloured bishops - fa- vouring the attacker - have combined with prospects of lLlg3-hS or lLlf4-hS to produce balanced results. c23) 7 lLld2 (this maintains a threat on g7) 7 ... i.xd2+ (after 7 ... lLle7, White might play S i.xf7+ 'ittxf7 9 ~b3+ lLldS! 10 O-O-O! 'iVe7 11 exdS and Black's king is exposed; 7 ... 'ii;>fS!? is a curious alternative, protecting g7 and dodging ~a4+; the Danish Gambit is by no means worked out) S "i!Vxd2lLlf6 9 ~gS (9 'it'c3!? is an alternative: 9 ... c6 10 i.b3 O-O 11 lLlf3 i.e6!? and here White might try 120-0 'iVe7 13lLld4!?) 9 ... O-O 10 O-O-O 'iVe7 11 lLle2 with some at- tacking prospects. Black has a material plus, however, and 'dynamically equal' seems a fair verdict. 6 lLlc3 lLlf6 7 lLle2 (D)

White develops calmly. Black has to be care- ful that eS doesn't create big trouble, and sim- ply 'iVb3 with O-O-O is also in the air. 7 . lLlxe4? This is really too greedy. Black should try to develop something by 7 ... lLlc6 or 7 ... O-O, or break in the centre with 7 ... dS. I've chosen this game to illustrate the most elementary gambit situation, in which rapid development and open lines triumph over material advantage. 80-0! Now every white piece is out, and lLlxe4 is a threat, along with lLldS.

138 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

S  lbxc3 9lbxc3 .Jtxc3?! This fails, but again, 9 ... O-O allows lO lbdS!, hitting the b4-bishop and threatening ~g4. Then Black can try to hold on by lO ... ~h4, but this quickly becomes depressing; e.g., 11 ~c2 .JtaS 12 :adllbc6 13 .l:td3 d6 14 :g3lbeS IS f4 lbg6 16 lbf6+! with the idea 16 ... gxf6 17 :xg6+ hxg6 18 'ii'xg6+ <Ji>h8 19 .Jtxf6+.

10 .Jtxc3 (D) A pair of ideal bishops.

10. . JWg5

What else? lO ... O-O loses to the fine ma- noeuvre 11 ~g4 g6 12 ~d4, forcing mate! A classic coordination of the bishop-pair: note the pin on the f-pawn. And lO ... dS loses for multi- ple reasons, one being 11 l::tel+ .Jte6 12 .JtxdS with the idea 12 ... lbc613 lIxe6+! fxe614 ~hS+ 'it'd7 IS .Jixe6+! 'it'xe6 16 ~g4+ and the king can't escape. lll:!.el + 'it'dS Or 1l...'it'f8 12 .Jib4+ d6 (l2. .. cS 13 ~d6+)

13.Jixd6+.

12 f4!? 'ifxf4 12 ... ~cS+ 13 .Jid4 ~xc4 14 .Jixg7 is hope- less for Black. 13 .Jixg7 l:tgS This allows White to play a queen pseudo- sacrifice. 13 ... lIe8 also loses, to 14 :xe8+ <Ji>xe8 IS 'ii'e2+ <Ji>d8 16 l:i.el c6 17 ~e7+ 'it'c7 18 .JteS+. 14~g4! ~d6 14 ... ~xg4 IS .Jtf6#. 15 .Jtf6+ 1-0 Chess in 1863! You can see the appeal of a gambit that is based upon development and line-clearance. In the 19th century, Black tended to be a little more cooperative in allowing such attacks, but the Danish Gambit can still be fun to play today. Let's tum to its cousin, the Goring Gambit. I'm going to switch to heavier analytical mode, because it's so important to know precise moves if you're going to enter into either side of this opening. Ciocaltea - Karaklajii: Smederevska Palanka 1971

[diagram]
Black may also decline the pawn. In the last game, we saw (by transposition) 4 ... dS S exdS 'ifxdS 6 cxd4 .Jtg4 7 .Jte2 .Jtb4+ 8 lbc3. Here are two other ways: a) 4 ... lbge7 (D) closely resembles 3 ... lbe7 versus the Danish, and the ideas are the same. w I think that Black can get an objectively equal game by controlling the light squares, but both sides will be able to create a fighting im- balance: al) S lbxd4!? lbxd4! 6 cxd4 dS 7 eS lbfS (trying to get ... cS in) 8lbc3 c6! presents White with the problem of what to do about the threat of 9 ... 'ifb6, winning a pawn. There might fol- low 9 .Jte3 lbxe3 lO fxe3 'ii'h4+ 11 g3 'ii'h6 12 'iVd2 .Jte7 with equality. a2) S .Jtc4 dS 6 exdSlbxdS is the most tacti- cal line. White has to be careful not to overex- tend: 7 O-O (7 'ii'b3 lbaS! 8 'ilVa4+, and Black can retreat with 8 ... lbc6, threatening ... lbb6, or try 8 ... c6!? 9 .JtxdS 'ii'xdS lO O-O lbc4) 7 ... i.e7 (or 7 ... .Jtg4!? 8 'ii'b3 .Jtxf3 9 gxf3! lbaS lO 'ifa4+, when Black should play lO ... tt:lc6!, when in view of ... tt:lb6, White will probably repeat

GAMBITS 139

moves; instead, 1O ... c6? is hit by 11 .l::tel + i.e7 We now return to 4 ... dxc3 (D): 12 i.xdS! 'iVxdS 13 'iVb4) 8 'iVb3 i.e6 9 'iVxb7 lbaS 10 i.bS+ 'it'f8! 11 ~a6 cS, threatening ... i.c8. Black has active counterplay. a3) S cxd4 dS 6 eS (6 lbc3!? dxe4 7 lbxe4 W i.e6 produces a typical isolani position) 6 ... i.g4 (6 ... i.fS!? contemplates ... lbb4 or ... i.e4) 7 i.e2 lbfS 8 i.e3 i.e7 (or 8 ... g6!?) 9 O-O O-O 10 h3 lbxe3 11 fxe3 i.e6 with approximate equality; Black intends .. .f6. b) 4 ... lbf6 counterattacks the e-pawn and comes close to equalizing. Nevertheless, White may get a slight pull following S eS lbe4 6 "iVe2

White attacks Black's knight just when it's not well-positioned to retreat. The main line goes 6 .. .fS (6 ... lbcs 7 cxd4 costs Black too much time; according to theory, 6 ... dS 7 exd6 fS is playable, but better for White) 7 exf6 dS 8 lbbd2 d3!? (this leads to a lengthy forcing se- quence; 8 ... ~xf6 9lbxe4 dxe4 10 ~xe4+ "iVe6 11 i.d3! dxc3 12 bxc3 is held to favour White very slightly) 9 'iVe3 i.cS 10 fxg7 .l::tg8 I1lbd4 i.xd4 12 cxd4 i.fS 13 i.xd3 'iVe7 14 i.bS O-O-O IS i.xc6 bxc6 16lbxe4 dxe4 (after 16 ... i.xe4 Black's weak queenside hurts him in the case of both 17 O-O! ~xg7 18 g3 and 17 f3 'iVxg7 18 g3!) 17 'iVc3 (White can also get an edge with 17 ~h6 ~xg7 18 ~xc6 ~xg2 19 'iVa8+ 'it'd7 20 'iVdS+ 'it'e7 21 'iVeS+ i.e6 22 .l::tfl) 17 ... e3! (17 ... .:.xg7 18 ~xc6) 18 i.xe3 ':'xg7, Iskov- Kaiszauri, Oslo 1980, and here 19 O-O! is sug- gested in Infarmatar. Indeed, 19 ... i.h3 20 g3 i.xfl 21 ':'xfl is clearly better for White with his two pawns for the exchange and Black's queenside weaknesses. 5lbxc3 This distinguishes the Goring Gambit. White can also proceed in Danish Gambit style with S i.c4, which opens up some new possibilities after S. .. cxb2 (S ... c2!?) 6 i.xb2, but in the end, the simple S. .. lbf6 (with the idea 6 eS dS!) is probably best answered by 6lbxc3 or 6 O-O d6 7lbxc3, transposing to other main lines below. S. .. d6 also transposes after 6lbxc3, but if White is a lunatic, he can try Marshall's amazing re- sponse 6 'it'b3 ~d7! (guarding f7 and threaten- ing ... lbaS) 7 ~xc3!!?? (an apparent blunder) 7 ... dS! 8 exdS i.b4 9 dxc6 i.xc3+ 10 lbxc3 bxc6? (1O ... ~e7+! 11 i.e3lbf6 120-0-00-0 is better; White can develop very rapidly, but a queen for two pieces is a lot!) 11 O-O lbe7? (however, 12 lbeS was threatened, and White has a real attack after 11... "iVd6! 12 lle 1+ lbe 7 13 i.gS!) 12 i.xf7+! 'it'f8 13 i.b3 i.b7 14 i.e3 lbfS IS i.cS+ lbd6 16 lbd4 with a winning game, Marshall-Halper, New York 1941. More old-fashioned romanticism!

5. .. i.b4

This pin proves effective. After S. .. d6 6 i.c4, 6 ... i.e6 7 i.xe6 fxe6 8 'it'b3 ~d7 9 ~xb7 ~b8 10 "iVa6 has scored well for White in practice, while 6 ... lbf6 is seen in our next game. Again, White's sneaky move-order with 2 d4 (described in the last game) might have given White more leeway in these lines, since without having com- mitted to lbf3, he could play an early lbge2, f4 or even iib3, just to take the game out of main- stream theory. At any rate, it's easy for Black to go wrong in the Goring, and even fairly strong players can

140 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

get in trouble after 5 ... ~c5!? 6 ~c4 d6 7 ~3

The most important line goes 7 ... flid7 (with the idea ... tDa5; 7 ... tDa5 8 ~xf7+ ..t;>f8 9 ~a4 ..t;>xf7 10 ~xa5 leaves Black's king a bit ex- posed, and the advance e5 will be a theme) 8 tDd5!; for example, 8 ... tDge7 (8 ... tDa5? 9 ~c3 tDxc4 10 ~xg7) 9 'ii'c3! O-O 10 O-O tDg6?! (re- turning the pawn by 1O ... tDxd5 11 exd5 tDe5! 12 tDxe5 dxe5 13 'iWxe5 ':'e8 gives Black roughly equal chances) 11 b4 ~b6 12 a4 tDce5 13 tDxb6?! (13 a5! tDxc4 14 'ii'xc4 c6 15 axb6 cxd5 16 'iWxd5) 13 ... axb6 14 ~b2 ..t;>h8? (14 ... ~c6!), Schlechter-Hromadka, Baden 1914, and now 15 tDxe5 dxe5 16 f4! is very strong. 6 ~c4 (D)

White really has to develop speedily at all costs. 6 ... d6 6 ... ~xc3+ 7 bxc3 d6 is also possible. It usu- ally transposes (8 'YWb3, for example, is the note to 7 O-O) but has the benefit of forcing White to capture with a pawn on c3. In principle, White could exploit this move-order with ~a3 and e5, but that's hard to implement successfully. Simply 6 ... tDf6 is a major option. Then the line 7 e5 d5 (7 ... tDe4?? 8 'i'd5) 8 exf6 dxc4 9 'i'xd8+ tDxd8 10 fxg7 lIg8 has been around for a long time. Now: a) 11 O-O!? ~xc3 (versus tDd5) 12 bxc3 is a unique and little-tested approach. White gives up the g-pawn in order to gain pressure in the centre and on the queenside: 12 ... f6 (upon 12 .. J:txg7 13 lIel+, play can go 13 ... ~e6 14 ~f4 ':'c8 15 lIe2 with ideas of tDd4 or tDg5; nor is 13 ... tDe6 14 ~h6 lIg6 15 ~f4 attractive) 13 .l:f.el+(l3tDd4..t;>f714~f4c615~d6l1e816 .:tfe 1 tDe6 17 ~f8 ~d7 18 tDxe6 will be drawn) 13 ... ..t;>f7 14 lIe4!? b6! 15 ~h6 ~b7 16 lIxc4 tDe6 (16 ... ~xf3! 17 gxf3 ..t;>g6 18 ~f4 c5 19 ~g3 tDe6) 17 tDh4! ~d5 18 .l:ta4 tDxg7 19 lIdl ~e6 20 f3 tDe8 21 ~f4 tDd6 22 ~xd6 lIgd8, and the action subsided in Ketola-A.Ivanov, ICCF email 2004. b) Traditionally White plays 11 ~h6 ~xc3+ 12 bxc3 (D).

Now Black has pursued two main paths. The resulting lines are very concrete: bl) Black mayor may not stand satisfacto- rilyafter 12 ... tDe6 130-O-O, but it's easy to fall into trouble; for example, 13 ... tDxg7 (l3 ... tDc5? 14 tDg5 tDd3+ 151Ixd3! cxd3 16 tDxh7 ..t;>e7 17 l:tel + ~e6 18 f4 f5 19 g4 ..t;>d6 20 gxf5 ~xf5 21 tDf6 with a winning game, Levy-Karaklajic, Cienfuegos 1972) 14 lIhel+ (or 14 tDh4!?) 14 ... tDe6 (l4. .. ~e6 15 g4! and now 15 ... lId8?! 16 tDd4! .l:f.d5 17 f4..t;>d8 18 ~xg7 lIxg7 19

GAMBITS 141

nxe6 1-0 was Do1gov-Kudriatsev, COIT. 1993, but lS ... <;;>e7 16lbh4 is also difficult for Black) IS .Jtf4 .Jtd7 (1S ... f6! 16 .Jtxc7 <t;f7) 16 .Jtxc7 i.c6 17 lbd4! nxg2?? (l7 ... .Jtxg2 18 f4!) 18 lbxc6! bxc6 19 .Jtg3, when the rook on g2 is trapped and can't get out without material con- cessions, Dolgov-Walter, ICCF COIT. 1990. b2) 12 .. .f6! 13 O-O-O <t;f7 can lead to inter- esting play, although sometimes it peters out because of the opposite-coloured bishops: 14 nd4!? (14lbd4 <t;g6! seems to equalize; for ex- ample, IS .Jtf4 nxg7 16 nhe1 nd7 17 lbbS nxd1+ 18 nxd1lbe6 19 lbxc7lbxc7 20 .Jtxc7 is dead drawn) 14 ... <t;g6 IS nh4 c6 (lS ... lbe6 should be equal) 16 nd1 .JtfS 17 .Jte3 .Jtd3?! 18 ng4+ <t;f7 19 lbel! hS 20 nh4 .JtfS 21 nf4 .Jtg4 22 f3 .Jte6 23 .Jtd4 <t;xg7 24 .Jtxf6+ <t;g6 2S nd6 and White was winning in Dolgov- Kaverin, COIT. 1991. We now return to 6 ... d6 (D): w 70-0 7 'iVb3!? is rare, but maybe worth a try. 7 ... .Jtxc3+! 8 bxc3 (8 'iVxc3 lbf6 9 O-O O-O 10 ne1 ne8 forces White to attend to his e-pawn; if Black is nevertheless worried about 8 'iVxc3, he should capture on move 6 instead) 8 ... 'iVd7 threatens 9 ... lbaS, to get rid of the powerful c4-bishop, but 9lbgSlbh6 (Black again threat- ens ... lbaS; 9 ... lbeS?! 10 .JtbS c6 11 f4 is dan- gerous for him) 10 'iVc2 O-O 11 f4lbaS 12.Jtd3 f6 13 lbf3 leaves everything up in the air. 7  .Jtxc3 8 bxc3 We've arrived at one of the main lines of the Goring Gambit. Of course, especially at lower levels, you can't count upon reaching it from ei- ther side. 8 . .Jtg4!? This is Black's most dynamic move, but per- haps not his best. a) 8 ... .Jte6 is a popular and extremely impor- tant alternative. There usually follows 9 .Jtxe6 fxe6 10 ~b3 (D).

Now Black has two ways to protect e6, and some fascinating attacking themes result from both: a1) With iO ... ~c8, Black decides that he wants to look after his b7-pawn as well: 11 lbgS (11 .Jta3!? looks inviting, with the idea of eS, either immediately or in conjunction with lbgS) 1l...lbd8 (1l...<t;e7? 12 .Jta3! has the idea 12 ... h613lbxe6!; after 12 ... lbh6, there can follow 13 f4 intending eS, or even 13 eS!? with the idea 13 ... lbxeS 14 f4 lbef7 IS lbxe6!; the whole line with iO ... 'iVc8 is full of similar tac- tics) 12 f4 (12 eS!?) 12 ... h6. Now the game Ribli-Kovacs, Debrecen 1970 continued 13 lbh3! ? (D) (White wants to push the f-pawn; 13 lbf3 is a fair alternative, but not as interesting).

142 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

13 .. :iVd7 (13 ... lbe7 doesn't prevent 14 f5!, in view of 14 ... exf5 15 exf5lbxf5?? 16 ~b5+, picking up the knight on f5; instead 14 ... e5! can't be too bad; then White has time to play slowly, and might begin oy trying to probe the kingside by 15 lbf2 and lbg4) 14 .Jta3!? (now 14 fS eS with ... lbf6 is ineffective for White; on the other hand, 14 :tel is a good slow move, with the idea eS) 14 ... ~c6 IS ~hl!? (IS eS is consistent with 14 .Jta3) IS ... lbe7 16 :tael O-O 17 fS as Islbf4 a4 19 ~dl eS? (a bad mistake; Black has played nearly perfectly, and now simply 19 .. :iii'c4! or even 19 .. :iii'xc3 20 .U.f3 ~c4 leaves White short of compensation) 20 lbhS (suddenly moves like ~g4, :tf3 and .Jtc1, intending to capture on h6, are extremely hard to answer) 20 ... lbcS? (20 .. :~Vc4 21 f6! lbg6 22 .Jtc1! lbe6 23 ~g4 ~h7 24 ~g1! protects f1 and prepares fxg7), and now 21 iVg4! would pretty much have won outright: 21..J!Vd7 22 .Jtc1 ~hS 23 'iYg6 'iYf7 24 .Jtxh6!, etc. a2) 1O ... iYd7 has a fair reputation, returning the pawn on b7. However, the position is rela- tively unexplored. For example, White might try the simple 11 lbd4, which threatens 'iixb7 as well as a capture on e6 (the book line is 11 ~xb7 l::tbS 12 iYa6, when 12 ... lbf6!, with good piece- play, is almost certainly better than 12 ... lbge7 13 .i.e3 O-O 14l::tabl with an edge for White). Then: a21) White's centre gives him compensation after l1...lbxd4 12 cxd4 b6 (12 ... O-O-O 13 .!:tbl b6 14 a4! is no fun for Black) 13 dS!, in view of 13 ... eS 14 f4 exf4 IS .i.b2! or 13 ... exd5 14 iYxdS c6 IS ~b3, for example, when Is ... lbf6 16 f3 O-O-017 a4!? l::theS IS as bS 19 .i.f4 a6 20 .l:!.fdl gives White ongoing pressure. a22) l1...lbdSI2eS! (D). I don't believe that this line has been tried, but to me it doesn't look easy for Black at all. He should probably play 12 ... d5 (12 ... dxeS 13lbf3 has ideas of .Jta3, lbxeS and :tdl; 12 ... lbe7 13 exd6 cxd6 grants White good chances by 14 .JtgS or 14 :tel d5 IS .Jta3 O-O 16 :tad 1, intend- ing 17 c4, which Black can't stop by 16 ... :tcS, because after l7 c4!, 17 ... :txc4? loses to IS lbxe6!) 13 .Jta3lbe7 14 c4 (or 14 :tadl O-O IS c4 c6 16 f4!) 14 ... c6 IS f4, when White intends IS ... O-O 16 fS! with the initiative: 16 ... exfS 17 e6!?iYc71ScxdScxdSI9.Jtxe7~xe720'ii'xdS g6 21 :tac1. b) S. .. lbf6 is an established main line. Then 9 .Jta3 .Jtg4! 10 'ii'b3 O-O and 9lbgS O-O 10 f4 ~e7 don't impress, which leaves: bI) The speculative 9 :te1!? O-O 10 :tbl gives White positive chances in a less simpli- fied position than in the lines after 9 ~b3. b2) 9 eS and now 9 ... lbxeS 10 lbxeS dxeS 11 iYb3 iYe7 12 .Jta3 transposes to the main po- sition below, but with this move-order, Black can also play 9 ... dxeS, when 10 'iiVc2 O-O! 11 .Jta3 yields full compensation (but no more than that) after ll...h6 or ll...lbaS. This is more dynamic than 10 lbgS O-O 11 .Jta3 iYxdl 12 .!:taxd 1 .i.fS. b3) 9 ~b3 'ii'e7 10 eS!? (10 .JtgS O-O 11 l::!.ael is risky; White would then reorganize to play f4) 1O ... lbxeS IllbxeS dxeS 12 .Jta3 cS 13 .i.bS+ (D).

This position has been played in many games and has led to numerous draws. Black can safely give his extra material back by 13 ... lbd7 14l::tadl O-O (but not 14 ... b6? IS .Jtc6) IS i.xd7 .Jtxd7 16 ~xb7 l:tfdS, etc. He also has the

GAMBITS 143

underrated alternative of 13 ... ii.d7 14 ii.xd7+ 'ii'xd7 IS ii.xcs lZJe4! 16 ii.a3 lZJd2! 17 'iVb4! O-O-O! IS .l:i.fdl 'ii'c6. Finally he can choose the ambitious 13. .. 'it>f8!?, with ideas of ... a6 and ... bS or simply ... b6, while the king can get away with ... 'it>gS and ... h6 or ... hS. In practice, Black has done well in this position following 14 f4! e4 IS fS, although it's still unclear. At any rate, White should check out his earlier op- tions before entering this 10 eS (or 9 eS) line. 9 'ii'b3 The only way to fight for the initiative, hit- ting f7 and b7. Black jumps at the opportunity to expose White's king.

9. .. ii.xf3

9 ... 'iUd7?! turns out badly following 10 lZJgS lZJdS 11 eS!, intending l1...dxeS? 12 .:tel. 10 ii.xf7+ 'it>f8 11 gxf3 11 ii.xgS .l:i.xgS 12 gxf3 and now 12 ... lZJeS transposes, but 12 .. :iVd7 is more complex. 11 ... lZJe5 12 ii.xg8 (D)

... .l:i.xg8 Alternatively, Black can grab the pawn but expend precious time by 12 ... lZJxf3+?! 13 'it>g2 lZJh4+ 14 'it>hl .l:i.xgS IS 'it'xb7!? (or IS .i:!.gl with the idea IS ... 'ii'f6 16 .l:i.g3) IS ... 'ii'cS! 16 'ii'xcS+ .l:i.xcs 17 .i:!.b 1, when White has the more active pieces in the ending. 13 f4! lZJf3+ 14 'it>g2lZJh4+ 14 ... lZJxh2!? IS .l:i.hl lZJg4 16 ~xb7 favours White; Black's rook on gS is very passive. 15 'it>hl 'ii'd7 At this point, the game continued 16 fS? 'ii'c6

17 f3 .l:i.eS, and with the threat of ... .l:i.xe4, Black

equalized. Instead, White should play 16 f3! (16 c4 is also good, but achieves less following 16 .. :iVg4 17 'iVg3 'ii'e2 IS ii.e3 lZJg6 19 eS or 16 ... .l:i.eS 17 f3 'ii'h3 IS .l:i.f2) 16 .. :~h3 (16 .. :iVc6 doesn't seem to improve after 17 c4 .l:!.eS IS 'iWd3) 17 .l:i.f2. Black can't make significant progress and White's advantage is clear; for ex- ample, 17 ... .l:i.bS IS ii.e3 b6 19 .l:!.g 1 lZJg6 20 J:Ig3 'iWd7 21 fSlZJeS 22 .:tfg2, etc. Przybyla - Sapa Polish carr. Ch 1992-4

[diagram]
.i.c4 d6 6 lZJxc3 lZJf6 This normally leads to a complex forcing line that White has a hard time avoiding. The 'Danish' move-order would be 1 e4 eS 2 d4 exd4 3 c3 dxc3 4lZJxc3 lZJc6 S ..Bc4lZJf6, when 6lZJf3 d6 is the main line in this game. Instead, White could try to avoid theory by 6 ~e2!? (6 lZJge2 allows 6 ... ii.cS with easy development for Black) 6 ... ii.cS (6 ... d6 7 ..igS ii.e7 S O-O-O may not favour White, but at least it's unique; f4 is a theme, for example) 7 lZJf3 O-O S .i.gS with the idea O-O-O. However, this is a specula- tive notion that should be reserved for lower- level adventures. 7 ~b3 (D)

White needs to counter the straightforward idea of ... ii.e7 and ... O-O, and it's also desirable to quash the defensive move ... .i.e6. 7 ...' iWd7! 7 .. :iVe7 is logical, attacking e4 preparing ... lZJeS, but putting the queen on the dangerous e-file is risky and (unlike 7 ... ~d7) it doesn't threaten to simplify by ... lZJaS. Fehlhammer- K.U.Mtiller, Bundesliga 1992/3 continued S O-O

144 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

ttJe5 9 ttJxe5 dxe5 10 i.g5 c6 (versus ttJd5), and now instead of 11 f4?! (when 11...i.e6! was correct), White had the powerfu111 .l:r.fd1!. Then 1l...h6? 12 i.xf6 'ii'xf6 (or 12 ... gxf6 13 ttJb5!) 13 ttJb5! is killing, since Black can't stop ttJc7+. After 11 ... a6?!, White's other tacti- cal point appears: 12 i.xf7+! 'ii'xf7 13 .l:r.d8+ <J;e7 14 iYb6!, threatening .l:.xc8 or l:tadl. Nor does 11...i.e6 improve matters after 12 ttJd5! with a terrific attack. Finally, 1l...i.g4 allows White a better ending after 12 ttJb5 i.xd1 13 l:txd1, or White can enter into 12 f3 i.e6 13 ttJd5! cxd5 14 exd5 b5! 15 i.xb5+ i.d7 16 d6 'ii'd8 17 i.xd7+ ~xd7 18 f4! with a strong at- tack. S ttJgS ttJeS 9 i.bS c610 f4 (D)

A very important position in the Goring Gam- bit. Surprisingly, it isn't that well worked out.

10.  cxbS

Or: a) The other major move is 1O ... ttJeg4, when I'll just give a typical example out of the scores that have been played: 11 h3!? (11 i.d3 and 11 ii.e2 are the main alternatives) 11.. .cxb5 12 hxg4 h6 13 ttJxb5!? d5 (13 ... a6 14 ttJc3 b5 is unclear) 14 i.e3 a6 15 ttJc3 iYxg4? 16 e5! 'ifg3+ 17 i.f2 'iYxf4 18 exf6 'ifxg5 19 O-O! i.d6 20 fxg7 .l:r.g8 21 .l:r.ael+ ii.e6, Schu1z-Volbert, corr. 1981, and here the easiest win was 22 'iia4+ b5 (22 ... <J;d8 23 i.h4) 23 ttJxb5 axb5 24 'iixb5+ <J;d8 25 iYb7; for example, 25 ... .l:.c8 26 l:txe6! fxe6 27 i.b6+ .:!.c7 28 i.xc7+ i.xc7 29 .l:r.f8+. b) 1O ... ttJg6 11 i.d3 (11 e5!? h6 12 exf6 hxg5 13 O-O cxb5 14 ttJd5 was complex and fascinating in Mastrovasilis-Ovod, Groningen 1999; 11 i.c4?! d5! 12 exd5 i.c5 13 i.d2 'ii'e7+ 14 <J;dl O-O 15 h3 b5 favoured Black in Lutikov-Lisitsyn, Leningrad 1951) ll...h6 12 ttJf3. This position has arisen many times and is still unresolved; for example, 12 ... 'ii'c7 13 'ii'c2 (13 O-O 'ii'b6+) 13 ... i.g414 O-O 'ii'b6+ 15 <J;hl O-O-O 16 h3 i.xf3 17 .l:r.xf3 with satisfac- tory compensation for White, but no more than that. 11 fxeS dxeS 1l...ttJg4?! permits White to grab the initia- tive by 12 e6! fxe6 13 ttJxb5 (threatening ttJxe6) 13 ... a6 14 ttJd4 e5 15 ttJde6 h6 16 'ii'c4!; for ex- ample, 16 ... b5 17 ttJc7+ <J;d8 18 ttJf7+ <J;e7 19 ~d5. 12 i.e3 (D) White wants to combine .l:r.dl and ttJxb5. Af- ter 12 ttJxb5 a6 13 ttJc3 i.c5!, Black activates quickly and remains a pawn to the good.

12 aS! Long experience has shown the worth of this move, whose main point is to drive White's queen away by ... a4, but has the added benefits of securing b4 for a bishop and in some cases preparing ... .l:r.a6. Instead, 12 ... i.d6 13 .l:r.dl O-O 14 ttJxb5 ttJe8 15 O-O threatens multiple cap- tures on d6, although instead of the known 15 .. :~e7? 16 ttJxd6 ttJxd6 17 .l:r.xd6! 'ii'xd6 18 J::txf7, 15 ... h6! limits the damage: 16 ttJxd6 ttJxd6 17 ttJxf7!? (17 .l:r.xf7 ttJxf7 18 .l:r.xd7 i.xd7 19 ttJxf7 lhf7 20 'iYxb7 .l:r.e8 favours White, and yet Black has his chances) 17 ... .l:r.xf7 18 ':xd6 ~xd6 19 'ii'xf7+ <J;h7 20 'ii'd5. White may pick up a pawn, but the opposite-coloured bishops complicate matters.

13 O-O

GAMBITS 145

White remains a pawn down after 13 1:.d 1 a4! 14 'ii'xb5 'ii'xb5 15lLlxb5 .Bb4+. 13 .. a4 14 'ii'xb5 .Bd6! Covering e5. Obviously, 14 ... iYxb5 15lLlxb5 can't be good for Black, and after 14 ... h6 15 1:.adl 'ii'xb5 16lLlxb5 .Be7 17 lLlc7+ ~f8 18 lLlf3! White wins material, in view of 18 ... lta5 19 .Bb6 .Bc5+ 20 .Bxc5+ 1:.xc5 21 1:.d8+ ~e7 221:.xh8. IS 'ii'e2! (D) Keeping the pressure on. After 15 l:Iadl 'i!i'xb5 16 lLlxb5 .Bb8, Black has successfully guarded his pieces.

IS ... h6 This forces the pace, and it may well be the best continuation. Black has tried several other moves here, including 15 ... 1:.a6 and 15 ... 'ii'g4. 15 ... O-O? was played by none other than a young Alexander Grishchuk versus Fluvia Poyatos (World Under-16 Ch, Oropesa del Mar 1998). The game continued 16 1:.xf6! gxf6 17lLlxh7! ~xh7 18 'ii'h5+ ~g8 (18 ... ~g7 19 'ii'h6+ ~g8 201:.n .Be7 21 1:.f5! forces 2l...'ii'xf5 22 exf5 and White will follow with either lLld5 or lLle4) 19 lLld5 .Be7 20 ':n f5, and here instead of 21 1:.xf5? ':a6!, when Black was defending, White had simply 21 1:.f3! f4 22 ':h3 'i!i'xh3 23lLlxe7+ ~g7 24 gxh3 fxe3 25 'ii'xe5+ with a winning position, since he can reposition his knight to d5 and f6. 16 ':xf6! gxf6 17lLldS ~f8? 17 ... .Be7 18 lLle6! fxe6 19 iYh5+ ~f8 and now 20 .Bxh6+ 1:.xh6, etc., is a draw. White can try for more by 20 lLlb6, but 20 ... 'iWb5 21 .Bxh6+ 1:.xh6 22 'ii'xh6+ ~g8 23 'ii'g6+ ~f8 24 lLlxa8 'ii'xb2 probably leads to a draw anyway. 18lLlxf6 'ii'd8 19lLlgh7+! ':xh7 19 ... ~g7? 20 .Bxh6+! ~xh6 21 'ii'h5+ ~g7 22 ~g5#. 20 lLlxh7+ ~g7? (D) But after 20 ... ~g8 21 'iVh5 .Be7 22 l:1dl White keeps a powerful attack going. w 21 ~hS! 'It>xh7 22 1:.n fS After 22 ... .Be6 23 'ili'xh6+ ~g8 24 1:.f3 .Bg4 25 l:!.g3 White can win in several ways; for ex- ample, 25 ... 'ii'd7 26 iYh5! 'iWc8 27 .Bh6!. 23 ~xh6+ ~g8 24 iYg6+ ~h8 2S exf51-0 White threatens 1:.f3-h3 as well as .Bg5 and f6. There's a lot oflife in some ofthese almost- forgotten gambits. I've given a lot of details in this section, so that you can pick up this open- ing right away if you're interested. Milner-Barry Gambit The Danish and Goring Gambits are classic ex- amples of 1 e4 e5 gambits which jettison cen- tral pawns for development and attack. The same idea can be used against other openings. Here's an example from the French Defence. R. Moyer - B. Kaczmarek corr. 1969

[diagram]
This is the traditional main line of the Ad- vance Variation.

6.Bd3

In the vast majority of cases, White plays this move with the intention of gambiting the d-pawn. We saw 6 .Be2 in the introductory

146 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Chapter 3 of Volume 1, and 6 a3 is also played; both of those moves keep White's d-pawn de- fended by the queen on d 1. B 6 .. cxd4 7 cxd4 .Jtd7 (D) Black prepares to capture on d4. Notice that 7 ... liJxd4?? loses a piece to 8 liJxd4, since 8 .. :~xd4?? 9 .JtbS+ costs Black his queen. w 80-0 Formally speaking, it is this move that intro- duces the Milner-Barry Gambit. White's d-pawn cannot be comfortably defended, since 8 .Jte3? allows 8 .. :iVxb2, and 8 .Jtc2 runs into 8 ... liJb4 9 .Jtb3 (to preserve the bishop-pair generally, and his good bishop in particular; 9 .Jta4 'ilVa6! threatens ... liJd3+) 9 ... 1Ia6!, preventing castling and preparing ... liJd3+. White can also gambit the pawn with 8 liJc3 first, which normally transposes after 8 ... liJxd4 if White continues with the natural 9liJxd4 'ilVxd4 10 O-O (10 'ilVe2 has the drawback that Black can play 1O ... f6!; compare the next note). Here the bold move 9 liJgS !? is sometimes tried and might be fun to play, although like other slower moves in the Milner-Barry, it allows Black to retreat and at- tack the e-pawn via 9 ... liJc6!. 8 .. liJxd4 9liJxd4 'ilVxd4 10 liJc3 (D) 10 'iVe2 first can run into the instructive 1O .. .f6!, decimating the centre and frustrating an attack; for example, 11 exf6 (11 'ilVhS+ ~d8 12 1If7liJe7! develops quickly; Black's extra pawn and superior centre more than make up for his king position) ll...liJxf6 12 liJc3 i.d6 with ideas of ... WVeS, ... 'iVh4 and ... O-O. If Black wants to, he can also answer 10 ~e2 by 10 ... a6, when 11 liJc3 liJe7 transposes to the main line with- out Black having had the chance for 10 .. :iVxeS. After 10 liJc3, we should ask what White has for his pawn, and why he is offering Black an- other one. Essentially, the answer is the same as in the Danish and Goring Gambits: he has cleared out central lines and taken a lead in de- velopment. But there are some differences: in those double e-pawn examples, White con- trolled the centre with a pawn on e4 facing one on d7 or d6. Here he faces a central majority of pawns and a very solid black pawn-structure. Thus White has little long-term compensation, and the onus falls on him to drum up quick ac- tion with his pieces. 10. 'ifxe5 (D) Now it's a truly 'primitive' gambit, with both centre pawns cleared away. While 1O ... 'ii'xeS is the riskiest move, losing still more time without developing, it is in some sense the most princi- pled: Black gains not only a key central pawn, but a 2:0 majority in the centre. In the next game we see 10 ... a6. w 11 l:te1 'iVd6?

GAMBITS 147

Black loses even more time in this way. He should return one of the pawns and get devel- oped by 11..:~b8! 12liJxdS i.d6, which is an- other main line that is held to be at least equal for Black. White can try to work up chances by 13 'iig4 ~f8 14 i.d2, when a typical sequence is 14 ... hS IS 'iih3 liJh6 16 liJe3 ~g8 17 liJc4 iLf4 18 i.xf4 'iixf4, after which White has to improve upon 19liJeS?! liJg4 20 ~g3 'iVxg3 21 hxg3 liJxeS 22l:f.xeS i.c6 23 i.e4? f6! 24 l:!xe6 ~f7, Weeramantry-Berrocal, Turin Olympiad 2006. 12 liJbS! i.xbS 12 ... 'iib8 may still be best, but then 13 ~f3 threatens 14 i.f4, and 13 ... i.d6 14 liJxd6+ 'iixd6 IS i.f4 'iib6 16 'iii' g3! takes over the dark squares with a very strong attack. 13 i.xbS+ ~d8 (D) w The inexperienced player might simply dis- miss this position, thinking that with Black's king in the centre and White so far ahead in de- velopment, White's attack will crash through. In fact, that's what happens. But you should re- alize that this is only because of the unusual ex- tent of that lead in development. If it were Black's move, for example, he could develop straightforwardly (by ... liJf6) and even have a substantial advantage, because it's so difficult to attack a strong pawn-centre without the help of pawn-breaks. That's why so few gambits rely entirely upon piece-play. 14 'iihS! After 14 'iif3?!, a nice example went 14. .. f6? (14 ... liJf6 denies White an easy attack) IS i.f4 e5 16l:!xeS! fxe5 17 i.xeS 'iicS 18 a4!? (or 18 b4 'iixbS 19 'iixf8+ 'iie8 20 'iixg7) 18 ... a6? 19 b4 'iVxb4 20 'iVxdS+! 1-0 Brandao-Wellington, Banco do Nordeste do Brasil Ch 1999.

14.  g61S ~f3 f6?!

But the f-pawn is attacked and Black's posi- tion is already extremely bad. 16 i.f4 (D)

16  eS White's pieces simply massacred Black fol- lowing 16 ... '*lVe7 17 :adl 'ilf7 18 l:txdS+ (18 ~xd5+! exdS 19 ':xd5+ is an even prettier con- clusion) 18 ... exdS 19 ~xd5+! i.d6 (19 .. :~xdS

20 J:te8#) 20 ~xd6+ 1-0 in Mavrikakis-Der-

mentzis, Aghia Pelagia 2004.

17l:!.xeS! 17 l:tadl?! liJe7 isn't so easy.

17.  fxeS 18 i.xeS (D)

18  :~VxeS? After 18 ... ~c5 19 i.xh8 White levels the material and continues the attack; for example, 19 ... 'it'xbS (19 ... i.d6 20 'iif7 'iixbS 21 ~xg8+ 'iie8 22 'iixdS) 20 'iixf8+ 'iie8 21 ~b4! ~c6

148 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

22 .l:tel .l:tc8 23 'ii'f4! (with too many threats) 23 ... tDe7 24 .ltf6 .l:tc7 25 'ii'e5 'ii'c5 26 'ii'e6 in- tending'ii'f7-f8+. 19 ~xf8+ ~c7 20 .l:tc1 + 1-0 In view of the finish 20 ... ~b6 21 'ii'c5+ ~a5 22 b4#. This is the kind of game that Milner-Barry players live for. Notice how, with his own cen- tre decimated, White's various attacks all de- pended upon free piece-play and sacrifices, as opposed to pawn advances. Golod - Barsov Dieren 1998

[diagram]
11..."iVh4!? is also played, when Black has

the ideas of ... h5 and ... tDh6-g4, while keeping open a retreat-path to d8. 12~hl After 12 .l:tdl, Black can ignore the discov- ered attack and play 12 ... tDc6!; e.g., 13 .ltxa6 'ii'xe5 14 ~xe5?! tDxe5 15 .ltxb7 .l:ta7 16 .ltxd5 exd5 17 .l:tel f6 18 f4 .ltc5+ 19 ~hl d4 and Black had taken over in Mnatsakanian-Monin,

USSR 1979.

12  tDc613 f4 (D) A wild idea for those who want to avoid the beaten track is 13 .lte3 'ii'xe5 (or 13 ... "iVh4) 14 f4 ~d6 (14 ... "iVf6!? isn't mentioned anywhere, but looks satisfactory) 15 .l:Iadl with the idea 15 ... .lte716 f5, and here 16 ... "iVe5! is best, since 16 ... e5? 17 .ltc4! d4 18 tDe4 'ii'c7 19 .txf7+! ~xf7 20 'ii'h5+ grants White a very powerful attack.

... .ltcS This developing move prevents .lte3, and prepares ... 'ii'f2 if White plays .l:tdl. 13 ... tDb4 has also been successful, threatening to cap- ture or exchange the opponent's most impor- tant bishop. In that case, if White plays 14 .ltbl, 14 ... "iVc4 gains more time by threatening

GAMBITS 149

to exchange queens, so (ignoring many of the theoretical details), scores of games have con- tinued 141:.dlll'lxd3 151:.xd3'ilVb6! (15 ... 'ilVc4 16 b3'ilVc7 17 Ji.b2 gives White good compen- sation; after 17 ... b5, both 18 f5 and the more positional 18ll'ldl intending ll'le3 are promis- ing) 16 Ji.e3 Ji.c5 17 Ji.xc5 ~xc5 18 'ilVd2! (Black has done very well after 18 f5 Ji.c6! in- tending ... O-O-O and ... exf5 with ... file7 in some order) 18 ... Ji.c6 19 1:.c 1 'ilVe7 20 ll'le2 ! (D). After most of the attacking themes are gone or have been put on hold, White still has long- term compensation worth roughly a pawn. We can see that Black's bishop on c6 is bad, and that a white knight on d4 will be a force to reckon with. An early example of this position went 20 ... O-O (Black can bailout at this point with 20 ... Ji.b5; for example, 21 1:.dc3 O-O 22 ll'ld4 .ltd7 23 1:.c7 1:.ab8 24 ~a5 1:.fc8 25 g3 'ilVe8 26 'ilVb6 Ji.c6!, giving the pawn back for equality) 21 ll'ld4?! (more accurate is 21 1:.dc3 or 211:.g3 with the idea f5) 21 .. J:tac8 221:.g3 f6 23 f5?! (fancy-looking, but White should play to restrict the bishop further by 231:.el Ji.d7 24 1:.ge3 f5 25 1:.b3) 23 ... Ji.d7! 24 1:.el fxe5 25 1:.xe5 ~d6 26 1:.ge3 exf5 27 ll'lf3 Ji.c6 and White has no way in, so Black should consoli- date, Voigt-C.Peters, Hamburg 1990.

14 Ji.d2

This both discourages ... 'ilVb4 and prepares 15 1:.f3 with the idea Ji.e3 (14 1:.f3?? allows mate on gl ).It is slow, but everything else is un- satisfactory: a) 14 1:.dl 'ilVf2 threatens to swap queens, and after 15'ilVg4 O-O-O! Black stays a pawn up and introduces the idea of ... h5. b) 14 a3 takes b4 away from Black's queen, but is slow: 14 ... Ji.a7 (or 14 ... ll'la5) 15 Ji.d2 g6

16 b4 'ii'b6 (16 ... b5! is a good option) 17 'iig4

ll'ld418 Ji.e3'ilVd8 19 .i:'!adl1:.c8, Cubas-An.Ro- driguez, Mar del Plata Zonal 200 1. ... ll'lb4 Experience demonstrates that 14 ... Ji.a7 is also good.

15 Ji.bl Ji.a716 a3ll'lc617 Ji.d3 g6 (D)

18.l:.ac1

18 b4 transposes to Cubas-An.Rodriguez

above. 18  Ji'b6 19 b4 ll'ld4 20 ~dlll'lf5 21ll'la4 It's hard to see what else to do. 21  'iVd8 22ll'lc5 Ji.c6!? 22 ... Ji.xc5 23 1:.xc5 b6 24 .l:tc1 Ji.b5 secures the extra pawn. 23ll'lxa6 A typical French Defence pawn sacrifice for light-square control follows 23 Ji.xf5 gxf5 24 Ji.e3 (24ll'lxa6 d4): 24 ... d4! 25 'ii'xd4 'iixd4 26 Ji.xd4 J:.g8 with ... O-O-O or ... .l:.d8 to come. 23  ll'le3 24 Ji.xe3 Ji.xe3 25 nc2 O-O 26'ilVal White is in bad shape. After 26ll'lc5 d4 27 b5 Ji.d5, Black threatens both ... .i:'!xa3 and ... b6 fol- lowed by ... Ji.b3. 26  Ji.a4 27 .i:'!e2 fJib6 28 ll'lc5 Ji.xc5 29 bxc5'ilVxc5 Black's extra passed d-pawn is decisive; he went on to win. Morra Gambit Versus the Sicilian Defence, the gambit that most follows a primitive line-clearing policy is the Morra Gambit. Many books and articles

150 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

have been written about the Morra, including whole ones about specialized subvariations, so I'll have to be content with presenting a struc- tural overview that concentrates upon the most important variations. In doing so, I'll attempt not to skimp too much on details so that the reader can get a good start on a Morra and/or anti-Morra repertoire. My apologies in advance for the density of coverage; these are unruly lines, and sometimes the moves are more im- portant than the explanations! Hardarson - de Firmian Copenhagen 1999

1 e4 c5 2 d4 cxd4 3 c3 (D)

White offers a pawn. Notice how the combi- nation of 2 d4 and 3 c3 resembles the Danish and Goring Gambits.

3 ... dxc3 Most of the time, Black takes up the chal- lenge and accepts the pawn. As usual, he can decline the gambit in many ways, among them the following: a) 3 ... d3 denies White's knight access to c3, but doesn't gain a tempo or occupy the centre. A common idea is 4 .i.xd3 (4 c4!?) 4 .. .'~Jc6 (4 ... dS? S i.bS+) S c4, establishing a kind of Maroczy Bind. b) 3 ... dS 4 exdS 'i!VxdS S cxd4 is a line from the I e4 cS 2 c3 Sicilian, that is, 2 ... dS 3 exdS 'i!VxdS 4 d4 cxd4 S cxd4. However, in that line, Black ordinarily doesn't exchange on d4 at this early a stage, so his options are somewhat re- duced, and he must tread a little carefully. One long-established continuation is S. . .'~Jc6 6lbf3 eS (6 ... i.g4?! 7 lbc3) 7 lbc3 i.b4 8 i.d2 i.xc3 9 i.xc3 e4 10 lbeS. c) Similarly, 3. .. lbf6 4 eSlbdS is a main line of the 2 c3 Sicilian (1 e4 cS 2 c3 lbf6 3 eS lbdS

4 d4 cxd4). To be well prepared on either side,

you should consult the theory of the 2 c3 Sicil- ian. d) 3 ... eS!? used to have a poor reputation, but is not so bad. One variation goes 4lbf3lbc6 S i.c4 (S cxd4 exd4 6 lbxd4 and now both 6 ... i.h4+ and 6 ... lbf6 7 lbxc6 dxc6 8 'ilkxd8+ 'it>xd8 9 f3 are known lines which offer White a very slight edge) S. .. i.cS!? (Langrock prefers White after S. . .l bf6 6lbgS!? dS 7 exdS lbxdS 8 ~b3! i.e6 9 'ilkxb7 J::!.c8 10 O-O, although Black might want to dispute that assessment; the rare S ... ~c7!? is quite a logical move - then maybe 6 'ilVb3 is best, intending 6 ... d6 7 cxd4 exd4 8 O-O lbf6 9 i.gS!, but Langrock analyses 6 O-O lbf6 7 lbgS lbd8 8 'ilkb3 lbe6 9 f4! i.cs 10 lbxf7!? to an indefinite conclusion) 6 b4!? i.b6 (6 ... .i.d6 may improve: 7 bSlbaS 8 i.e2lbf6 9 cxd4 lbxe4 10 O-O i.e7) 7 bS lbaS 8 lbxeS lbxc4 9lbxc4 dS!? 10 lbxb6 'ilkxb6 (1O ... axb6 11 'iVxd4!) 11 exdS with an extra pawn. The reason that Black doesn't decline the Morra Gambit more often is that the methods of doing so are unambitious, and in many cases slightly inferior. If nothing else, his winning chances are appreciably reduced. 4lbxc3 (D)

4 . lbc6 4 ... d6 is a significant move-order finesse: S lbf3 (S f4!? looks more appropriate than usual, since Black has no option of ... i.cs with which to prevent castling) S ... e6. This elementary

GAMBITS 151

set-up introduces two interesting defences fol- lowing 6 Sl.c4: a) 6 ... a670-0b5 8Sl.b3.l:ta7!?(D). Thema- noeuvre .. J:ta7-d7 is the defining idea of the Chicago Defence: Black intends to shore up d6, thus dissuading the attacking move e5 for the foreseeable future. Then ... Sl.b7 may well fol- low, or simply ... tbf6 and ... Sl.e7. The rook also supports a potential ... d5. In return, White gets a few tempi to decide where to put his pieces. He can, for example, play Sl.e3 and tbd4, con- templating sacrifices on e6, but also preparing to attack with f4-f5. Actually, Black has a number of move-orders with which to introduce ... .l:ta7-d7, and 8 ... .l:ta7 may not be as accurate as Langrock's prefer- ence 8 ... tbc6! 9 "iVe2 .l:ta7 (upon 9 ... Sl.e7 10 l:!dl .l:ta7 11 Sl.e3 .l:td7, the remarkable piece sacri- fice 12 tba4! bxa4 13 Sl.xa4 has been tested and analysed, with White apparently holding the upper hand) 10 Sl.e3 .l:td7 11 .l:tac1 Sl.b7, and now 12 tbd4 is a sound way to continue the at- tack, but Langrock-Reddman, Cuxhaven 2001 saw 12 tbxb5!? axb5 13 "iVxb5 tbge7 14 tbd4 tba7! (an improvement upon several earlier games) 15 "iVh5 g6 16 "iVh3!? with a compli- cated game ahead. Again, White's strategy is based upon piece-play, noticeably the various potential sacrifices on e6. w Be that as it may, after 8 ... l:ta7 (pictured in the diagram), the game RJunge-Vatter, Bun- desliga 1988/9 was exciting and highly instruc- tive: 9 "iVe2 (9 Sl.g5!? is a good developing move, and it sets the trap 9 ... Sl.e7? 10 "iVd4!, forking a7 and g7!; instead, Black can play 9 ... tbe7, whereas 9 ... tbf6!? 10 e5!? is messy) 9 ... Sl.e7?! (9 ... tbc6 is more precise, preparing to exchange a knight if it comes to d4) 10 Sl.e3 .l:td7 11 tbd4! Sl.f6 (1l...tbf6? walks into 12 Sl.xe6! fxe6 13 tbxe6 'iVa5 14 a3!, threatening to trap the queen with b4 and meeting 14 ... b4 with 15 "iVc4!) 12 f4 tbe7? (12 ... Sl.xd4! 13 Sl.xd4 tbf6 is correct, when 14 Sl.xf6!? 'ii'xf6 15 f5 'iVe5 16 ~g4launched an interesting attack in Kuntz-Gauglitz, Budapest 1988; then 16 ... ':c7 was best) 13 Sl.xe6?! (not a terrible mistake, but White misses the winning 13 e5! dxe5 14 tbxe6! fxe6 15 fxe5 Sl.xe5 16 'ii'h5+ tbg6 17 Sl.c2, when Black's position is falling apart) 13 ... fxe6 14 tbxe6 'ilVa5 15 e5! (D).

15 ... dxe5 16 fxe5 Sl.xe5 17 1i'f2 tbg6? (17 ... tbec6), and here White could have played 18 .l:.adl!. That threatens .uxd7 followed by 1i'f7+ and there's nothing to do; for example, 18 .. J:tb7 19 b4! intending 19 ... fixb4 20 .l:td8+ ~e7 21 "iHf7#. Notice that White's attacking themes in this note are not all that different from the ones we see in mainstream Sicilian Defence variations. b) The Finegold Defence tries to develop the queenside first, and can involve a funny-looking fianchetto of the queen: 6 ... tbf6 7 O-O a6 (or 7 ... Sl.e7 8 fie2 a6) 8 ~e2 b5 (or 8 ... tbbd7) 9 Sl.b3 tbbd7 10 .l:tdl (D). Now: bI) 10 ... fib6!? has the idea 11 Sl.e3 fib7; the b7-square turns out to be a good one for Black's queen in several variations. After 12 i.f4, 12 ... b4?! is well met by 13 tbd5! exd5 14 exd5+ ~d8 15 .l:tac1!, when the idea tbd4-c6+ is at best difficult to defend against. Black can improve with 12 .. .'iVb6, when White has to find

152 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

something better than 13 iLe3 llb7, repeating the position. b2) 1O ... iLe7 II ttJd4!? ~b6! 12 iLxe6 fxe6 13 ttJxe6 g6! (13 ... ~f7? 14 ttJd5!) and White lacks compensation. All of this is open for de- bate. c) Another move-order with the same idea is 6 ... iLe7 7 O-O ttJf6 8 ~e2 a6, when 9l:!.dl bS 10 iLb3 ttJbd7 is line 'b2' above. Langrock sug- gests instead 9 eS!?; for example, 9 ... dxeS 10 ttJxeS O-O 11 ltdl ttJbd7 12 iLf4 ~e8!? 13 iLd3!? (lest ... bS and ... iLb7) 13 ... ttJdS 14 ttJxdS exdS ISl:f.acl iLf6 (Silman) 16 ttJxd7 'iixd7 17 ~d2 l:!.e8, when White has enough compensa- tion for the pawn, but no more than that. Let's return to 4 ... ttJc6 (D). w 5 ttJf3 S iLc4 is an appealing move-order finesse. Then someone looking to escape the books and stay aggressive as White might consider S ... d6 6 f4!? with the idea of ttJf3 and a potential eS. Against S. .. e6, however, 6 f4?!, is strongly met by 6 ... iLcS!, so White should probably trans- pose with 6 ttJf3. A possible advantage of S iLc4 could come in the line S. .. g6, when White has various tries to avoid the main lines given in the next note (which deals with S ttJf3 g6). For example, 6 ~3!? (6 iLgS i.g7 7 'ilVdS!? e6 8 'ilVd2 might be worth a try) 6 ... e6 (6 ... ttJeS 7 iLf4 ttJxc4 8 'ilVxc4 d6 9 ttJdS) 7 ttJf3 ttJaS 8 'ilVa4 a6! (8 ... ttJxc4 9 'ilVxc4 a6 10 'ilVd4 f6 II O-O with terrific development) 9 i.e2 bS 10 'ilVd4 and White has some play for the pawn due to his development and Black's dark-square weak- nesses. 5 ... d6 We'll see combinations of ... e6 and ... a6 in the next game. S. .. g6 is known as the Fianchetto Defence, which has a sound reputation. If Black can get ... i.g7 and ... d6 in, his position will be well-nigh unassailable. Therefore, to justify his gambit, White needs to act quickly. One of the main lines goes 6 i.c4 (6 h4 ttJf6! 7 hS ttJxhS 8 .l:IxhS!? gxhS 9 ttJgS ultimately seems to fail to Langrock's 9 ... i.g7! 10 'ilVxhS l:!.f8 11 i.c4 iLxc3+! 12 bxc3 ttJeS 13 iLb3 'ilVaS and Black wins) 6 ... iLg7 (6 ... d6 is also apparently play- able, intending 7 iLgS iLe6!; White's best seems to be 7 eS iLg7! 8 exd6 ttJf6! 90-00-010 dxe7 ttJxe7 11 ~e2 with a small edge) 7 eS!? (D) (a crazy-looking pawn sacrifice; after 7 O-O d6, Black's position is hard to break down).

7 ... ttJxeS (7 ... ttJh6 8 iLf4 O-O 9 O-O d6! 10 exd6 exd6 is held to be equal, although White has a number of tries, including 11 'ifd2 ttJfS 12 .l:i.fel and l:!.adl, as opposed to 11 iLxd6 l:le8 with equal play) 8 ttJxe5 iLxeS 9 iLxf7+ 'it>xf7 10 'ifdS+ ~g7! (1O ... e6 II 'iVxeS ii'f6 12 'iVc7!

GAMBITS

with great compensation) 11 'ii'xeS+ ltJf6 12 O-O d6 13 'i*'e3 h6 14 l:f.el eS! IS h3 with the idea f4. Now Black might try IS ... gS, but a safe B equalizer according to Langrock is Is .. :tIVb6 16 'i'xb6 axb6 17 ..te3 ..te6. 6 ..tc4 (D)

6 ... a6 Many players feel that this is the most reli- able defence in the Morra Gambit complex, or at least the easiest to play. Black retains the idea of ... ..tg4, and also the flexibility to decide be- tween ... e6 and ... e5. In any case, we've come to a major splitting point where Black needs to commit to a structural choice. One of the main defensive lines begins with 6 ... e6, but you might also want to check out the move 6 ... ltJf6, which, if playable, can cut down the number of White's options: a) 6 ... e6 7 O-O leads to two other standard positions: al) 7 ... ..te7 8 'i*'e2 a6 (8 ... ..td7 9 l:f.dl and now 9 ... a6 transposes, while 9 ... ltJf6 10 ..tgS! introduces the idea of ..txf6, damaging Black's pawn-structure, and prepares to double on the d-file; naturally, that's not fatal for Black, but keeps the game lively) 9l:f.dl (D). This is White's basic set-up in the Morra Gambit. As befits a 'primitive' gambit, White relies mainly upon piece-play, almost never re- sorting to f4 or g4-g5, as he does in the Open Sicilian (see Volume 1). Instead, development by ..te3, ..tf4 or ..tg5 follows, hoping to exploit the weaknesses in Black's position, such as d6 and b6, and, with luck, using his single pawn- break e5. Black can argue that he has an extra pawn and a central majority, the latter covering all of White's potential forward posts cS, dS, eS and f5. His problem, of course, is catching up in development. Some sophisticated players use the following move-order: 9 ... ..td7 (Black de- lays ... ltJf6 so as to prevent White from placing his bishop on g5 early on; he also blocks the d- file in the face of 10 eS) 10 ..tf4 eS 11 ..te3ltJf6 12 l:td2 O-O 13 Itadl h6 (13 ... b5 14..tb3ltJaS! is recommended by Langrock, although White might bailout with the tactic ISltJxeS!? ltJxb3 16 axb3 dxeS 17ltJdS! ltJxdS 18 .l:txd5, when 18 ... ..te6! 19 l::txd8 l:f.fxd8 looks about equal) 14 ltJh4!? ltJa5 (14 ... b5 IS ..tb3 b4 16 ltJa4 ltJxe4 17 ..tb6 ltJxd2 18 ..txd8 ltJxb3 leads to equality, according to Langrock) 15ltJg6ltJxc4 16 ltJxe7+ 'i*'xe7 17 'iUxc4 ..te6 18 'iib4 :ac8 (18 ... b5!? 19 :xd6 .l::i.fb8 has the idea of ... ltJe8 and/or ... a5) 19 .l:txd6 l::tc4 20 ~6 :fc8 21 f3 .l:.4c6 1/2-1/2 N.Regan-Holm, London 1994. a2) 7 ... ltJf6 8 'iUe2 ..te7 9 .l::!.dl eS!? (D) is known as the Classical Main Line, a much- disputed position which once was the most popular in the entire Morra. w

154 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black sacrifices a whole tempo and cedes the dS-square, but stops eS and intends ... ~g4 to increase his new-found control over d4, or sim- ply ... ~e6. As compensation for Black's extra pawn, White has space and control of the dS- square. One important line goes 10 ~e3 (10 h3 has been played a lot, when 10 ... O-O 11 ~e3 ~e6 or 11.. .a6 is a typical follow-up) 10 ... O-O (1O ... ~g4 11 h3 ~hS!? 12 g4 ~g6 13lLlM! in- tends lLlfS) 11 b4! (a typical queenside space- grab) 11...~g4 (l1...lLlxb4 12lLlxeS eliminates Black's hard-earned central presence) 12 a3. This position introduces a middlegame that ap- pears about equal. White doesn't have immedi- ate threats, but Black has some issues with the weakness of his dS-square, and has to find a way to redeploy his forces. b) 6 ... lLlf6!?, sometimes thought to be dubi- ous, has the advantage that after 7 O-O (7 ~gS e6), Black can play 7 ... a6 and transpose into the line 6 ... a6 7 O-O without having to face 6 ... a6 7 ~gS. White's standard reply has been 7 eS (D).

Now Black can't play 7 .. .lbxeS?? 8 lLlxeS dxeS?? 9 ~xf7+; this is a recurring theme in gambit play. Nor is 7 ... dS 8 ~bS comfortable. Two others: bl) After 7 ... dxeS?! 8 'ikxd8+ lLlxd8 9lLlbS ~b8, White should continue 10 lLlc7+! 'it>d7 11 lLlbS!, because if 11...'it>e8, which may well be best, Black can no longer castle and White can play 12lLlxeS. b2) After 7 ... lLlg4! no one has demonstrated an advantage for White: b21) If White chooses 8 exd6, then the type of position after 8 ... exd6 9 ~f4 ~e7 10 O-O O-O is one that often arises in Morra lines. One try is 11 'iVe2 ~e8 12l:tfel ~d7 13 'iVc2!? with the dual ideas of'iVb3 and l:tadl. 8 ... 'iVxd6 is play- able, when 9 O-O!? or the attacking 9 'iVe2 is more attractive than 9 'iVxd6. b22) 8 e6!? fxe6 9lLlgSlLlgeS (9 ... lLlf6?! 10 lLlxe6) 10 lLlxe6 'iVaS 11 ~b3 ~xe6 12 ~xe6 'iVa6!; neither side can castle, and Langrock gives various lines that lead to equality. Finally, we return to 6 ... a6 (D): w 70-0 Already White might want to look for some- thing harder-hitting. An often-recommended idea for him is 7 ~gS, with the line 7 ... lLlf6 8 ~xf6 gxf6 9 O-O e6 (9 ... l:tg8!?) 10 lLld4. It has been pointed out that this is virtually the same position as a sideline of the Richter-Rauzer Si- cilian with the same tempi but White having a pawn less! After 1O ... ~e7, intending ... O-O and ... 'it>h8, Langrock continues 11 lLlxc6 bxc6 12 llVg4, with the idea of 'iVg7, interfering with the coordination of Black's pieces. Still, Black has the bishop-pair and an extra pawn, which Silman recommends giving back by 12 .. :iVaS (but Black can also be greedy with 12 ... ~f8 or delay White's win of the h-pawn by 12 ... hS!? 13 'ikg7 ~f8 14 'iVh7 l:tb8 with ideas of .. .'iWaS and ... 'ilVgS or even ... fS) 13 'iVg7 ~f8 14 'Yixh7 'ilVgS IS ~ac1 ~g8 16 g3 ~g6 17 M?! (17 'iVh3! is better), and now 17 ... ~h6! 18 hxgSl:txh7 fa- vours the bishop-pair. This could be the most significant line versus 6 ... a6, and deserves in- vestigation. 7 .. lLlf6 8 b4!? (D) White attacks on the queenside, hoping to harass Black's pieces with bS and gain the bS- square. This is designed to bypass the standard

GAMBITS 155

set-ups. In particular, 8 'Yi'e2?! i.g4! 9l:Idl e6 has scored brilliantly for Black over the years, getting the bishop out without the disadvantage of having to play ... eS (and in doing so, ceding dS). After 10 i.f4, 10 ... tbhS! 11 i.e3 'Yi'f6 (or

11...ttJeS) is effective. White has almost noth-

ing for a pawn. Alternatively, both 8 i.gS e6 9 "iVe2 and 8 i.e3 (eyeing b6) 8 ... e6 (8 ... i.g4 9 "iVb3!) 9 "iVe2 i.e7 10 l:Ifdl bS 11 i.b3 i.d7 are playable for White, if slightly uninspiring. Objectively, they are probably better than 8 M, which is more of a gamble.

[diagram]
156 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

19 .. :iVh3 20 lDxe7+ ~h8 21 ~b3 wins d5 for White's knight. 20 ':'cS?! White can play for a win with 20 l:txe7, and another nice idea is 20 ~c 1 e6 21l:tc8! ~h4 22 'iWh6! with the point 22 ... ~xh6?? (22 ... .:.xc8 is met by 23 ~xh4 exd5 24 ~e7!) 23lDf6+ ~h8 24lIxf8#. 20  :~d7 21 ':c7 iVdS 22 lIcS 'iVd7 112_112 H. Schmidt - A. Muller Germany tt 199213

[diagram]
Various unique lines can arise via 4 ... e6 5 lDf3, when 5 ... lDc6 transposes to the game. One is 5 ... iLc5 I?, and another 5 ... a6 6 iLc4!? (6 iLf4!?) 6 ... b5 (6 ... lDc6 is seen in the following game) 7 iLb3 iLb7. Both are chancy, but the lat- ter has a fairly good theoretical reputation. 5 lDf3 e6 6 iLc4 'WIc7 Systems featuring ... e6 and ... a6 have always had a following among Sicilian players. These are ultra-flexible lines, and there are a remark- able number of move-orders, in part because Black can play combinations of ... b5, .. ,'Vilic71b6, ... iLc5/d6/e7 and ... lDge7 or ... lDf6 in almost any order. One popular sequence is 6 ... a6 7 O-O (7 ~g5 f6 8 iLh4 lDge7 is rather cooperative of White, because one of Black's logical set-ups combines ... f6 and ... lDge7-g6 anyway) 7 ... b5!? (several other legitimate moves are played here; for example, 7 ... iLc5, 7 .. :fic7 8 'WIe2 iLd6!? with the idea ... lDge7-g6, and 7 ... lDge7 immedi- ately) 8 iLb3lDge7 (D). w Now: a) The most common move is 9 iLg5, but 9 ... f6 10 iLf4 lDg6 11 iLg3 shouldn't bother Black; for example, ll...iLb7 12 lDh4!? (12 ~e2 iLc5; 12l:tc1l:tc8 13 ~e2lDa5) 12 ... lDxh4 13 iLxh4, Chikovani-Yagupov, Tula 1999, and now 13 ... ~b6, 13 ... iLb4 and 13 ... .:.c8 all leave White looking for compensation. b) In this sort of line, White needs to strike quickly, and 9 iLe3, intending to meet 9 ... lDg6?! with 10 a4! b4 IllDd5! is a sacrifice that fits in well when Black has committed to ... lDg6. Then Black has to decline the sacrifice and de- fend b6, but he's on the defensive: 11.. .. :.b8 (ll...exd5? 12 exd5 lDce5 13 lDxe5 lDxe5 14 d6! threatens 'iVd5 and f4) 12l:tel f6 13 ':'cl!. Therefore Black should develop first by 9 ... iLb7, when 10 a4 b4 l1lDd5 exd5 12 exd5lDa5 is an- other story; for example, 13 d6lDxb3 14 ~xb3 iLd5! 15 'iVd3 iLe6 16 dxe7 iLxe7, holding on to the extra pawn with fair prospects. 70-0 lDf6 (D) w S 'WIe2?! This allows a cunning manoeuvre that robs White of his compensation. 8 lDb5! ~b8 9 e5! is better. Black should probably reply 9 ... a6!, when 10 lDd6+ ~xd6 11 exd6 b5 and 10 exf6 axb5 11 fxg7 iLxg7 12 iLxbS O-O have been analysed in depth without a firm conclusion. 9 ... lDxeS? leaves Black in trouble after 10 lDxeS! 'WIxeS IIl:tel, which reminds me of a Milner- Barry where Black has been too greedy. Instead, 10 iLf4?! d6 11 .l:.el lDxc4 12 'WIa4 (D.Moul- ton-Manik, San Mateo 1992) l2 ... ..te7! is an example of the kind of countertactics that abound in these positions. s. .. lDg4! 9lDb5!

GAMBITS 157

An astonishing number of players (including grandmasters) have fallen for the trap 9 h3?? ttJd4!, winning on the spot. The alternative 9 g3 a6 10 i.f4 i.d6!? (or 1O ... d6) is fairly solid for Black, although naturally White still has some compensation. 9  :i1Bb8 10 h3 h5 A standard idea; White can't capture the knight unless he weakens his own kingside first.

11 g3 a6

1l...i.cS 12 i.f4! ttJgeS 13 ttJxeS ttJxeS 14 .i:tac1 threatens IS i.xe6. In what follows, White lets the game drift. 12 ttJc3 ttJge5 13 ttJxe5 ttJxe5 14 i.f4 i.d6! 15 i.b3 h4 By luring White into playing g3, Black has justified the move ... hS. 16 ~g2 hxg3 17 fxg3 ttJg6 (D) Both 17 .. .f6! and 17 ... bSleave Black with as many attacking chances as White, in addition to his extra pawn. 18 i.xd6 ~xd6 19 ~g4 b5 20 .i:tadl ~e5 White has no compensation; the e5 outpost serves Black well. A desperate counterattack ensues. 21 .i:txf7 ~xf7 22 .i:tn + And now simplest was 22 ... ~g8! 23 'iVxg6 ~h5, winning, because White can't avoid the exchange of queens. In spite of Black's good play thus far, the game ended tragically fol- lowing 22 ... ~e7 23 ~xg6 .i:tf8? (23 ... b4!) 24 ttJd5+! exdS 2S ':xf8 i.b7?? (25 ... 'ihf8 26 i.xdS ~xb2+ 27 ~f3 ~c3+ 28 ~g2 ~d2+ with a perpetual check) 26 ':f7+ ~d8 27 ~b6+ Re8 28 ~xb7 'iti>xf7 29 ~xd5+! ~f6 30 'ii'xa8 ~xb2+ 31 ~f3 ~c3+ 32 ~g4 ~d3 33 'iVf8+ 1-0. The developing player would do well to try out the Morra Gambit upon occasion. It can serve to improve your tactical skills, while throwing a lot of Sicilian Defence players off balance. Even in slow openings such as the Caro- Kann Defence, there are respectable gambits in this category; for example, White clears out the centre for activity in the variation 1 e4 c6 2 4Jf3 dS 3 ttJc3 i.g4 4 h3 i.xf3 5 'iixf3 e6 6 d4 dxe4 7 4Jxe4!? ~xd4 8 i.d3, intending to attack with the help of the open central files. Blackmar-Diemer Gambit

1 d4 by its nature develops less dramatically

than 1 e4, but I should mention some fairly mainstream examples of primitive gambits in d-pawn openings. The most obvious example is the Blackmar-Diemer Gambit, which goes 1 d4 d5 2 e4 dxe4 and either 3 f3 or 3 4Jc3 4Jf6 4 f3 exf3 5 4Jxf3, the latter a mirror-image of the Goring Gambit. Once more, there are books and many publications on this opening. There are many wonderful traps and tactics in the Blackmar-Diemer, and it may be worth experi- menting with, but I don't think it quite holds up against accurate defence. To keep the coverage concise, I'll bypass much of the fun and give a respectable example: Alexander - Golombek British Ch, Nottingham 1946

[diagram]
Unfortunately, serious move-order issues can interfere with White's plans in the Blackmar- Diemer. Here 2 4Jc3 ttJf6 3 e4 is also played, when 3 ... dxe4 transposes. But Black can also play 3 ... ttJxe4 4 4Jxe4 dxe4, which has been pretty effective in practice. Some fans of the gambit are willing to accept that and work around it. Others feel that 2 e4 dxe4 3 4Jc3 may be the best move-order, even if White has to deal with 3 ... e5 in the note to Black's third move. 2  dxe4 3 4Jc3 Upon the immediate 3 f3, 3 ... eS! is known to be good. Then 4 dxeS 'ii'xdl + S ~xdl ttJc6

158 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

already gives Black the advantage; for exam- ple, 6 ttJc3 i.e6! 7 ttJxe4 O-O-O+ 8 i.d2 ttJxe5. 3 . ttJf6 B Unfortunately for the gambiteer, 3 ... e5 (D) at this point illustrates another limitation of the Blackmar-Diemer. w For example: a) 4 dxe5 is met by 4 ... 'ii'xdl +. b) 4 ttJxe4 has several answers, an ambi- tious one being 4 .. :~xd4 5 i.d3 f5, while after 4 ... exd4, the common reply 5 i.c4 seems to end up in Black's favour after 5 .. .'ike7 6 ~e2 i.f5. c) Nor is the slow 4 i.e3 exd4 5 'ii'xd4 'ii'xd4 6 i.xd4 ttJc6 appealing. d) White has often played 4 'ii'h5, but the countergambit 4 ... ttJf6! 5 'ii'xe5+ i.e7 subjects him to difficult pressure. e) 4 ttJge2 ttJc6!? (4 ... exd4 is a popular alter- native, and 4 ... f5 with the idea 5 dxe5 'ii'xdl + is also promising) 5 i.e3 (5 d5 ttJce 7) 5 ... f5 !? 6 dxe5 ttJxe5 7 'ii'xd8+ 'it;xd8 8 O-O-O+ i..d7 9 ttJf4 ttJf6 and White has to show how his posi- tion might be worth a pawn. I should emphasize that this is hardly the last word; further research and/or creative thinking may improve your view of White's prospects.

4 f3 (D)

4 . exf3 Black can also decline the gambit. Among other tries, 4 ... c6 is a particularly useful semi- waiting move. Black's first point is that 5 fxe4 e5! makes structural gains. Black has the advan- tage after 6 dxe5 (6 d5 is met by 6 ... i.b4; 6 ttJf3 exd4 7 ~xd4 'ii'xd4 8 ttJxd4 may be best, but both 8 ... i.b4 and 8 ... i.c5 with the idea ... O-O and ... ttJbd7 leave White with little compensation for the isolated e-pawn) 6 ... 'ii'xdl + 7 'iiitxdi ttJg4 8 ~el ttJxe5, when he has a powerful out- post on e5 in front of the isolated pawn. Other moves for White include 5 i.c4 'ii'a5! and 5 i.g5 ttJbd7, which is a variation of the Veresov Opening, that is, 1 d4 d5 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 3 .tg5 ttJbd7 4 f3 c6 5 e4 dxe4. In that line, 6 fxe4 e5! 7 dxe5 'ii'aS! with the idea 8 exf6 'ii'xg5 is known to be at least equal for Black. Finally, 5 ttJxe4 isn't what White wants in terms of structure (the pawn on f3 is misplaced); then 5 ... ttJbd7 already equalizes or more. 5 ttJxf3 Black has an overwhelming record versus 5 ~xf3? His pawn advantage is safe after 5 ... g6 or 5 ... c6, which leave no weaknesses in the po- sition. With care, Black can also get away with 5 ... ~xd4!, since White can't win enough time attacking the queen to succeed in attack.

[diagram]
This is one of the better defences. Black strengthens his control of d5 without blocking off his queen's bishop, which can develop to f5 or g4. To my mind, the frequently-played alter- natives 5 ... e6 and 5 ... g6, analysed in remark- able detail over many years, offer White more chances to work up a significant attack. 6 i.c4 (D) Black does very well against other moves; for example, 6 ttJe5 ttJbd7 (or 6 ... i.f5), and 6 i.d3 i.g4!' 6 .. i.f5 White gets what he wants after 6 ... i.g4?? 7 ttJe5! i.e6 (7 ... i.xdl?? 8 i.xf7#; 7 ... i.h5?? 8 'ii'xh5) 8 i.xe6 fxe6 (Black's isolated e-pawns are not only targets, but they also imprison Black's bishop) 9 O-O ttJbd7 10 i.f4 ttJxe5 11

GAMBITS 159

i.xeS with a winning position; for example, 11 ... ~d712 ~e2 O-O-013 lIf3!, threatening 14 lbbS! and 14 lba4!. 70-0 7 lbeS e6 8 O-O sets some traps such as 8 ... i.xc2?! 9 lbxf7! i.xdl (Bticker analyses

9...~xf7 10 ~xc2! 'it'xd4+ 11 i.e3! ~xe3+ 12

~hl i.d6 13 lIael with a strong attack) 10 lbxd8 ~xd8 11 lIxdl lbdS?! 12 lIel lbb4 13 lIxe6!, Welling-Wrobel, Bad Mondorf 1982. This is the sort of thing Blackmar-Diemer fans live for. Alas, Black can defend by 8 ... i.g6!, when the dramatic 9 g4 was smoothly coun- tered by 9 ... lbbd7! 10 lbxg6 hxg6 11 gS'iVc7! 12 i.f4?! i.d6 13 gxf6 i.xf4 14 fxg7? i.e3+! 0-1 in Ang.Rodriguez-Bricard, Toulouse 1998. 7 ... e6 8 i.g5 8lbeS can be met by 8 ... i.g6 (or 8 ... i.xc2!? 9 ~xc2 'it'xd4+) 9 lbxg6 (9 g4!? lbbd7 10 lbxd7 'it'xd7) 9 ... hxg6 10 ~d3 i.d6 with the upper hand. 8 ... i.e7 Or 8. .. lbbd7 9 ~d2 i.d6 and ... ~c7. 9 ~e2 O-O 10 lIadllbbd7 lllbe5lbxe5 12 dxe5lbd5? Black has an extra pawn and a healthy ad- vantage after l2. .. lbd7! 13 i.xe7 ~xe7. 13 lbxd5 cxd5 14 i.xe7 ~xe7 15 i.xd5! i.xc2 IS ... lIad8 is somewhat less cooperative. 16 ~xc2 exd517 lIxd5 %:tad818 %:tedl lIxd5 19 lIxd5 lIdS Ih-1fl Other Primitive Gambits The Staunton Gambit versus the Dutch De- fence offers the e-pawn in a similar way via 1 d4 fS 2 e4 fxe4 and now 3 f3 exf3 4 lbxf3 or 3 lbc3 lbf6 4 f3 exf3 S lbxf3 (though Black nor- mally doesn't take on f3 so readily). That's a mirror image of the Morra Gambit. A more original idea arises in the Queen's Gambit Semi-Slav sequence 1 d4 dS 2 c4 c6 3lbc3 e6, if White continues 4 e4!? dxe4 (4 ... i.b4 is the most promising way to decline the offer) S lbxe4 i.b4+ 6 i.d2!? 'iVxd4 7 i.xb4 'iVxe4+ 8 i.e2 (D) (or 8 lbe2). White has again allowed the capture of both central pawns in order to develop quickly and open lines. The difference here is that in addi- tion to attacking chances, he has gained an es- sentially positional advantage: the dark squares in Black's camp have lost the natural protection afforded by Black's king's bishop. Neverthe- less, this sacrifice has the usual drawback of a 'primitive' gambit, that is, White's pressure on those squares is not supported by central pawns, and there are no immediate ways to break down Black's solid pawn-structure. Therefore Black will frequently manage to consolidate, espe- cially when he succeeds in playing ... e5 and freeing his bad bishop. Theory goes back and forth with respect to how this imbalance plays out, but I should say that 4 e4 has been one of White's most respectable gambits at the highest levels for many years. You may have noticed that I haven't yet mentioned any gambits by Black in the 'primi- tive' category. It's asking a lot for Black, al- ready a tempo down, to offer valuable centre pawns in pursuit of attack. For example, you sometimes see Black try 1 d4 eS 2 dxeS d6?! 3

160 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

exd6 i.xd6 at lower levels of play, but that has yet to attract much interest among masters. If White plays 4 tLlf3, he is not even behind in the number of pieces developed. On the other hand, I f4 eS 2 fxeS d6 3 exd6 i.xd6, known as the From Gambit, has a long history of grandmas- ter practice. Clearly, that's because of the fact that 1 f4 doesn't help White's development and somewhat exposes his king. See Chapter 6 for some analysis. Similarly the gambit 1 e4 cS 2 f4 dS 3 exdS tLlf6 4 c4 e6! S dxe6 i.xe6 clears out Black's centre, but leaves holes all over White's position (the moves f4 and c4 have not been productive) and gives Black a lead in develop- ment. The Hennig-Schara Gambit is a good exam- ple of a 1 d4 opening in which Black plausibly abandons his centre pawns for activity. It be- gins 1 d4 dS 2 c4 e6 3 tLlc3 cS 4 cxdS cxd4!? S ~xd4 (S "iYa4+! is a technical nicety; you can reach the main position via S. .. i.d7 6 "iYxd4 exdS 7 "iYxdS tLlc6 with 8 ... tLlf6 next, gaining another tempo on White's queen; White avoids a couple of alternate tries by Black if he plays this way) S. .. tLlc6! 6 "iYdl exdS 7 "iYxdS i.d7!; for example, 8 tLlf3 tLlf6 9 "iYdl i.cs (D) is con- sidered the main line of this gambit. w As with our other primitive gambits, Black has cleared out the centre but gained several tempi for an attack by pieces. He can pursue that in various ways; for example, by moving his queen to c7, e7 or b6, and then playing ... O-O-O or ... O-O with ... l:.d8. The dynamic old main line continues 10 e3 "iYe7 11 i.e20-O-O 12 O-O gS! 13 b4!. White returns the pawn to launch a queenside attack after 13 ... i.xb4 14 ~b3. Positional Gambits When modem chess was first developing, gam- bits were almost always used as a means to es- tablish an attacking game. Today, those gambits are still with us (see above), but we often play gambits which are positional in their orienta- tion. In these, the gambiteer retains an influen- tial pawn-centre, which is usually part of his compensation. The most common strategy em- ployed is the sacrifice of a flank pawn to estab- lish a full and often mobile pawn-centre. This can involve giving up a flank pawn in order to divert one of the opponent's centre pawns, thus establishing a pawn-majority. Or it might in- volve surrendering a flank pawn with the goal of gaining time, which is then used to establish a large centre. Note that this is the opposite of the strategy in the previous section, which in- volved clearing out one's own centre pawns! Let me begin by listing some of these gambits and examine a few others via games. To begin with, there's the King's Gambit, discussed in Volume 1: 1 e4 eS 2 f4. White of- fers his f-pawn in order to draw Black's e-pawn away from the centre. Then, ideally, he will be able to play an effective d4 and develop his pieces quickly around a mobile centre. Black has several gambits which employ the same philosophy, the two most prominent of which are the Latvian Gambit (l e4 eS 2 tLlf3 fS) and the Schliemann Defence to the Ruy Lopez (1 e4 eS 2 tLlf3 tLlc6 3 i.bS fS). The Queen's Gambit (discussed in Volume 2) is not a real gambit, at least in its pure fonn 1 d4 dS 2 c4 dxc4, because White can recover his pawn quickly. We do see a number of lines, however, in which White sacrifices a pawn for the sake of establishing a large, mobile centre; for example, 1 d4 dS 2 c4 dxc4 3 tLlf3 tLlf6 4 tLlc3 a6 S e4 bS 6 eS. An analogous line in the Slav is 1 d4 dS 2 c4 c6 3 tLlf3 tLlf6 4 tLlc3 dxc4 S e4 bS 6 eS, while 1 d4 dS 2 c4 c6 3 tLlf3 tLlf6 4 tLlc3 e6 S i.gS h6 6 i.h4 dxc4 7 e4 gS 8 i.g3 bS is a major line in the Semi-Slav. These have a rather opportunistic character, and when White succeeds he usually does so by direct assault supported by tactics, rather than by further cen- tral pawn advances.

GAMBITS 161

b4 Gambits In openings which begin with moves other than B

1 e4 or 1 d4, most gambits for White are

positionally-based flank-pawn sacrifices. In the Symmetrical variations of the English Open- ing, we find various offers involving b4; for ex- ample, 1 c4 cS 2 g3 g6 3 Ji.g2 Ji.g7 4 tbc3 tbc6 S a3 e6 6 b4!? The point is seen in the line 6 ... cxb4 7 axb4 tbxb4 8 Ji.a3 (D).

Here the considerations are more positional than tactical. White's development advantage is only slight, but he has some serious pressure on the dark squares: tbbS or tbe4 might follow, and d4 and tbf3 also hit dark squares; finally, even e4-eS is sometimes an issue. In this pre- cise position, furthermore, the knight can't be easily defended in view of 8 ... aS? 9 Ji.xb4. Consequently, the pseudo-sacrifice 6 ... tbxb4 7 axb4 cxb4 is more common, when 8 d4 bxc3

9 e3 intends tbe2xc3 and Ji.a3, a gambit with

the same dark-square themes. In Volume 3, I covered this position in some detail. In the Sicilian Defence, the diversion of the black pawn from cS arises in the Wing Gambit,

1 e4 cS 2 b4, which allows White to have more

leeway in the centre following 2 ... cxb4. He can play 3 d4 or 3 Ji.b2 at that point, but more com- monly opts for 3 a3, trying to develop quickly after 3 ... bxa3 4 tbxa3 or 4 Ji.xa3 (D). White intends to construct a large centre, but he also hopes to win dark squares and pre- vent Black from castling if he plays ... e6 or ... eS; this strategy resembles the English Opening example above. Of course, there are many options for Black even before this point, including 3 ... tbf6 or 3 ... dS. The same idea (and sometimes the same pawn-structure) arises in the French Wing Gam- bit: 1 e4 e6 2 tbf3 dS 3 eS cS 4 b4 cxb4, when White can play either the central move S d4 or the developing S a3 bxa3 6 Ji.xa3. In the Scandinavian Defence with 1 e4 dS 2 exdS "iYxdS 3 tbc3 ~a5, White can play an- other sacrifice of the b-pawn, Mieses's long- discarded 4 b4!? After 4 .. :t#Vxb4, the older S l:Ibl scrounges up some activity, but has gen- erally been ineffective because after s .. :iVd6, Black develops normally. Recently, White has played S a4! with the idea 6 Ji.a3; then Black has some problems getting developed, because White can answer ... eS or ... e6 with Ji.xf8 and prevent castling, as well as gaining influence on the dark squares. Even the move as can prove useful. Of course, this gambit may tum out to be of marginal soundness, but at least it com- bines quick development with positional con- siderations. g4 Gambits in the Dutch Defence The mirror image of the Sicilian Defence gam- bit with b4 is a Dutch Defence gambit with g4. It turns out that there are quite a few of these: Ravikumar - Nasir Ali New Delhi 1982

1 d4 f5 2 g4!?

This is called the Krejcik Gambit. White un- dertakes to divert Black's f-pawn from control of e4, just as 1 e4 cS 2 b4 tries to draw Black's

162 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

c-pawn from control of d4. White has three similar and respectable ways to gambit the g- pawn: a) The move 2 h3 has the same idea of g4, but intends to recapture on g4 with his h-pawn in case of ... fxg4, while not allowing ... g3 (see the note to move 3 in the main game). This is sometimes called the Korchnoi Attack. Play can proceed 2 ... lDf6 (after 2 ... d5, White can still continue with 3 g4 fxg4 4 hxg4 i.xg4 and 5 f3 or 5 i.h3, but that looks speculative, and it's probably more sensible to exploit the hole on e5 by 3 lDf3 and 4 i.f4) 3 g4 fxg4?! 4 hxg4lDxg4 (D), and now: w al) 5 e4 d6 6 i.g5!? g6 (6 ... c6 is recom- mended by A.Watson) 7 f3lDf6 SlDc3 c6 9 'ilVd2 with positional pressure and attacking chances, Korchnoi-Kanel, Bie11979. a2) 5 ~d3! appears still stronger, and in- cludes the trap 5 ... lDf6?? 6 .l:t.xh7!. Also terrible is 5 ... lDh6? 6 i.xh6 gxh6 7 ~f5!, threatening ~h5#. Even the best move, 5 ... g6, allows 6 J:i.xh7!? .l:txh7 7 ~xg6+ l:!.f7 S 'iVxg4, which is probably somewhat better for White, and 6 ~xh7 is by no means necessary; for example, both 6 lDf3 and 6 lDh3 generate more than enough play for a mere pawn. b) Another version of a g4 gambit in the Dutch Defence stems from Alapin's move 2 ~d3, attacking f5. Then if Black chooses 2 ... e6 (2 ... d5 is probably better), White plays 3 g4 fxg4 4 h3 gxh3 (not the only move) 5 lDxh3, which is an approximate mirror-image of a line in the Sicilian Wing Gambit. White has reason- able compensation, with ideas of lDf4 or lDg5, as well as simply i.g2 and e4. c) 2 lDc3 lDf6 (2 ... d5 is the main alterna- tive) 3 g4!? is a similar idea, when 3 ... lDxg4 (3 ... fxg4 4 h3) 4 e4 forms a big centre, and then 4 ... d6 5 i.h3 keeps up the pressure. As usual, Black's e6-square is weak. w 2  fxg4 (D) 3h3

3 e4 is the next game.

3 ... gxh3?! This cedes the h-file to White, who also gets rapid development against a weakened king po- sition. 3 ... g3 4 fxg3 lDf6 is a good way to de- cline the gambit. Then 5 lDc3 d5 6 i.g2 e6 7 i.f4 i.d6 S e3 0-09 'iVd2 with the idea 9 ... lDh5 10 lDge2 leads to a nicely imbalanced position, perhaps slightly in favour of White because of Black's difficulty in achieving ... e5. 4lDxh3 (D)

White has a serious attack, with ideas of lDf4, 'ilVd3 and e4. 4  lDf6 SlDgS!?

GAMBITS 163

This supports e4 and threatens 6 'iVd3. An- other good course is S tDc3 dS 6 'iVd3 with the idea i.f4 and O-O-O. 5 ... d5 6 'iVd3 ~d6! 7 tDc3! 7 tDxh7 tDxh7 8 .l:i.xh7 .l:i.xh7 9 'iVxh7 tDc6 10 c3 eS gives Black some compensation. 7 ... c6 8 e4!? dxe4 9 tDcxe4 tDxe4 10 tDxe4 'iVc7 11 tDg5 'iVa5+ 12 ..td2 ~d5 13 ~xh7 ..tf5 14 .l:.xh8! ..txd3 15 ..txd3 White is winning; he has far too many pieces out aimed at Black's weaknesses, with ..te4 and O-O-O in reserve if needed. Marzolo - Piat Clermont Ferrand 2001

[diagram]
Here it seems wise to stake out central terri- tory by 3 ... dS 4 eS ..tfS, when S h3 'iVd7 6 hxg4 i.xg4 7 ..te2 ..txe2 8 tDxe2 is double-edged. 4 h3! (D)

White plays much as he does in the Sicilian Wing Gambit with 3 a3. 4 ... tDf6 As above, 4 ... g3 keeps White's h-file closed, but after S fxg3, there is no obvious follow-up, and White controls the centre. 5 tDc3 S hxg4 ..txg4 6 f3 is similar: 6 ... ..te6!? (not 6 ... ..thS? 7 eS) 7 tDh3 c6 8 tDgS ..tg8 9 ..th3 with ample pressure on the light squares. 5 ... tDc6 6 hxg4 ..txg4 7 f3 ..td7 8 ..tg5 e5 A good move, but it further weakens the light squares. 9 tDge2 h6 10 ~d2 .l:.g8 11 ..te3 exd4 12 tDxd4 'iVe7 13 O-O-O a6 14 tDb3 Here 14 ..tc4! .l:i.h8 IS tDdS tDxdS 16 ..txdS would confer a clear advantage upon White. ... O-O-015 ..tc4 ..te6 16 tDd5 iLxd5? 16 .. :~f7 is better. 17 exd5 Surprisingly, 17 iLxdS! tDxdS 18 ~xdS wins material because of l8 ... .l:i.h8 19 ..tgS. ... tDe5 18 ..te2 c5?! 19 dxc6 tDxc6 20 ..tb6l:td7 21 ~hel 'iVf7 22 ..tn! ..te7?! But against 22 ... 'iVhS, 23 'iVc3 'it'b8 24 tDd4 tDxd4 2S ..txd4 is very strong; for example, 2S ... dS 26 iLxa6! with the idea 26 ... bxa6 27 iLeS+ ..td6 28 ~b4+.

23..th3

White picks up material; he won easily. ... b5 Gambits in the Nimzo-Indian Defence Sometimes the offer of a pawn by ... bS can be used to divert White's c-pawn. This occurs in the Benko Gambit, discussed below, where Black completes the analogy with the Sicilian and Dutch examples by playing ... bS and then ... a6. In several variations of the Nimzo-Indian Defence, we see the same idea; for example, 1 d4 tDf6 2 c4 e6 3 tDc3 ..tb4 4 e3 O-O S tDe2 bS!? 6 cxbS a6 is a gambit based upon controlling the light squares. It was developed by Vitolins. Another type of flank pawn sacrifice is seen in this game: Short - Aleksandrov European Team Ch, Pula 1997

[diagram]
This is the Leningrad System of the Nimzo- Indian. Now one of Black's primary methods of defence involves sacrificing a flank pawn: 4  h6 5 ..tb4 c5 6 d5 b5 (D) In typical gambit style, Black undermines White's support of dS. 7 dxe6 7 cxbS gS 8 ..tg3 tDxdS works out well for Black. If White is going to decline the gambit, 7 'iVc2 with the idea of e4 is one of the best ways to do so. 7 ... fxe6 8 cxb5 d5 This is the point: once the c-pawn disap- pears, Black is able to establish a central superi- ority.

164 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

9 e3 O-O

The game we are following actually went 6 ... O-O 7 e3 b5 8 dxe6 fxe6 9 cxb5 d5, trans- posing to this position. I'm using the normal move-order because it avoids certain compli- cations. Now White has to deal with the pros- pect of Black's centre advancing further. 10 i.d3 a6!? (D) This is a familiar pattern for us by now: Black exchanges White's advanced b-pawn so as to activate his pieces. In fact, however, 10 ... d4 is more common, often leading to the forcing line 11 exd4 cxd4 12 a3 i.a5 13 b4 dxc3 14 bxa5 i.b7 15 lbe2 i.xg2 16 .l:tgl, when 16 ... i.f3 17 .l:i.g3! i.xe2 18 'iNxe2 seems to favour White, al- though it's still tricky. w 11 lbe2 White almost has to return the pawn and get his pieces out. One major point of 1O ... a6 be- comes clear in the line 11 bxa6?! d4 12 exd4 cxd4 (or 12 .. :~Vxd4!?, hitting the bishop on h4 15 ~xd3 i.xa6) 13 a3 i.a5 14 b4 dxc3 15 bxa5 ~xa5 16 lbe2 lbxa6 17 O-O lbc5 with ideas of ... lbxd3 and ... i.a6; then Black stands better. 11 .. e4 12 i.e2 12 i.bl1eaves room on c2 for the queen. Af- ter 12 ... axb5 13 ~c2, 13 ... i.xc3+ 14 bxc3 e5!? has been played, but 13 ... lbbd7! 14 O-O ~b6 looks safer, with a central majority and space. ... axb5 130-0 lbe6?! Insisting upon playing with a material defi- cit. Simply 13 .. J:ta5! keeps Black's good struc- ture intact, because 14 a4 (14 a3 i.e7; 14 lbd4 i.xc3 15 bxc3 e5 16 lbf5 lbc6) 14 ... bxa4 15 i.xa4 i.d6 leaves White with a vulnerable b- pawn. 14 lbxb5 e5?! 14 ... i.c5 followed by ... ~b6 and/or ... lbb4 gives Black meaningful compensation, although White should keep a small edge. 15b3 White misses his chance: 15 i.xf6! ':'xf6 16 b3 gives him the better of it. Now Black in tum could play 15 ... 'iVa5! with an excellent game. 15  i.g4? 16 h3 i.h5 17 i.xf6 ':'xf6 18 bxe4 dxe4 19 ~xd8+ lbxd8 20 lbee3 White has a healthy extra pawn. s. Mohr - Christiansen Bundesliga 1989/90

[diagram]
i.xe3+ 61i'xc3 b5!? 7 exb5 e6 (D) This time Black uses his c-pawn instead of his a-pawn, but the idea is the same: to open lines and bring pieces out quickly. w and intending 13 lbf3 i.xc3+ 14 ~f1 ~xd3+! 8 f3

GAMBITS 165

The obvious alternative is 8 bxc6 tLJxc6. Here Black has a multitude of ideas, including ... .tb7 and .. J:k8, or in some cases ...t LJdS and .. .fS, perhaps with .. J~b8 and ... tLJaS. He is try- ing to develop quickly and grab the initiative, of course, but even more than that he wants to con- trol the light squares and use them as a basis for attack. Compare the alternate acceptance of the gam- bit by 8 e3 cxbS 9 ..ItxbS in Rantanen-Raaste, Helsinki 1990: 9 ... tLJe4!? 10 ~b4 as 11 'iVa4 .tb7 12 tLJf3 fS 13 O-O l:tf6 14 tLJd2 l:tg6 IS tLJxe4 fxe4! (it seems odd to block the path of the b7-bishop, but the pawn on e4 serves to cut off White's defenders from the kingside) 16 .te2 'i'h4 17 g3? (17 ~hl) 17 ... ~h3 18 f4 exf3 19 1:txf3 l:th6! 20 l:tf2 ~xg3+ 21 ~f1 .l:[xh2 (21...i.g2+! is even stronger) 22 .l:txh2 'iWxh2 23 <ltel .te4 24 ~dl ~gl+ 2S <ltd2 tLJc6 26 ~dl 'i'h2 27 <ltc3 l:tc8 28 ~b3 ..ItdS+ 29 ~a4 .l:tb8 30 i.bS tLJa7 31 ..Itd3 .Bc6+ 0-1. 8  tLJd5 9 ~d2 f5 10 tLJh3 cxb5 11 e3

11 e4 would run up against 11...fxe4 12 fxe4

tLJf613 .Bd3 .Bb7 14 tLJf2 tLJc6!, as analysed by Christiansen. 11 ...t LJc6 (D) w

12.Bxb5

12 .Bd3 tLJaS! threatens ... tLJb3 and intensi- fies the pressure on the light squares. 12 ... tLJa5! 13 ~d3l::tb8 14 b4 l:txb5!? Enterprising, although 14 ... ~b6 is safer and good, with the idea IS bxaS 'i'xa5+ 16 .Bd2 ~xbS. 15 bxa5? IS ~xbS! tLJb3 16 l:tbl ~c7 17 'it'd3 tLJxc1 18 ~d2 tLJa2 19 'i'xa2 tLJxe3 is unclear. 15  ..Ita616 .Bd2 .l:[b617 ~c2 l:tc618 ~dl ~h4+ 19 tLJf2 'i'g5 Black attacks two critical pawns; it's all over.

20 g3 tLJxe3 21 tLJh3 'i'h6 22 ~b3 tLJg2+ 0-1

The reason why these gambits are possible in the Nimzo-Indian is that Black takes an early lead in piece development when he plays

1. .. tLJf6, 3 ... .Bb4 and 4 ... O-O while White is tak-

ing time to establish a pawn-centre. A pawn sacrifice that works on the same principle in the King's Indian Defence is 1 d4 tLJf6 2 c4 g6 3 tLJc3 .Bg7 4 e4 d6 S f3 O-O 6 .te3 cS 7 dxcS dxcS 8 ~xd8l:hd8 9 i..xcs tLJc6 (D). w Black intends to exploit his lead in develop- ment, the hole on d4, and White's dark-square weaknesses. He will usually do so by ... tLJd7, unmasking the powerful g7-bishop with tempo. Notice how bad White's bishop on f1 is. In spite of the fact that White has no overt pawn weak- nesses to target, and the queens are off the board, Black's pawn sacrifice is considered sound, and this has become his most popular line of defence versus the Sarnisch Variation. Gambits in the Reti Opening Early flank pawn gambits abound in chess. Here are a few of many positional gambits in the Reti Opening (and closely related lines of the English) which involve diverting Black's d-pawn to c4: a) 1 c4 c6 2 tLJf3 dS 3 g3 tLJf6 4 i..g2 dxc4 S O-O tLJbd7 6 ~c2 tLJb6. Now Black keeps the gambit pawn, and 7 tLJa3 ~d5 8 tLJh4 ~e6 9 e4

166 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

g6 10 b3! makes the sacrifice permanent. Then 1O ... i.g7 11 i.b2 cxb3 12 axb3 O-O 13 d4 gave White central compensation in Salov-Beliav- sky, USSR Ch, Minsk 1987. b) 1 ltJf3 d5 2 c4 c6 3 g3 ltJf6 4 i.g2 i.g4 5 ltJe5 i.e6 6 d4!? dxc4 7 e4 again establishes a strong centre in return for the pawn. c) 1 c4 e6 2 g3 d5 3 i.g2 c6 4ltJf3 dxc4 5 O-O ltJf6 (5 ... b5 6 a4 i.b7 7 b3! cxb3 8 ~xb3 is sim- ilar) 6 a4ltJa6 7 ltJa3 .txa3 8 l:!.xa3 ltJb4 9 a5 O-O 10 b3 cxb3 11 ~xb3, and White has a typi- cal central advantage along with the bishop- pair and dark-square pressure, Kosten-Goldin, Paris 1994. d) 1 c4 c6 2ltJf3 d5 3 g3 ltJf6 4 i.g2 dxc4 5 iYc2 b5 6 b3 cxb3 7 axb3 .tb7 8 i.a3 with dark-square pressure and a potential attack on Black's backward c-pawn, Dzhindzhikhashvili- Bagirov, USSR Ch, Baku 1972. You'll find many variations on these themes in opening praxis. The Evans Gambit Finally, a flank pawn may be sacrificed purely for the sake of gaining time. In the classic ex- ample, the Evans Gambit, White wants to use that time to set up a large centre. Here are a cou- ple of games and a brief survey:

H. Lehmann - P. Muller Lucerne 1952

1 e4 e5 2ltJf3ltJc6 3 i.c4 i.c5 4 b4!? (D)

This introduces the Evans Gambit, which for some time in the 19th century was the most popular attacking opening around. The Evans is still being used by some grandmasters, and received a boost from Kasparov's successful adventures with it. This charming game shows why enthusiasts love it, and I've embedded as many important lines as I can, including some fun miniatures, to illustrate the lay of the land for potential gambiteers. 4 . i.xb4 5 c3 i.a5 Or: a) 5 ... i.d6!? looks funny, blocking the d- pawn, but it supports e5 and therefore allows Black to castle quickly, something he often doesn't get to do in the Evans Gambit. Short- I.Sokolov, Sarajevo 2004 went 6 d4ltJf6 7 O-O O-O 8 l:!.el h6 9 ltJbd2 ne8 10 i.b3 (with the idea of ltJc4) 1O ... b5 11 a4! b4 12ltJc4 bxc3 13 dxe5 i.xe5 14 ltJfxe5 ltJxe5 15 ltJxe5 l:txe5 16 i.f4l:te7 17 e5 ltJe8 18 ~d3 with an attack. b) 5 ... i.e7 6 d4ltJa5 is one way to attempt to return the pawn: after 7 ltJxe5 ltJxc4 8 ltJxc4 d5 9 exd5'iWxd5, White has space and the better centre following 10 ltJe3, but Black has the two bishops and practice has shown that he has his full share of the chances. Following Kasparov's example, White often prefers to stay a pawn down with 7 i.e2 exd4 8 'ili'xd4, relying on his attacking chances.

[diagram]
It's always risky to allow White a mobile centre, so Black takes time to prevent that. 6 ... d6 is a solid alternative seen in the following game. 70-0 White can try ~b3 at several junctures. Here 7 iYb3 is unresolved; for example, 7 ... 'iWe7 8

O-O (D):

GAMBITS 167

a) Crazy play results from 8 ... tbf6 9 .Ba3 d6 10 cxd4 .Bb6 (10 ... O-O 11 eS! tbd7! is un- clear) 11 eS tbxd4 12 tbxd4 .Bxd4 13 exd6 (13 .i.xf7+? fixf7 14 fia4+ tbd7 IS fixd4 tbxeS; 13 exf6 fixf6) 13 ... cxd6 14 tbc3 O-O IS ~adl (1S ~ae1 !?) IS ... .icS 16 ~fe1 .Be6 17 .Bxe6 fxe6 18 ~xe6 fif7 and Black keeps his pawn. There are many alternatives here for both sides. b) 8 ... .Bb6 9 cxd4 (or 9 .Ba3 d6 and then 10 eS tbaS! or 10 cxd4 tbaS!? 11 fic3 tbxc4 12 fixc4 .Bg4 13 tbbd2 fid7 with ... tbe7 next) 9 ... tbaS (9 ... tbxd4 10 tbxd4 .Bxd4 11 tbc3 tbf6 12 tbbS! led to a successful attack in Short- P.H.Nielsen, Skanderborg 2003) 10 'ilVc2 tbxc4 11 fixc4 d6 12 tbc3 tbf6 13 eS dxeS 14 dxeS tbg4 IS tbdS i.e6 16 fia4+ .Bd7 17 'ilVc4 .Be6 18 fia4+, repeating. 7 .. .Bb6 Alternatively: a) A good old-fashioned example shows why the Evans Gambit used to be so popular: 7 ... dxc3 8 fib3 fif6 geS fig61Otbxc3 .Bxc3?! 11 fixc3 tbd8? (1l...tbge7 is better, although 12 tbgS has done well against it) 12 .Ba3 tbh6 13 ~fel b6 (13 ... tbe6 14 .Bd3 'iWhS IS tbd4 c6 16 ~adl and all of White's pieces are poised to attack) 14 i.dS .Bb7? IS e6! (D).

1-0 Neumann-Anderssen, Berlin 186S. Look at that activity; the position has adopted the character of a 'primitive' gambit. Black resigned in view of lS ... fxe6 (1S ... dxe6 16 'iVxc7) 16 tbeS 'iVfS 17 fixc7. At the time, Anderssen was one of the best players in the world! b) A popular defence is 7 ... tbge7, when I'll just mention a few possibilities: 8 tbgS (8 cxd4 dS 9 exdS tbxdS 10 fib3 .Be6! with the idea 11 ~xb7?! tbdb412.Bxe6~b8) 8 ... tbeS! (8 ... dS 9 exdS tbeS 10 'iWxd4! is very complicated, but can be avoided by 8 ... tbeS) 9 .Bb3 (now 9 ~xd4 can be met by 9 .. .f6!; 9 tbxf7 tbxf7 10 .Bxf7+ 'iio>xf7 11 'iVhS+ g6 12 'ilVxaS dS gets Black's pieces out quickly) 9 ... dS! 10 exdS (10 cxd4 tbSg6) 10. .. O-O 11 tbxh7 'iio>xh7 12 ~hS+ 'iio>g8 13 'iVxeS tbfS! 14 .Bd2 (14 cxd4 I:te8) 14 ... cS (Black can keep an edge by 14 .. Jle8! IS ~f4 and now Is .. :iVd6 or IS ... .Bb6) IS dxc6 bxc6 16 :tel .i.c7 17 'iWe4 'iWf6 18 .Bf4 liz-liz Short-Adams, Sarajevo 2000. 8 cxd4d6 8 ... tbge7 with the idea of ... dS deserves re- spect: 9 tbgS (9 dS tbaS 10 .Bd3 d6 11 .Bb2 gives White unclear compensation) 9 ... dS (not 9 ... O-O? 10 'ilVhS) 10 exdS tbaS! (several games have gone 1O ... tbxdS? 11 tbxf7 'iio>xf7 12 'ifu5+) 11 d6! tbxc412 'iWa4+tbc6! 13l:te1+tb4eSI4 dxeS (14 :txeS+ 'iio>f8 IS dxc7 .Bxc7 16 ~e1 h6 17 tbf3 'iio>g8 with the idea ... .Bg4 or ... .i.e6 is about even) 14 ... O-O IS 'ilVe4 g6 16 'iWh4 hS, Gamier-Chamba, Loire 2004, and now 17 .Bb2! is unclear but promising; for example, 17 ... cxd6 18 exd6 'iVxd6 19 tbe4 .Bd8! 20 tbf6+! .Bxf6 21 .Bxf6 .ifS 22 tbc3. 9 tbc3 (D)

9".tbf6?! This is at best extremely risky after White's response, and probably just bad. Black has a couple of alternatives: a) 9 ... .Bg4 10 i.bS! (10 'iVa4 .Bd7 11 'iVb3 tbaS 12 .Bxf7+, although often played, is un- convincing after 12 ... 'iio>f8 and now 13 'ilVdS tbf6 14 'iVgS 'iio>xf7 IS eS h6! or 13 'iWc2 'iio>xf7 14 eS h6!) 1O ... .Bd711 eS!? (11 tbdS tbge7 12 .igS is

168 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

one good option, and 11 dS 0,ce7 12 a4 an- other) l1...dxeS? (11...0,ge7) 12 dS 0,ce7 13 i.xd7+ 'iUxd7 14 0,xeS 'iUfS IS 'iUa4+ ..t>d8 16 i.f40,g6 17 g4! with a winning game, Hirsch- feld-Kolisch, Paris 1864. b) 9 ... 0,aS can be answered by 10 i.d3, but some classic games continued 10 i.gS f6 11 i.f4 0,xc4 12 'iVa4+ 'iVd7 13 'iVxc4; for exam- ple, 13 .. :ilVf7 14 0,dS! gS!? IS i.g3 i.e6 16 'iVa4+ i.d7 17 'iVa3 .l:k8, Chigorin-Steinitz, London 1883, and here 18 0,xb6 axb6 19 eS! is strong. 10 e5! dxe511i.a3! (D)

This is the essence of the Evans Gambit! Black's king is stuck in the centre, regardless of how many pawns he wins. 11 ... 0,a5 Nothing is terribly attractive here: a) After 11....i.xd4 12 'iVb3 'iVd7, 13 0,gS has had some success, but 13 .l:tael! looks better, when all of White's pieces are in the attack; for example, 13 ... ..t>d8 (13 ... 0,aS 14 0,xeS! 0,xb3 IS 0,xf7+ 'iVe6 16 i.xe6 i.xe6 17 0,xh8) 14 0,bS! 0,aS IS 'iVa40,xc4 16 'iYxc4 and the cen- tral files will decide. b) 11...0,xd4 12 0,xeS i.e6 13 l:tel cS 14 'iVa4+ ..t>f8 IS I:tadl ..t>g8 16 .i.xe6 fxe6 17 'iVc4 0,dS 18 i.xcs and White is already close to winning, Blackburne-NN, Great Britain 1872. 12 0,xe5 0,xc4 13 'iVa4+ i.d7 If 13 ... c6, then Black's position collapses following 14 0,xc4 i.c7 IS dS! 0,xdS 16 .l:!ad 1 ! 0,xc3 (16 ... i.e6 17 0,xdS i.xdS 18 .l:tfel+) 17 l:txd8+ ..t>xd8 18 'iVb4 0,dS 19 .l:idl lIe8 20 0,e3. 14 'iVxc4 i.e6 15 d5! Offering more pawns for open files! 15. i.xd5 Black is thoroughly lost after IS ... 0,xdS 16 l:tadl c6 17 0,xdS i.xdS 18 'iUe2. 16 'iUa4+ c6 17 %:tadl 0,d7 18 0,xd7 'iUxd7 19 0,xd5 cxd5 20 ':xd5! 1-0 After 20 ... 'iUxa4 21 ':el + White mates in a few moves. After that wild ride, let's see some more sober treatments. In the game and analysis that follow, Black doesn't go for material aggrandisement as much as for personal safety. Vicente Haro - Flear Castellar 1996

[diagram]
The main way to decline the Evans Gambit is 4 ... i.b6, when White should not try to win a pawn by S bS?! 0,aS 6 0,xeS? because of a tac- tic that appears in many double e-pawn open- ings: 6 .. :~'gS! 7 0,xf7 (7 'iUf3 'iUxeS 8 'iUxf7+ ..t>d8 9 i.b2 'iUxe4+ 10 ..t>dl 'iUe7 11 'iUxg7 0,xc4 12 'iVxe7+ 0,xe7 13 i.xh8 and after both 13 ... dS and 13 ... d6 Black's two pieces are clearly more effective than the rook) 7 ... 'iUxg2 8 ':n 0,xc4 9 0,xh8 'iVxe4+ 10 'iUe2 'iUxe2+ 11 ~xe2 'It>f8 and with care, Black will be able to win the trapped knight on h8. White's conventional course after 4 ... i.b6 is S a4 a6 6 0,c3 0,f6 7 0,dS 0,xdS 8 exdS ctJd4 9 as i.a7 with equal chances; for example, 10 d6!? cxd6 11 c3 ctJe6 120-00-0, Morozevich- Kamsky, Moscow 2008.

5 c3 i.a5 6 O-O

Logically developing so that the c-pawn won't be pinned after the advance d4. Instead, 6 d4 mixes things up, as we saw in the preceding game, when Black accepted the pawn and at- tendant risks by 6 ... exd4. Or, in the spirit of the game before us, Black can head for a safe posi- tion by 6 ... d6 7 'iVb3 (7 O-O i.b6 transposes to the game) 7 ... 'iVd7!? (an alternative and un- der-utilized defence is 7 ... 0,xd4 8 0,xd4 exd4 9 i.xf7+ ..t>f8; however, watch out for the stan- dard trap 7 ... fiif6? 8 dS ctJd4 9 0,xd4 exd4 10 'iVa4+ and 11 'ilVxaS - the move ... 'iVf6 can be a good defence, but only if Black's bishop is back on b6!) 8 ctJbd2 (8 dxeS i.b6 intends ... 00aS; then 9 0,bd2 ctJaS 10 'iUc2 0,e7 11 O-O

GAMBITS 169

O-O might follow) 8 ... Sl.b6 (or 8 ... tbf6) 9 a4

9 ... exd4 (9 ... tba5 is an alternative, although 10 ~a2!? tbxc4?! 11 tbxc4 threatens a5, and ll...exd4 12 cxd4 d5 l3 a5! gives White ongo- ing pressure; Black can also play 9 ... tbf6, when the violent continuation 10 a5!? tbxa5 I11ha5 .Bxa5 12 dxe5 tbg4 l3 exd6!? Sl.b6 14 h3 tbxf2 15 tbe5 ~xd6 16 Sl.xf7+ 'ittd8 produces a mess that Black appears to survive) 10 cxd4 tbxd4 11 ~c3 tbxf3+ (l1...tbe6 looks like a sound alternative for Black) 12 gxf3! f6!? l3 a5 Sl.c5 14 tbb3 tbe7 15 :gl tbg6 16 tbxc5 dxc5 17 Sl.e3 b6 18 :dl ~e7 and Black's posi- tion is hard to breach, Nouro-Norri, Jyvaskyla 2008. 6 . d6 7 d4 Sl.b6 (D) w This is known as the Lasker Defence, and has held up for years as a reliable Evans Gambit remedy. 8dxe5

8 a4 tbf6 (Lasker also played 8 ... exd4 9

cxd4 Sl.g4, when 10 d5 complicates matters) 9 Sl.b5 a6 10 Sl.xc6+ bxc6 11 a5 Sl.a7, Chigorin- Em. Lasker, St Petersburg 1895/6. Black stands better with his bishop-pair and extra pawn, al- though White has space and it's still a game. 8  dxe5 9 'iWb3 This doesn't accomplish much, but White would like to avoid the simplifying 9 ~xd8+ tbxd8 10 tbxe5 Sl.e6 (or 1O ... tbf6). Then: a) 11 Sl.b3 tbf6 12 Sl.c2 tbd7 leaves White rather passively placed. b) 11 Sl.e2 can be answered by 11... tbf6 or ll...tbe7 12 tbc4, when 12 ... Sl.xc4 l3 Sl.xc4 tbdc6 is fine, intending ... tbg6-e5. The game Annageldiev -V.I vanov, Ashkhabad 1996 con- tinued instead 12 ... tbdc6!? l3 Sl.f4?!, and now l3 ... i.xc4 14 Sl.xc4 tbg6 15 Sl.g3 h5! 16 h4 tbce5 17 Sl.b3 O-O-O would have resulted in an advantage for Black. c) 11 Sl.xe6 tbxe6 12 tbc4 tbf6 13 tbxb6 axb6 (D) . w This type of position is what Black is aiming fOf. White's c-pawn is isolated, as is his a-pawn, which can be attacked along the half-open a-file. In addition, Black's knights have particularly good squares to occupy on the queenside. 9  ~f6 10 .Bg5 ~g6 11 Sl.d5 White wants to deal with ... tba5 followed by ... tbxc4. 11  tbge7 This is the most frequently-played move. Sadly for White's attacking ambitions, Black has several roads that lead to equality or better.

11...tbh6 has also proved playable, for exam-

ple, as have:

170 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) 11...lDa5 12 ~a4+ (12 lDxe5 lDxb3 13 lDxg6 hxg6 14 axb3lDf6) 12 ... c6 (12 ... ~d7 13 ~xd7+ ~xd7 14lDxe5+ ~e8 15 lDxg6 hxg6 16 e5!?) 13 lDxe5 "ilfxg5 14 lDxf7 "ilfe7 15 lDxh8 and both 15 ... ~f8! and 15 ... lDh6 leave the h8-knight in major trouble. b) l1...f6! may be easiest of all: 12 ~xg8 fxg5! with the idea 13lDxg5? ~f8. 12 ~xe7 ~xe7 13 ~xc6 'iVxc6 14 lDxeS ~e6 (D) w Black has done well in this position because of his pawn-structure and bishop-pair. ISlDd3?! (D) Or: a) 15 lDc4 J:td8 16 ~a3+ ~e8 17 lDxb6 'iUxb6 favours Black's activity and pawn-struc- ture, but as it keeps the queens on the board, this is probably White's best course. b) 15 'ii'a3+ 'ii'd6 16 'ii'xd6+ cxd6 17 lDd3 (17 lDc4 ~c5 18 lDbd2 ~e6) 17 ... ~e6 18 lDd2 .l:!.hc8, Ebeling-Rantanen, Jyvaskyla 1987; com- pare the game.

IS ... ~xb3! 16 axb3l4d817lDf4 c618lDa3 ~c7 19lDhS ~eS 20 :tac1 ~g4 21lDg3 ':d3 With his opponent having the bishop-pair, active rooks and targets to attack, White doesn't stand a chance. The game concluded 22 lDbl ~f4 23 ':c2 ':ad8 24 lDa3 ~dl 25 :ta2 ~xg3 26 hxg3 ~xb3 27 ':b2 :txc3 28 lDbl ':cd3 29 ':c1 a5 30 lDc3 a4 31 ~h2 nd2 32 lDd5+ .l:t8xd5 33 ':xb3 ':h5+ 0-1. Positional Gambits of Centre Pawns Sometimes one side sacrifices a centre pawn (rather than a flank pawn), not for an attack, but with the object of improving his central posi- tion and/or establishing lasting positional ad- vantages. One simple example is the Albin Counter-Gambit, 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e5 3 dxe5 d4, which I discussed in Volume 2; Black's d-pawn cramps White and wins territory. It has a rea- sonably good reputation. The Falkbeer Coun- ter-Gambit, 1 e4 e5 2 f4 d5 3 exd5 e4, is a king's pawn mirror image of the Albin! In modem chess it has few takers, however, because the pawn on e4 can't be maintained. In Volume 3, I discussed an early central pawn sacrifice by White which has all the char- acteristics of a positional gambit: 1 c4 lDf6 2 lDc3 e6 3 e4 c5 4 e5 lDg8 5lDf3 lDc6 6 d4 cxd4 7lDxd4lDxe5 8lDdb5 (D).

It is aimed entirely at dark-square control rather than attack. The main line goes 8 ... a6 9 lDd6+ ~xd6 10 ~xd6 f6 11 ~e3, when the weaknesses on d6 and b6 compensate White for the pawn. A one-sided example went 11...lDe7

GAMBITS 171

12 ~b6 ttJf5 13 'iVc5 "fie7 14 'iVxe7+ ttJxe7?!

15 c5 O-O 16 O-O-O f5 17 ~c7 ttJ5c6 18 ~d6

J:.e8 19 ttJa4 ttJd5 20 ..tc4 and here 20 ... ttJf6 (Black played the hopeless 20 ... b5 21 cxb6 in Giffard-Verat, Paris 1996) 21 ttJb6 l:ta7 22 f3 (D) would be the culmination of the dark-square strategy!

Another standard English Opening central- pawn gambit is associated with the establish- ment of a strong point: Ponferrada Luque - Bellon Malaga 2002

[diagram]
ttJb5 d5!? 6 cxd5 ..tc5 (D)

[diagram]
Black hopes that this pawn will cramp White for the rest of the game. 9 ..te2 'fiIe7 100-0 Usually, White tries to consolidate in the centre before using up a tempo on this move; for example, 10 ttJd2 J:.d8 11 a3 intending b4.

10 a3 a5 11 g4!? is an intriguing alternative

which I discussed in detail in Volume 3.

10. . l:td811 'iVc2

11 a3 or 11 ttJd2 is still preferable. White

should not be afraid to return the pawn for posi- tional gains. 11 ... ~f5 12 l::tdl ttJbd7 13 ttJd2 l:tac8 14 "iib3 ttJe5 (D) Black is not concerned with regaining his pawn by, say, 14 ... ttJb6 and ... 'iWe5, but eyes weak squares like d3. Even more importantly, his well-secured pawn on e4 cuts White's pieces off from defending his kingside. w 15 ttJn a616 ttJg3 ~g617 a4 h5! Black finally supplements his piece-play with a menacing pawn advance. 18 as?! White really should hunker down with 18 h3 h4 19 ttJn, although his position is passive and unenviable; the same applies for the next few moves. 18  ..td6 There's really no reason to delay 18 ... h4 19 ttJn h3!.

19 Ita4 ttJed7 20 l::tad4 h4 21 ttJn 'iVe5 22

ttJa4 llc7 23 'iWa2 h3! Finally! 24g3? Leaving a horrible weakness on g2, but after ... hxg2 Black would control all the light squares anyway. 24  ..thS! 25 b3 l:tdc8 26l:Ic4 ~f5! Intending ... ttJe5. The rest is easy:

172 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

27 .Bxh5 iVxh5 28 f3 liJe5 29 ':xc7 liJxf3+ 30 ~hl ':xc7 31 iVe2liJg4 0-1 Resignation is a bit premature, but White can hardly move and Black threatens ... liJfxh2, among other things; for example, 32 .Bb2 liJfxh2 33 liJxh2 liJf2+ 34 iVxf2 'iWxdl + 35 'iff1 iVxb3. Black can also gambit a central pawn simply to free his pieces, particularly if he has a reason- able chance to recover the pawn. A prime exam- ple is the Budapest Gambit, 1 d4liJf6 2 c4 e5, challenging the centre while activating Black's dark-squared bishop. After 3 dxe5, Black nor- mally plays 3 ... liJg4 (although 3 ... liJe4, which is a true gambit, remains unrefuted and is taken quite seriously by some strong players). Then White will generally return his forward e-pawn for what he hopes will be a slight positional su- periority. For example, after 4 .Bf4 liJc6 5 liJf3 .Bb4+, one line is 6liJbd2 'iWe7, when ... liJgxe5 will follow shortly, and White counts upon the fact that his c-pawn restrains ... d5, along with the idea of a timely c5, to give him some pressure. White can also play 6liJc3 .Bxc3+ 7 bxc3 'iWe7 8 'iWd5, to hang on to his material, after which Black can drum up an initiative by 8. .. f6 9 exf6 liJxf6, with compensation for the pawn; whether it is sufficient has been debated for decades. The number of positional gambits that mas- ters play is growing every year. They are enor- mously instructive to study from both sides of the board, and I recommend adding at least one or two to your own repertoire. The Ultra-Positional Benko Gambit The most important true gambit in modern times is the Benko Gambit, whose nature is about as far as possible from the Danish Gam- bit (which we saw at the start of this chapter). Because it serves no attacking or tactical pur- pose and only aims for long-term positional pressure, the Benko Gambit was effectively ig- nored for more than 100 years of modern chess. Even the positional gambits above contain pos- sibilities of attacking the king in the long run, but the Benko is ultra-positional, in that Black's play consists of queenside pressure which may not even come to fruition until the endgame. Let's begin by examining one of Pal Benko's own games from several decades ago. In essen- tial ways, little has changed since. w Camara - Benko Silo Paulo 1973 1 d4liJf6 2 c4 c5 3 d5 b5 (D) This is the Benko Gambit. 4cxb5 In the following game, I'll briefly discuss declining the gambit on this move or returning the pawn on the next move. The most important positional lessons proceed from its acceptance. 4 .. a6 5 bxa6 .Bxa6 In the early years of the gambit, it wasn't re- alized that 5 ... g6 is more accurate, for reasons that are explained in the next game. 6 liJc3 d6 7 liJf3 When White tries to use this knight to bolster his queenside, its passive position allows Black to make a central break. Gross-Benko, Aspen 1968 is a good introduction to the gambit's character: 7 e4 .ixfl 8 ~xfl g6 9 g3 (9 liJf3 transposes to the game) 9 ... .Bg7 10 ~g2 O-O (here we have the standard formation that we discuss in the main game) llliJge2!? iVb6 12 l:tbl liJa6 13 b3 liJc7 14 f3 (everything looks solid enough) 14 ... e6! (D). This is a major Benko Gambit theme that we don't often see because in most modern systems, White takes care to prevent it! The game went 15 dxe6 fxe6 16 .Be3 'ifc6! (White is vulnerable on the long diagonal) 17 iVd2 d5 18 exd5 exd5

GAMBITS 173

w (Black's centre is already decisively strong) 19 i.f4 d4 20 ttJa4 ttJfdS 21 l:thfl ttJe6 22:f2 d3! 23 ttJgl (23 ~xd3 l:txf4!) 23 ... ttJexf4+ 24 gxf4 ttJxf4+ 2S ~hl i.d4 26 l:tffl ttJe2! 0-1. 7 ... g6 (D) w OK, we've reached the archetypal Benko Gambit position. What is Black's compensa- tion for the pawn? It turns out that there are many factors; initially, we can identify these: a) He is ahead in development. Apart from his bishop and knight, his rook on a8 is devel- oped on a useful half-open file. b) Black's undeveloped pieces have conve- nient and active squares to go to: his bishop on g7 will be a powerful, unopposed piece, his queen's knight can go to d7, and his king's rook and queen can occupy the b- and/or a-files. c) Black can put serious pressure on White's queenside pawns, especially with his g7-bishop bearing down on c3 and b2. The Benko pawn- structure is particularly instructive because it shows how unobstructed a- and b-pawns can so easily be rendered immobile. This occurs in other openings, even when the pawns are passed (i.e., in the absence of an enemy c-pawn), as long as they are on half-open files. In the Benko Gambit, White's b-pawn advance creates a hole on a3 and target on a2, whereas if his a-pawn steps forward, that forms a weak square on b3 and makes it easier to attack b2. One extra possibility for Black is to capture White's knight on c3 in a situation where White has to play bxc3. The idea is to create a further weakening of White's pawn-structure because of the newly-isolated a-pawn, weak c-pawn, and attractive outposts for Black's pieces on c4, a4 and a3. Sometimes White will get compen- sation in the form of weakened dark squares around Black's king, but in a number of posi- tions that won't have practical value. d) White's centre can sometimes be attacked by ... e6, which either gives Black a direct attack on dS if he gets to play ... exdS, or a broad and potentially mobile centre if he answers dxe6 with ... fxe6. This occurred in Gross-Benko above. e) In terms of defence, Black's pawn-struc- ture is weakness-free and his king is extremely unlikely to face attack. Importantly, White will have trouble marshalling enough forces to carry out his desired pawn-break e4-eS, because Black can aim so many pieces at that square. So, you may ask, why does White even bother to play against the Benko Gambit, given this array of inspiring features in his opponent's position? First, an extra pawn is nothing to sneer at. In addition, White has no overt weak- nesses in his pawn-structure; for all of Black's wonderfully-placed pieces, he still needs to at- tack something more times than it's defended, or to craft a pawn advance that breaks down his opponent's position. And while authors are de- scribing all the positive aspects of Black's situ- ation, they seldom mention that his queenside attack is based mainly upon piece-play; we know that such attacks are more difficult to bring to fruition than those which have the aid of pawn-breaks. It's true that Black sometimes has an opportunity to play ... fS or ... e6, but White can often prevent those moves or render them harmless. As we shall see, for example, neither of those moves is likely to be successful if White plays g3 and i.g2.

174 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

8e4 A major decision. White stakes out room in the centre, but loses the right to castle and cre- ates an interior weakness on d3. In the next game we shall see other ways of handling the position. 8 . .i.xfl 9 'it>xfl .i.g7 10 h3 At the time of this game, this was the most popular move. White stops ... ttJg4 and will 'cas- tle by hand', marching his king over to h2. The related 10 g3 O-O 11 'it>g2 ttJbd7 (D) was a main line of the Benko for some years, accounting for hundreds of master games. w It's worth seeing a few examples in order to illustrate the pluses and minuses of these two very similar set-ups. In doing so we shall be in- troduced to some basic themes of the Benko Gambit. Once White has moved his king to g2, he must decide whether to allow ... ttJg4-eS: a) Upon 12 .l:.el, 12 ... likaS is a good move, but the most thematic idea is 12 ... ttJg4, prevent- ing eS and bringing a black knight to eS, from where it watches over c4 and d3. That needn't be fatal, of course, and Black has to be wary of playing ... c4 (intending ... ttJd3), because he gives White access to his own d4-square with the possibility of ttJd4-c6. White can respond with piece-play or pawn-play: al) 13 .i.f4 ~aS 14 h3 ttJgeS IS ttJxeS ttJxeS 16 ~e2 .l:!.fb8 17 .l:r.acl (D). 17 .. :~a6!? (this is by no means the only move, but demonstrates how endgames can be satisfactory for Black even when White hasn't compromised his pawn-structure; 17 .. J;tb4! is an attractive alternative, especially in view of the critical line 18 b3 c4! 19 .i.xeS .JtxeS 20

bxc4 ~cS 21 ttJdl l:Ia3, when Black is two pawns down but has sufficient counterplay) 18 .i.xeS .i.xeS 19 l:Ic2 ~xe2 20 l:Iexe2l:Ib4! 21 a3 l:tb3 22 ttJdl, Karpov-Salov, Belgrade 1996, and now 22 ... .l:!.ab8 would have kept the pres- sure on, with equality. a2) 13 h3 ttJgeS 14 ttJxeS ttJxeS1S f4 drives the knight away, but at the cost of creating fur- ther internal weaknesses in White's camp. In Neverov-Bologan, Nikolaev Zonal 1995, Black tried IS ... ttJd7 (1S ... ttJc4 16 ~d3 ttJb6 is also sensible) 16 ~c2, and now he arranged his pieces both to increase the pressure on White's queenside and to look down the long light- squared diagonal: 16 ... l:Ia6!?(16 .. :~VaSI7 .i.d2 'iVa6 18 a4l:!.fc8! 19 l:Ia3 c4 is unclear) 17 a4 ~a8 18 ttJbS! l:Ic8 19 .i.d2 c4! 20 .i.c3 (20 .i.e3 ttJcS 21 .i.xcSl:IxcS 22 .l:Ia3 at least temporarily stops Black's initiative) 20 ... .i.xc3 21 ttJxc3 ttJcS 22 l:te2l:tb8 23l:ta3 l:tb4 with active rooks and an attack on d3, b3 and a4. These lines seem balanced. b) 12 h3, stopping ... ttJg4, is logical. A typi- cal example is 12 ... ~a5 (Benko'S 12 ... ttJb6 with the idea ... 'iM7 and ... 'iVb7 is still held to be a sound method of play) 13 l:Iel l:Ifb8 14 'ue2! (covering b2 and thus at least theoretically al- lowing White's bishop to move) 14 ... ttJe8 (cov- ering eS, and presaging a trek to bS via c7, in order to exchange White's knight on c3) IS .:tc2! (D). White protects c3 and b2, again preparing for a move by White's bishop. This position has arisen scores of times. In Neverov-Van der Weide, Hoogeveen 1999, Black chose IS ... ttJb6 (IS .. J:!.b4 and IS .. J::f.b7 are also played) 16 'iVe2 'iVa6!? (with White's pieces coordinating so

GAMBITS 175

well, the ending may not be optimal; 16 ... lL'la4! looks like a better solution: 17 lL'lxa4 'ili'xa4 IS :Lc4 'iVa619 a3, Maduro-Mendes, Coimbra 1995, and now 19 ... lL'lc71ooks satisfactory, consider- ing capturing on b2, but also having in mind ... liJbS or even ... e6) 17 'iYxa6 :Lxa6 IS l:tbl! (IS b3 is answered with IS ... fS!) IS ... lL'la4?! (lS ... liJc7 is met by 19 b4!, but IS ... liJc4 may be best) 19 lL'ldl ! lL'lc7 20 b3 fS 21lL'ld2lL'lb6 22 b4! and White was consolidating. An instruc- tive example. c) 12 'iVc2 'iVb6 13 :Lb 1 :LfcS!? is a typically creative Pal Benko idea, preparing ... c4 and ... liJcS. For everyone else, putting the rook on bS would be automatic. 14 b3liJg4 IS h3liJgeS 16 liJxeS .JixeS 17 .Jid2 c4! gave Black full equality in Donner-Benko, Palma de Mallorca

1971. After IS bxc4 (or IS b4 :La3! intending

either ... 'iVa6 or ... l:tcaS) IS .. :~d4 Black stands better.

10 . O-O (D)

w 11 ~gllL'la6 ll...liJbd7 12 ~h2 'iVaS 13 l:.el :LfbS 14 lte2 is precisely the position we saw in the pre- ceding note 'b', with the exception that ~gl h2 has replaced g3 and ~g2. One example is 14 ... :LM (alternatively, 14 .. Jla7 is playable, or 14 ... liJeS IS .l::!.c2 liJb6 16 'ii'e2 'iYa6 17 'iYxa6 lha6 IS l:.bl liJc4) IS ~gl lL'leS 16 'iYel!? l:tabS 17liJdl 'iYa6! (D). w IS .JigS (not IS iLd2? .Jixb2!) and now IS ... .Jixb21ed to equality in Scherbakov-Vucko- vic, Belgrade 2000, but IS ... e6! 19 dxe6 fxe6 would have created a positional advantage in the centre and forced White to deal with b2 anyway. 12 ~h2 'ii'b6 13 'iVe2 As this variation is no longer used much, I'll skip over the remaining theory.

13. . ILfb814lL'ld2liJc7

Benko gives the line 14 ... liJM ISlL'lc4 ~a6 16 iLf4liJc2! 17 'iVxc2 (else ... lL'ld4) 17 .. :iVxc4 with adequate compensation. 15lL'lc4 ~a6 16 iLd2lL'ld7 17 l:!.hellL'le5! As usual, Black is not afraid of simplifica- tion, including the exchange of queens. 18lL'lxe5 IS b3? liJxc4 19 'ili'xc4? 'iVxc4 20 bxc4 loses to 20 ... l:tb2. 18  .Jixe5+ 19 f4 .Jid4 (D) Benko: "Black stands better: the pawns on a2 and b2 are targets, the dS-pawn can be un- dermined by a well-timed .. .fS advance, and White's counterplay is nowhere to be seen." 20 .Jic1 'iVxe2 21 ltxe2 ~f8 By protecting e7, Black prepares ... fS, which will undermine the pawn on dS. This is another Benko Gambit theme, especially in the ending. 22liJdl

176 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w White's problem is that there isn't anything positive to do, and he can't even sit still in the face of ideas like 22 ~hl f5 23 exf5 gxf5 24 J:Id2 l:!.b3! 25 tbe2 i.e3 and 22 l:k2 i.xc3! 23 lhc3 l:ta4 24 .l:te3 f5. 22  fS 23 exfS gxfS 24 i.e3 tbxdS 2S i.xd4 cxd4 26l:!.d2 eS 27 fxeS dxeS 28 tbf2 ~e7 Black's powerful centre pawns make the victory a matter of technique, especially since White's queenside can't profitably advance.

29 a3 tbe3 30 l:.ell:.b3 31 tbd3 .l:tbS 32 ~gl

~d6 33 tbb4 tbdS 34 tbd3 e4 3S tbc1 d3 36 g4 tbf6 37 l:!.f1l:!.g8 38 ~hl ~e6 39 tba2 fxg4 40 l:.df2 l:.g6 41 tbc3 0-1 White resigned without waiting for 41...Ii.h5 or 41...!Ie5. To this day, Black wins many games based upon the positional ideas that appear in this game. Next, we'll look at a modem variation in which Black doesn't have such an easy time finding good squares for his pieces. Van Wely - Carlsen Wijk aan Zee 2008

1 d4 tbf6 2 c4 cS 3 dS bS 4 cxbS

White has a great many ways to decline the gambit or return Black's pawn. Here are some brief comments: a) An obvious try is 4 a4, intending 4 ... bxc4 5 tbc3. But 4 ... b4, closing the position, can sti- fle the play and make it difficult to open lines. b) 4 tbd2 has the simple idea e4, which shouldn't be too dangerous if Black quickly breaks up the centre via ... bxc4 and ... e6. White would rather have his knight on c3 in such posi- tions. c) 4 'iVc2 (D) is more subtle than 4 tbd2, still intending e4 but reserving the possibility of tbc3 and leaving a path to f4 or g5 open for his queen's bishop. Then Moskalenko suggests that the most important lines are:

c1) 4 ... bxc45 e4 e6 6 i.xc4 exd5 7 exd5 d6 8 tbc3 i.e7 9 tbge2 (or 9 tbf3 O-O 10 h3) 9 ... O-O

10 O-O tbbd7 11 tbg3 (by delaying tbf3 in fa-

vour of~c2, White now has a direct view of the f5-square) l1...tbb6 12 b3! tbxc4 13 bxc4 is a structure worth remembering, since White's space, grip on d5 and superior minor pieces outweigh Black's bishop-pair. c2) 4 ... b4 5 e4 d6 6 f4! sets up a mobile cen- tre as in the King's Indian Four Pawns Attack. White intends tbf3, i.d3, O-O and/or tbbd2 in some order. c3) 4 ... tba6 5 tbc3 (or 5 a3) 5 ... bxc4 6 e4 tbb4 (6 ... e6 7 i.xc4) 7 'iVa4! e6 8 i.xc4 i.b7 9 i.g5 i.e7 10 i.xf6 i.xf6 11 tbge2 with the idea of a3; again, delaying tbf3 proved useful. c4) 4 ... e65 e4 exd5 (5 ... bxc4 transposes to 'c1') 6 cxd5 c4 7 tbc3 with a small advantage for White. d) 4 tbf3 (D) is arguably the most signifi- cant attempt to get the better game by purely positional means. Then 4 ... e6!? is the Blumenfeld Gambit, af- ter which 5 i.g5 is an older main line, but I be- lieve that 5 dxe6 fxe6 6 cxb5 should, with care, give White an advantage. The usual responses to 4 tbf3 are: dl) 4 ... bxc4, when 5 tbc3 and 6 e4 is com- fortable for White, although playable for Black. d2) 4 ... i.b7, when among other ideas, 5 tbbd2 bxc4 6 e4 and 5 'iWc2 tba6 are critical.

GAMBITS 177

d3) 4 ... b4, when 5 a3 creates queenside pos- sibilities. d4) 4 ... g6 is probably Black's safest choice, and can still transpose into normal lines follow- ing 5 cxb5, or go its own way after 5 ctJbd2 or 5 ~c2. Considerable theory is attached to 4 ctJf3, and players on both sides of this opening will benefit from its investigation. 4 ... a6 (D) w 5 bxa6 Acceptance is the principled move, but White has some important alternatives here such as 5 b6, 5 f3 and 5 e3. Each of those moves has ex- tensive theory associated with them, and if you want to build a repertoire with the Benko Gam- bit, you'll want to learn something about them as well. To keep this coverage fairly concise, I'll refer you to more specialized sources.

... g6! (D) Of all the move-order nuances in the Benko If Black plays 5 ... i.xa6 (as he did in many of the early games with this variation, including the previous one), it turns out that White can defend effectively by fianchettoing both bish- ops: 6 g3 d6 (6 ... g6 7 b3) 7 i.g2 g6 8 b3! i.g7 9 i.b2 O-O 10 ctJh3 and 11 O-O. Experience has shown that, with Black's g7-bishop neutral- ized, he will have a relatively more difficult time achieving counterplay against White's queenside. Compare the next note. w 6 ctJc3 Here, however, the line 6 b3 i.g7 7 i.b2 O-O

8 g3 is well met by 8 ... ctJxa6!, when Black's

bishop has more options and ... ctJc7 has to be taken into account: 9 i.g2 d6 10 e4 (for exam- ple, White has to be careful that his d-pawn isn't lost to a combination of ... ctJc7 and ... i.b7) 1O ... i.b7 11 ctJe2 e6! with a very effective cen- tral attack. 6 ... i.xa6 (D) w Gambit, this one most needs to be understood. 7 g3

178 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Introducing the Fianchetto Variation, the most popular choice of grandmasters today. 7 ttJf3 i..g7 8 g3 d6 9 i..g2 transposes to the main line of this game. In such a flexible open- ing there are always obscure variations hidden within the transpositions, but fortunately they tend not to be too important at this juncture. 7 .. d6 8 i..g2 i..g7 9 ttJf3 ttJbd7 (D) w For our purposes, I'll use this move-order, because in some lines it helps Black to delay

... O-O.

Why is White taking two moves to put his bishop on a square (g2) where it is blocked by its own d-pawn? There are a few reasons for do- ing so, ones which should be more comprehen- sible when you have been through the material in the previous game: a) He gets to castle, a lUxury not afforded by the lines involving e4. b) He doesn't create any internal weaknesses such as the one on d3 that the move e4 pro- duces. c) He discourages the move ... e6, which we have seen can break up White's centre and es- tablish a mobile central pawn-mass. Now ... e6 is still conceivable, but will be an exceptional occurrence because dxe6 will extend the range of White's bishop along the long diagonal. d) Now that it isn't doing much useful work, White may actually profit from the presence of Black's bishop on a6. In fact, Neil McDonald goes so far as to say that White's bishop on g2 is in general a better piece than Black's on a6! His point is that the latter piece has nowhere partic- ularly useful to go, and in fact it gets in the way of Black's attempts to threaten White along the a-file or occupy a6 with another piece. That may sound rather abstract, but you will see that in key variations below, Black's favourite and probably best move is ... i..c8! Of course, Black mustn't be too upset with the passive position of White's bishop on g2; he should get on with his queenside play. That generally means ... O-O, ... 'iVa5 and ... .t:tfb8, as in the previous game, but he also has ideas of a well-timed ... ttJb6 in order to attack d5 and en- courage White to move his queenside pawns. 10lIbi It's remarkable how this simple move turned a previously humdrum line into White's favour- ite variation against the Benko Gambit. Granted, White's move is useful: it protects b2 and re- moves the rook from indirect attack from the bishop on g7. But the key factor is that White can play b3 at the right moment. And that's where timing comes in. In the past, White had played 10 O-O with the idea 10 ... O-O lll:!.bl, but he found himself confronted with 1O ... ttJb6!

w This causes problems with the simultaneous protection of d5 and the queenside; for exam- ple, if White now plays IIl:!.bl !?, he has to deal with 11 ... i..c4, which attacks both d5 and a2. At least that's how theory explains it. Actually, you might want to take this a bit further and see how the position plays out after, say, 12 ttJg5; I'm not sure whether this is as harmless as its lack of coverage suggests.

10. .. O-O

Carlsen has used the move-order 1O ... 'iVa5 11 i..d2 (after 11 O-O, 11...O-O will transpose, and ll...ttJb6 can be met by 12 a3! with the idea

GAMBITS

of b4) 1l...tiJb6 12 b3 'iVa3 13 0-00-0 to trans- pose to the game position. What about 1O ... tiJb6 (compare the previous W note)? For some time, it was dismissed due to

11 b3 (D).

This move keeps Black's pieces out of c4 and a4, while in some cases preparing i..b2. Now if Black plays ... c4, White will reply b4, establishing two connected passed pawns on the queenside and making the bishop look silly on a6. Nevertheless, Black has returned to this position with some new ideas and it is still be- ing disputed today: a) 1l...i..b7 (attacking dS) 12 tiJh4! (12 e4 can be met by 12 ... i..a6!, establishing the sort of position that we got used to in the previous game) 12 ... O-O 13 O-O (I'll be skimming over White's various alternatives; 13 a4 doesn't of- fer much after 13 ... tiJfd7 14 i..d2 I:ta6 with the idea ... 'iVa8, or here 14 ... tiJf6, offering a repeti- tion; 13 i..b2 'iVd7!? 14 'iid2 h6 threatens ... gS, when IS f4 c4!? gives compensation in view of 16 b4?! tiJa4!) 13 ... tiJe8?! (slow; 13 .. :~'d7 14 i..b2 h6 has the idea ... gS) 14 i..b2 (14 ~d2 tiJc7 IS e4 is also promising) 14 ... tiJc7 IS 'iVd2 'lVd7 16 e4 l:i.fb8 17 l:i.fel and White stands well, Rowson-G.Jones, British Ch, Scarborough

2004. The e4/dS structure is fine as long as

Black has no access to White's internal weak- nesses, and here the bishop on b2 neutralizes that on g7. b) 1l...i..c8!? (D) has the idea ... i..fS. If White prevents that with 12 e4?!, 12 ... i..a6! will bring us back to a familiar type of position in which Black has prevented castling and can target d3. A good illustration is 13 i..f1 'iVc8 14 i..d2 O-O IS i..xa6 ~x a6 16 'IV e2 tiJe8! 17 a4 'iVxe2+ 18 ~xe2 fS!, as in Cvitan-Matamoros, Cannes 1996, when White will have to give back his d-pawn and leave Black with a 2:0 central majority. Nevertheless, this exotic strategy (. .. i..c8-a6) is in itself proof of the efficacy of White's place- ment of his bishop on g2, in that Black's bishop on a6, so powerful in other variations, feels obliged to retreat to its home square so long as White hasn't moved his e-pawn. This corre- sponds with McDonald's observation above about the relative strengths of the two sides' light-squared bishops. Instead of 12 e4, White should move his f3-knight, and there seems to be a pleasant choice: bI) 12 tiJh4 h6 (D). w Black intends 13 ... gS and ... i..fS, forcing a response: bll) 13 'iic2 'iVd7! (Black renews the ... gS idea) 14 i..b2 (after 140-0 gS IS tiJf3, Gawain Jones discovered that even IS ... tiJfxdS! is sound;

180 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

instead, 14 f4!? prevents ... g5, but creates an internal weakness on e3, inviting 14 ... O-O 15 O-O {15 a4 c4!} 15 ... ttJg4; and 14 ... J.b7 15 e4 J.a6 is still possible, as in the game Gordon- Djurhuus, Oslo 2008) 14 ... g5 15 ttJf3 'iVf5 (15 ... J.b716e4 {160-0ttJbxd5!} 16 ... J.a617 a4! O-O 18 h4 g4 19 ttJd2 prepares J.fl and ttJc4, after which White has an extra pawn and solid position) 16 e4 ~g6 170-00-018 :tfd1 J.g4 19 h3 J.xf3 20 J.xf3 h5, Breier-Van der Weide, Wijk aan Zee 2006, and here White has several ways to solidify his extra pawn; for example, 21 J.g2 (or 21 a4) 21...g4 (21. .. ttJfd7

22 a4 ttJe5 23 ttJe2) 22 a4 gxh3 23 J.xh3 ttJg4

24 ttJe2. b12) 13 ~d3! is quite possibly better: White keeps d5 under guard, protects against ... c4, and still watches over f5. White plans .lib2 next; for example, Feller-Gunnarsson, Differ- dange 2008 continued 13 ... ~d7 14 O-O g5 15 ttJf3 and Black didn't find enough compensa- tion following 15 ... 'iVf5 16 e4 'iVg6 17l:Idl J.a6 18 'iVc2 O-O 19 J.b2. b2) 12 ttJd2 is also promising, covering c4 and e4. Black can still implement his plan by 12 ... J.f5 13 e4 .lic8 14 J.b2 (after 14 O-O?! .lia6 15 :tel, Gawain Jones's 15 ... J.d3! gives Black full compensation) 14 ... J.a6 15 J.fl J.xfl16 \it>xfl O-O 17 \it>g2 (D).

White's pieces are coordinating better than in Cvitan-Matamoros above. His knight on d2 and bishop on b2 are unusually well-placed. In Van Wely-E.Berg, Reykjavik 2008, seeing no prospects on the queenside, Black tried to play in the centre with 17 ... e6!? 18 dxe6 fxe6 19 a4! d5, but White easily neutralized the pressure after 20 l:1el 'it'd7 21 'it'e2 (21 ttJb5! is also strong) 2l...c4 (2l...d4 22 ttJb5 d3 23 'it'd1!) 22 bxc4 ttJxa4 23 ttJxa4 l:1xa4 24 cxd5 exd5 25 J.xf6! J.xf6 26 e5 J.e7 27 'iVb5 'it'xb5 28l:1xb5 and Black was a pawn down for less than noth- ing.

11 O-O (D)

11 . 'iVa5 The Benko is very flexible, and I'm not sure that anyone knows what's best here. Some pos- sibilities: a) ll...ttJb6 12 b3l:1a7!? 13 'it'd2!? 'it'a8 14 l:1dl .l:!.b8 15 J.b2 and Black hasn't made real progress, LJohannessen-Djurhuus, Norwegian Ch, Roros 2002. b) 11...ttJe8 has the idea of ... ttJc7-b5 to as- sist in the queens ide attack. One way to pre- vent this is 12 'iVc2 ttJc7 13 a4!? J.b7 (after 13 ... J.xc3 14 bxc3 ttJxd5, White has two strong bishops and a pin on the long diagonal; for ex- ample, 15 J.h6 l:1e8 16 ttJg5 J.c4 17 l:.!.fd1 ttJ7f6 18 ttJe4!, intending 18 ... l:1a7 19 l:1xd5! ttJxd5 20 ttJd2) 14 l:1dl (or 14 e4 ttJa6 15 ttJa2!?, covering b4) 14 ... ttJb6 15 e4 ttJa6 16 b3 ttJb4 17 'iVd2 J.a6 18 J.a3 and White consoli- dated in Grishchuk-Tregubov, French Team Ch 2005.

12 J.d2 (D)

12 'iVc2 has been played more, but this straightforward bishop development seems to cause Black the most problems. 12 ... ttJb6 Again, several ideas are possible here. After 12 ... J.b7, planning an early ... e6, Flear recom- mends 13l:1e1 'it'a6 14 e4, with the idea 14 ... e6? 15 dxe6 fxe6, and here 16 J.f4! is simplest.

GAMBITS 181

Alternatively, the natural 12 ... .l:!.tb8 13 b3 ~a3 14 lbe 1 resembles the game, with the idea 14 .. :YWaS IS a4! lbeS 16 lbc2 ~c7 17 lba3, keeping control over the queenside.

13 b3 'tWa3 14lbel!

White plans lbc2. 14 .ltc1 'tWaS and now IS .ltd2 'tWa3 might repeat. White usually plays for more with IS .ltb2, when lS ... .ltb7! 16 e4 .lta6! 17 .l:!.e1lbg4 with the idea ... lbeS-d3 is a famil- iar manoeuvre by now. 14  .ltb7 15 lbc2 'tWa6 Perhaps lS ... 'tWa7 is more accurate, but Black still needs a plan following 16lbe3. 16 e4! Now that Black can't play ... .lta6. ... lbe8 16 ... lbfd7 17 a4! 'tWa7 18lbbS 'tWb8 19lbca3 consolidates the pawn, Dautov-Felgaer, Port Erin 2002. 17a4! White is taking over. lbbS, lba3 and .l:!.e1 with .ltfl are all strong ideas. ... lbc718l:tell:tae8?! 19 b4 Still better is 19 .ltfl 'tWa8 20 lbbS .l:!.c8, or 19 lbbS with the idea 19 ... lbxbS 20 .ltfl. In both cases, White has a very large advantage. 19 .. lbd7 20 lbb5 .l::tc8 20 ... lbxbS 21 axbS ~b6 22 bxc5 lbxcs 23 .lte3 isn't much better.

21.lth3 (D)

[diagram]
A wild stab, but 2l....l:l.fd8 22 bxcS dxcS 23 .i.gS lbxbS 24 l:txbS .ltf8 25 ~d2 is position- ally disastrous for Black. After 21...fS?!, the most direct winning line was 22 exfS; for exam- ple, 22 ... lbeS 23 f4! lbd3 24 .l:!.xe7 lbxdS 2S .l:txb7! 'tWxb7 26 fxg6, etc. In the game, Van Wely lost the thread and Carlsen actually went on to win. Overall, the set-up with g3, .i.g2, l:tb1 and b3 has yet to be neutralized by Black. However, if an opening survives its initial challenges, which the Benko Gambit certainly has, it tends to sur- vive later ones, so we'll see what the future holds. This chapter has described a range of gam- bits from the directly attacking to the posi- tional. In my opinion, every developing player should try to incorporate one of each type into his repertoire, if only as an optional weapon. 6 f-Pawns and Reversed Openings This chapter re-opens the topic of reversed openings, which I've already discussed at some length in the context of the English Opening in Volume 3, and to a lesser extent in other places (for example, 1...b6 and 1 b3 in Chapter 4 of this volume). A reversed opening usually refers to a case in which White plays an opening best known as a black defence, hoping to exploit the advantage of his extra move. Sometimes Black plays what is normally a white opening with a tempo less; this is the case with a couple of the double e-pawn variations I'll mention below. Obviously, for White to gain a tempo on a known variation will more often be attractive than for Black to playa known variation with a tempo less. Even so, since white systems on av- erage sport a somewhat higher evaluation than black ones, their adoption with a tempo less will not necessarily lead to a disadvantage. Up to this point in the series, I've examined openings in which the first pawn move is made by the b-, C-, d-, e- or g-pawn. In this chapter, I'm beginning with a discussion of the ne- glected f-pawn openings, namely, 1 ... f5 (the Dutch Defence, played versus 1 d4 or 1 c4), and

1 f4 (the Bird Opening). The Dutch has a sto-

ried history of use by elite players, and numer- ous devoted grandmaster advocates today. The Bird, although it has never been played exten- sively at grandmaster level, has a respectable master following and is undergoing a modest revival. I'll devote most of this chapter to a seri- ous investigation of this opening duo. Then I look at the King's Indian Attack in the context of reversed openings, since it is the other side of the King's Indian Defence coin. Finally, I touch rather lightly upon some examples of reversed openings that stem from I e4 e5; hopefully they are instructive in their own right. The study of reversed openings will increase your understanding of what can and cannot be achieved in openings. Many chess-players are mathematically oriented, with a facility for logical thinking. So it's only natural to assume that there must be some way to make use of an extra move. After all, chess moves have value, and you wouldn't voluntarily give a move away under normal circumstances. However, as we've talked about throughout these vol- umes, the worth of an extra move isn't a straight- forward matter. In reversed positions of the English Opening, for example, it's remarkable how seldom White can actually claim to have the better game. For one thing, any advantage is limited by the fact that he will usually be play- ing what are essentially defensive or counterat- tacking lines. In addition, there's a paradoxical benefit in not having to move, in that Black gets a better look at what his opponent is up to and is able to react accordingly. Thus White's strat- egy will be to try to gain something from his ex- tra move without compromising his position, and Black will try to make use of the extra in- formation revealed by that move. It sometimes happens that, if White isn't careful, he will ac- tually end up in a worse position than if he hadn't had the extra move at all! Stepping outside the practical realm, this dif- ficulty (of converting a move into something of value) is also revealing about the nature of chess itself. The paradox of information applies to every move, whether in a reversed position or not. In some sense, however sound and logical a move is, it contains the risk of leaving you worse off! That enormously magnifies the com- plexity and subtlety of the game. If advantages and disadvantages were additive in some linear fashion, chess would be a minor game at best. But we have geniuses who do little else but study and play chess from the time they are five years old into their forties, and they make mul- tiple mistakes in nearly every game, often quite serious ones! As an exercise, set up a reversed opening and try to find ways to make even mod- est improvements in your position without de- stabilizing something elsewhere on the board. You'll find that the most trivial-seeming change

I-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 183

always seems to show up in one or another line of analysis where you're least expecting it. When you see how such a straightforward task (concentrating on only a single move) can en- tangle you in a whole complex of issues, it helps you appreciate how deep and impenetra- ble chess really is. Returning to the task before us, and before moving on to specific examples, you need to know which reversed openings are fit for inclu- sion in your repertoire. The simplest criterion is subjective: do you enjoy playing the opening in question? Strictly speaking, that's not neces- sary, but it is certainly helpful. Two other con- siderations present themselves:

1. Is the opening objectively good? For ex-

ample, let's assume that you're playing White and reversing a standard black defence; will the opening produce any advantage against accu- rate play? Does White, with a tempo more, risk ending up in a more exposed position than Black does with a tempo less?

2. If the reversed opening that White is using

doesn't produce any advantage, will it never- theless cause practical difficulties for Black? That is, are there easy ways for Black to equal- ize against it, or will he be confronted with problems to solve even after the opening phase is over? It's worth noting that the answer to this question also determines whether White plays a particular 'mainstream' opening. That is, since Black can ultimately equalize against most if not all openings, White will want to choose openings which exert lasting pressure. In con- ventional thinking, that would explain the high- level use of the Ruy Lopez (1 e4 e5 2 tbf3 tbc6 3 i.b5) rather than the Scotch Game (3 d4), the Vienna Game (2 tbc3) or any of the double e- pawn gambits. Arguably, all of these openings draw with perfect play. Similarly, among strong players, you largely see White's choice of the Queen's Gambit after 1 d4 d5. That is, he plays

[diagram]
e3, or 2 tbf3 with 3 i.f4. It's not that Black can't ultimately equalize in any mainstream opening; it's that against the better ones he is confronted with serious challenges and, having solved them, is still left with a complex struggle to conduct. On a practical level, this can have additional benefits such as tiring out your oppo- nent or putting him in time-trouble. Having said all that, let's move to our first set of reversed openings. Dutch Defence/Bird Opening

1 d4 f5 (D)

The Dutch Defence is a traditional and es- sentially sound opening which nevertheless re- quires precise treatment on Black's part. At the grandmaster level, therefore, it is primarily the province of loyal specialists. But for the aver- age player and even the master, the Dutch can be a particularly effective weapon. In part, that's due to a potential imbalance in knowledge be- tween opponents: most 1 d4 and 1 c4 players will allot only limited time to study of the Dutch, placing a higher priority upon much more frequently-played openings such as the Queen's Gambit and Indian systems. This situ- ation suits Black, all the more so if he applies himself to mastering the general ideas and con- crete variations of 1...f5. Black has three primary set-ups in the Dutch Defence. The Classical System includes the moves ... f5, ... tbf6, ... e6, ... i.e7, ... O-O and ... d6; the Leningrad System combines ... f5, ... tbf6, ... g6, ... i.g7, ... O-O and ... d6; and the Stonewall System consists of the moves ... f5, ... tbf6, ... e6, ... d5 and ... c6. I'll mainly concentrate upon the first two of these and discuss the Stonewall in less detail at the end of this section. The rare Antoshin System involves the moves ... tbf6, ... d6, ... c6, ... 'ilic7 and ... e5. Black's develop- ment suffers in this case, so he generally ends up in a somewhat inferior position; I'll have to

184 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

refer you to the standard remedies in theoretical works. The Dutch Defence can be thought of as a mirror image of the Sicilian Defence. In partic- ular, we see that if White plays e4 in the Dutch Defence, .. .fxe4 gives Black a central majority and a half-open f-file, just as in the Open Sicil- ian with, e.g., 1 e4 c5 2lbf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4, Black obtains a central majority and a half-open c- file. In the Dutch, Black's first goal is usually to achieve ... e5, whereas in the Sicilian, a success- ful ... d5 usually denotes equality or better. Take the position after the following se- quence:

[diagram]
O-O 6 O-O d6 7 lbc3 ~e8 8 :tel ~g6 9 e4 fxe4 10 lbxe4lbxe411ltxe4lbc612l:.e1li.f6 (D) w ... and compare it with this common structure and piece placement for Black in the Sicilian Defence:

[diagram]
lbc3 lbc6 6 li.e2 e6 7 O-O li.e7 8 li.e3 li.d7 9 ~h1 lbxd4 10 li.xd4 li.c6 11 'iVd3 O-O 12 f4 ~a5 (D) First, note that in all variations of the Dutch Defence, since Black plays ... d6 or ... d5 at some point, he will have a weakness on e6. Similarly, in the Open Sicilian (with 3 d4 cxd4 4lbxd4), assuming that Black plays either ... e6 or ... e5, he adopts a weakness on d6 (that applies to most variations, although not in the Dragon and Accelerated Dragon). In the Dutch, Black will generally have to castle kingside, i.e., on the same side of the board as his weakness, and he will lack the natural protection that a pawn on f7 affords a castled king. In the Sicilian Defence, w Black's corresponding weakness on d6 is fur- ther away from his normal king placement on g8, and all three kingside pawns remain on the second rank, guarding their charge. A comparison of flank attacks is also reveal- ing. After the exchange on d4 in the Sicilian Defence, Black has a potentially strong minor- ity attack on the queenside via ... b5-b4. In both the Classical and Leningrad Dutch, after an eventual e4 and ... fxe4, Black's advance of his kingside minority exposes his king. Neverthe- less, by the time White plays e4, Black's f- pawn in the Dutch Defence can sometimes as- sist a serious kingside attack by ... f4, often in conjunction with ... g5. As White's most popu- lar and arguably most promising lines nearly all stem from playing g3, li.g2 and O-O, this kingside advance, combined with moves such as ... 'iWh5, ... li.h3 and ... lbg4, can cause consid- erable havoc in White's camp. I should mention that in the Classical Variation ( ... lbf6, ... e6, ... d6 and ... li.e7), Black can also playa sort of waiting game with moves such as ... c6, ... a5 and ... lba6, delaying both ... e5 and ... g5. This time there is no analogy in the Open Sicilian, since d41. .. cxd4 has already been played; whereas, when playing Black in the Closed Sicilian, there would be no point in delaying both ... d5 and ... b5 in favour of risky moves like ... f6, ... h5 and ... lbh6. From White's point of view, the two most im- portant differences between these openings are: 1) In the Sicilian, he usually attacks in the centre and on the kingside; in the Dutch, he at- tacks in the centre and queens ide. 2) In the Sicilian, his centre is typically un- der attack from ... lbf6 and the likes of ... b5-b4,

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 185

... Jtb7 and ... liJbd7-c5; it is also subject to radi- cal transformation from the move ... e5. In the Dutch, his c4/d4 centre tends to be fairly se- B cure, particularly since ... g5-g4 is a risky ven- ture; and the move ... d5 is not a realistic option in most positions (with a few important excep- tions). Needless to say, most strong players feel that the trade-offs for the Sicilian Defence are worth it as Black, whereas fewer are willing to adopt the Dutch Defence. Nevertheless, the compari- son is useful for identifying the underlying fea- tures of both openings. Leningrad Dutch Beliavsky - Malaniuk USSR Ch, Moscow 1983

[diagram]
I'll concentrate upon this move in all varia- tions; White plays g3 and Jtg2 in a large major- ity of all Dutch Defence lines. On an obvious level, this supports White's ideal break e4, which will open lines for White in classical fashion. Another factor is that, with pressure on b7, Black will have to be careful in develop- ing his queen's bishop. In some cases, it's im- portant that White's attack on d5 makes the move ... d5 itself more difficult for Black to play, whereas the moves ... c5 and ... e5 can sometimes weaken d5 and the centre. Finally, whether or not Black plays ... c6, the bishop on g2 supports the advance b4-b5, just as it does in the English Opening. Not surprisingly, there's more to this move, but that's best shown by ex- ample. Instead, the natural move 2 c4 can transpose, or White can go his own way. Perhaps the main sequence that Black should avoid is 2 ... liJf6 (2 ... g6?! 3 h4!, when 3 ... Jtg7 4 h5 is annoying, while 3 ... liJf6?! 4 h5! liJxh5 5 .:txh5 gxh5 6 e4 is worse still; compare the rest of this note) 3 liJc3 g6 (3 ... d6! with ... g6 next avoids the fol- lowing problem) 4 h4! Jtg7 5 h5!, intending 5 ... liJxh5 6 e4! (D). Now there is no ideal defence against White's threats of 7 .:txh5 and 7 exf5; for example, 6 ... liJf6 (6 ... e6 7 exf5 exf5 8 .:txh5 gxh5 9 'iVxh5+ 'it>f8 10 liJd5 with a huge attack, threat- ening both 'iVxf5+ and Jtg5, to begin with) 7 exf5 gxf5 8 Jtg5 (or 8 Jtf4 d6 9 'iic2 and O-O-O; or even 8 liJh3 intending liJf4; in every case, White's half-open h-file facing Black's weak- ened kingside gives White some advantage) 8 ... 0-09 'iVd2 d6 100-O-O, and White has more than enough for a mere pawn. Always be aware of this h4-h5 possibility. 2 ... d6 Sometimes Black uses this particular niove- order in order to discourage liJh3 lines (see be- low). Instead, 2 ... g6?! 3 h4! presents the kind of difficulties seen in the previous note. So the conventional move-order is 2 ... liJf6 3 Jtg2 g6

Then apart from the normal4liJf3 Jtg7 5 O-O d6, transposing to the game, White has: a) 4 liJh3, intending liJf4 followed by d5. After 4 ... Jtg7 5 liJf4, a common defence is 5 ... liJc6, intending ... e5. After 6 d5liJe5, Black's knight can't easily be dislodged from e5; a typi- cal continuation is 7liJc3 c6 8 e4 fxe4 (8 ... d6 is also playable) 9 liJxe4 liJxe4 10 Jtxe4 cxd5 11

186 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.ltxdS e6 12 .ltg2 O-O with chances for both sides. b) Alternatively, White can play 4 c3!? with the idea of'iVb3, which both attacks b7 twice and prevents Black from castling; for example, 4 ... .ltg7 S lDh3 O-O? 6 'iVb3+ and 7 .ltxb7. Black usually resorts to ... e6 and/or ... dS at some point in order to get castled, with which he has achieved respectable results. I won't say more about these deviations, but they will repay some study. 3lDf3 Now 3 .ltg2lDf6 4lDh3 (with the idea 4 ... g6 SlDc3, looking to play dS and lDf4) 4 ... eS! de- nies White's knight access to f4, and Black has no problems following S dxeS dxeS 6 ~xd8+ ..to>xd8. Of course, there are options other than S dxeS, but Black should come out all right be- cause White's knight is poorly placed on h3. 3  g6 4 .ltg2 .ltg7 5 O-O lDf6 (D) w This is the Leningrad Dutch formation for Black, distinguished by the fianchetto of Black's king's bishop. It is the choice of most modem players, although the Classical and Stonewall Variations are still important. An optimist might argue that the Leningrad Dutch is an improved version of the King's Indian Defence, because in the King's Indian, Black ends up moving his king's knight in order to advance his f-pawn, whereas in the Leningrad Dutch, the pawn is al- ready on that square! Naturally there are some limitations to that argument, but it's true that Black initially has more direct control of the centre due to the move .. .fS, and ifhe can carry out ... eS (almost always a major goal, especially in the Classical and Leningrad Variations), the companionship of his pawn on fS increases the possibility of a productive central advance. 6c4

6 b3 O-O 7 .ltb2 will be examined below.

6 ...O-O 7lDc3 (D) 7 ...' iVeS This is the modem main line of the Lenin- grad Dutch, replacing the moves 7 ... c6 and 7 ... lDc6, which used to be considered the only two respectable choices. Those moves are still important choices, of course, but I'll stick with the queen move so as to cover the essential practical details. The Leningrad Dutch is a pop- ular system and, like others, has a massive body of theory attached to it. Why 7 ... 'iVe8? It's really a matter of timing and specifics. The threat of an early ... eS limits White, who has to prevent Black from equaliz- ing with that advance, and it turns out that transferring Black's queen to the kingside (usu- ally by ... 'ii'hS) can have real benefits. Black also keeps his options open, as can be seen in the next few notes. Finally, he has a concrete defence in mind versus 8 :tel, which you will see in the game following this one. S d5 (D) White's two main strategies in the Leningrad Variation involve this central advance dS and the break e4, seen in the next game. The older move 8 lDdS has failed to produce any advan- tage after either 8 ... lDa6 or 8 ... lDxdS 9 cxdS ~bS 10 lDgS h6 11 lDh3 eS. After 8 dS, if White can play lDd4 and then enforce the opening of the e-file, the weakness on e6 will be of decisive importance. He also has the idea ofb4, .ltb2 and, at the right moment,

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 187

c5. Playing b4 has the additional benefit of dis- couraging Black from ... c6 because of dxc6 fol- lowed by b5. On the negative side, 8 d5 opens the al-h8 diagonal for Black's bishop and gives him squares on c5 and e5 upon which to put knights. White's advance is also very committal and thus allows Black to focus upon a narrower set of problems than would be presented by a more flexible move. 8 ... ttJa6 8 ... a5 is the main alternative. It forestalls White's b4 expansion on the queenside (which is a plan that can cause Black considerable dis- comfort following 8 ... ttJa6), and in doing so it secures a post on c5 for Black's queen's knight. Now 9.l:tbl is rather slow after 9 ... ttJa6 10 b3 .i.d7 (versus ttJb5) 11 .i.b2 ttJc5 12 e3 c6. White has any number of other replies, includ- ing 9 .i.e3, 9 ttJel and 9 .i.d2. I'll limit myself to 9 ttJd4, which is the most thematic move, as it covers e6 and opens up the possibility of e4. Black replies with 9 ... ttJa6 (D).

a) 10 b3 .i.d7 11 .i.b2 g5! saves Black a tempo, because in other lines he usually has to play ... h6 and ... g5, the former move contribut- ing little to his plans. One instructive variation goes 12 e3 f4! 13 exf4 gxf4 14 ttJe6 .i.xe6 15 dxe6 c6 16 ttJe2?! fxg3 17 hxg3? ttJg4!, when White has problems in the face of ... ~h5. After 18 .i.h3 .i.xb2 White has to give up a pawn by 19l:!.bl ttJxf2 20 l:txf2, etc., because 19 .i.xg4? .ltxal 20 ~xal ~g6 21 .i.h3 'iVh5! costs him more material. b) 10 e4 fxe4 11 ttJxe4 ttJxe4 12 .i.xe4 .i.h3 13 l:tel (or 13 .ltg2) 13 ... ttJc5 14 .i.hl Wif7 15 .lte3 .l:tae8 (15 ... .ltd7!? prepares ... c6, not nec- essarily immediately) 16 'iVd2 e5 17 dxe6 ttJxe6 18 ttJxe6 .i.xe6 19 .l:.tac1 b6 with equality, Van der Sterren-Nikolic, Ter Ape11994. Naturally, there's more to be said here, but White should probably look into his 9th-move alternatives. 9 ttJd4 9 .lte3 isn't bad (compare the reversed posi- tion in the Bird Opening, where it equalizes). But the most important alternative to 9 ttJd4 is 9 l:tbl (D), which removes White's rook from the long diagonal and prepares b4, both capturing territory and restricting Black's pieces.

In this case, Black almost always gives up his kingside plans for the moment and plays on the queenside with ... c6 or ... c5. Many years of theory and practice have yet to resolve this vari- ation; here's a brief look at two key lines: a) 9 ... .i.d7!? 10 b4 c6 11 Wib3!? cxd5 12 cxd5 .l:[c8 13 .Be3 ttJg4 14 .i.d4 .i.xd4! (other- wise Black gets squeezed) 15 ttJxd4 f4! 16 ttJe4, Adianto-Kindermann, Bie11995, and here

188 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Kindermann suggests 16 ... liJc7; if White has any advantage, it's not much. b) 9 ... cS (or 9 ... c6) lO dxc6 bxc6 11 b4 ~d7 and then: bl) The aggressive 12 bS, trying to win the c6-square for a knight, isn't terribly effective following 12 ... cxbS 13 cxbSliJcS 14 a4 l:!c8 IS liJd4 (or IS ~b2 a6!) IS ... liJce4 16 liJxe4liJxe4 17 ~b2 ~f7 18 e3, when 18 .. :iVa2!? eventually resulted in equality in Babula-Beim, Bundes- liga 1999/00, but it might have been easier to double rooks via 18 .. .1:tc4!; for example, 19 liJc6 ~xc6 20 bxc6 ~xb2 21 l:!xb2l:Ic8. b2) 12 a3 is a move that was found only after lengthy investigation. 12 ... liJc7 (12 ... :tb8 and 12 ... h6 are also played) 13 ~b2 (D) and now:

b21) 13 ... aS is worth thinking about, since after 14 bS, 14 ... liJe6 or 14 ... :tb8 followed by ... liJe6 gives Black the cS-square or allows him to exchange off a white knight on d4. b22) Kindermann's idea 13 ... liJe6 14 cS! dS! has been tested several times and seems to hold, but needs precise handling. b23) 13 ... nb8!? (introducing a speculative pawn sacrifice) 14 "ia4 (14 ii.al is a safer con- tinuation) 14 ... liJe6!?, Fridman-E.Berg, Ber- muda 2003. Black is reacting to White's queen- side drift by using the standard Leningrad Dutch attack on the other wing. Whether it fully com- pensates after IS 'i!Vxa7 f4 16 ~a4 gS 17 'i!Vc2 'iVhS is not obvious, but these attacks are al- ways very dangerous in practice. 9  ii.d7 (D) Black can also increase his control over e4 by 9 ... liJcS, but it's more direct to develop a piece and support counterplay by ... c6 or ... cS. w 10 e3 Rather slow. The natural lO e4 has also achieved little after lO ... fxe4 11liJxe4liJxe4 12 ii.xe4 c6. Then Black can play ... liJc7 (to cover e6) and ... cS; after attending to the centre, he will often get a good queens ide attack. A positional trick that comes up a lot goes 10 J:Ibl c6, when 11 b4? cS! 12 bxcSliJxcs secures an outpost for Black on cS in front of the back- ward c-pawn. In Bu Xiangzhi-Galyas, Buda- pest 1999, White recognized the danger and undertook quick action to simplify: 13 liJe6! liJxe6 14 dxe6 ~xe6 IS l:!xb7 ~xc4 16 l:!c7 .l:tc8 17 l:txa7, when Black had a slight edge based upon his central majority. However, White can improve by 11 b3, which keeps both sides' possibilities open. ... c611 b3liJc7

11...cS 12 liJde2 liJc7 is also possible .

12 ~b2 c5! Black takes the opportunity to attack on the queenside. He will play ... bS and potentially render White's c4-pawn vulnerable to ... bxc4, ... liJg4-eS and ... l:Ib8-b4. 13liJde2 13 liJf3 bS 14 liJd2 places the knight on a better square than e2, but takes an extra move. After 14 ... J:Ib8 IS 'iYc2, White isn't threatening anything right away, so Black might continue IS ... aS, and if White tries to block by 16 a4, then 16 ... bxa4 17 liJxa4 liJa6 intending ... liJb4 creates queenside counterplay. This variation offers opportunities for both sides. ... b5! (D) 14 ~c2?! Since White's c-pawn now becomes weak, 14 cxbS liJxbS IS liJxbS ~xbS 16 nel should

j-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 189

w be played, threatening lLlf4. Then 16 ... i..xe2 is roughly equal, whereas 16 ... gS is both more ambitious and riskier. 14 .. J~b8 Or 14 ... bxc4 IS bxc4 l::tb8, to avoid giving White another chance for cxbS. 15l::tac1?! bxc4 16. bxc4lLlg4! In quite a few Dutch Defence positions, a knight can go to a pseudo-outpost on eS with good effect. It's easy to underestimate Black's piece-play. 17 i..a1 After 17 l::tbl lLleS 18 lLldl i..a4 19 'iVcl lLlxc4! Black wins a pawn. 17 ... lLle5 18lLldl ? (D) White had to bite the bullet and allow the lengthy forced tactical sequence following 18 lLlbl i.a4!? (18 ... l::tb4! 19 i..xeS i..xeS 20 ~d3 favours Black, but at least White keeps a mate- rial balance) 19 'lid2lLlxc4 20 l::txc4 i..xal 21 'liaS i..bS 22 lLld2 i..xc4 23 lLlxc4 i..f6 24 'iVxc7 'lia4 2S l::tc I l::tfc8 26 'liaS 'iVxaS 27 lLlxaS l::tb2 28 lLld4, which is still unclear.

Now Black wins material: 18  i..a4 19 ~d2 lLlxc4! 20 .l:i.xc4 i..xa1 21 lLldc3 i..b5!? 22lLlxb5 ~xb5 23 .l:i.fc1 i..b2 24 lHc2i.f6 Or24 ... ~a6!' 25lLld4 'iVa6 26 lLlc6l::tb6 27 h4?! lLlb5 A good move, although 27 ... e6! will either win material or further weaken White's posi- tion. 28 i..f1 lLla3 29 .l:i.f4 ~b7 30 lIc1 I:tb2 31 'iVa5l:i.xa2 It's over now. The finish is pretty: 32 .l:i.d1 ~b3 33 'iVa4 .l:i.b2 34 .l:i.c1 .l:i.a8 35 'iVa5 lLlb1! 36 g4 fxg4 37 .l:i.xf6 exf6 38 'iVc7 .l:i.xf2! 39 ~xf2 ~b2+ 40 i..e2 g3+! 41 ~f3 0-1 Because after 41...1Ihcl, 42 lLld8 (the trick that White has constantly been trying to make work) fails to 42 ... 'iVhl + 43 ~f4 'iVxdS. Filippov - Potapov Russian Ch, Elista 2001

[diagram]
O-O 6 lLlf3 d6 7 O-O 'iVe8 8 .l:i.e1 This is more directly dangerous than 8 dS; if White could play e4 now (with Black's queen on e8), his pressure down the e-file would be deadly. Hence Black's next move: 8 ... 'iVf7! (D) By attacking c4, Black buys time to play ... lLle4, preventing both e4 and lLlgs. The move ... 'iVf7 at this precise juncture is fundamental to the fact that 7 ... 'lie8 works at all. 9b3 White simply protects the c-pawn and pre- pares e4. Other tries:

190 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) 9 lLlgS!? 'i!xc4 10 oltfl!? gives White ac- tive play and compensation for his pawn. Fol- lowing 1O ... 'iVc6, the position is considered satisfactory for Black; for example, 11 e4 fxe4 12 oltbS?! 'i!b6 13 oltc4+ 'it>h8 14 lLlf7+ 1:!.xf7 IS oltxf7 and now IS ... oltfS or Is ... lLlc6 gives him two pawns for the exchange with the ini- tiative. However, Neverov's suggestion of 11 'iVb3+ dS 12 oltf4! is worth looking into. b) 9 'i!d3 h6 10 e4?! demonstrates how White's light squares in the centre and king- side can become vulnerable in conjunction with Black's f-file pressure: 1O .. .fxe4 11 lLlxe4 lLlxe4 12 'iVxe4 lLlc6! (with the idea ... oltfS) 13 dS (13 g4?! lLlxd4 14 lLlxd4 'iVxf2+ IS 'it>hl 'iVxd4) 13 ... lLlb4! with the point that 14 a3?! (better is

14 g4 c6 IS dxc6 lLlxc6) is met by 14 ... oltfS IS

'ilih4 oltf6! 16 'iVxh6 lLlc2 17 oltgS 'ilig7!. 9 .. lLle4 10 oltb2 (D)

Note how Black has taken advantage of White's unprotected pawn on f2 to prevent the capture on e4. But it's not so easy to manage ev- erything. In the meantime, White develops his remaining pieces and keeps his options open. 10 . lLlc6 Black wants to prepare ... eS and at the same time give his queen's bishop a place to go on d7, or even on fS or g4 if Black ends up playing ... fxe4 or ... f4. Instead, 1O ... lLld7 blocks the bishop, but has been satisfactory in practice; for example, 11 'ilic2 lLldf6 12 lLlxe4 (12 dS eS!) 12 ... lLlxe4 13 lLld2 lLlxd2 14 'iVxd2 c6 IS ~adloltd7, Zentai-Galyas, Balatonalmadi 2008. White may well be able to keep a small advan- tage after 1O ... lLld7, but Black's position is solid and playable. 11 ~c1 e5 ll...h6 12 dS lLlb4 13 lLld4 ultimately seems to favour White, especially because 13 ... lLlxc3 14 ~xc3 lLlxa2 IS ~f3! launches a terrific at- tack, with e4 coming next. 12 dxe5!? Introducing a tactical struggle. 12 dS lLlxc3 13 oltxc3 is of a strategic nature and deserves consideration by White. Then Kindermann's preference for Black is 13 ... lLld8 14 cS 'iVe7. 12  dxe5 (D) 12 ... lLlxc3?! 13 oltxc3 dxeS was eliminated from practice by the move 14 'iVdS!. Then eS is attacked, and 14 ... olte6 IS lLlgS! oltxdS 16 oltxdS 'iVxdS 17 cxdS is followed by lLle6 or oltb4. w 13 lLlxe4!? A creative pawn sacrifice.

13. . fxe4 14 lLlg5 'iVxf2+ 15 'it>hl

White's threat of'iVdS+ and l:!.fl is coupled with the placing of a powerful knight on e4. 15 . ~d8 16 'iVc2 16 lLlxe4!? has transposed in two games after 16 ... 'iVe3, thus eliminating Black's alternative in the next note. But 16 ... 'iVb6 and 16 ... ~xdl 17 lLlxf2 ~d2 are also worth looking into. 16  'iVe3 Here Kindermann discovered 16 ... 'iVfS 17 lLlxe4 'iVhS! with tremendous complications, which doesn't seem to have been tried over- the-board. There can follow 18 lLlcs lLld4 19 oltxd4 exd4 20 lLlxb7 ~f8! "and Black enjoys considerable counterplay". 17 lLlxe4 oltf5 18 'iVc3 This is a well-known position; rather than give the latest technical details, I've chosen an older and highly instructive game to show.

j-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 191

18 . ji'xc3?! 18 ... .ith6! 19 'iVxe3 .itxe3 20 ':cdl ~g7 has been played several times, with Black appar- B ently achieving equality. That will doubtless continue to be challenged, but 18 ... .ith6 ap- pears to be better than the immediate exchange. 19 .itxc3 .ith6 20 ':cdl ttJd4 21 g4! This wins the bishop-pair and thereby estab- lishes a clearly favourable endgame.

21.. .. itxe4 22 .itxe4 (D)

The opening is over, but the rest of the game is very much worth playing over. Note how White advances every pawn in a relentless terri- torial expansion; this enhances the power of his bishops. 22 .. c6 23 b4! .itg7 24 e3 ttJe6 25 h4! .u.xdl 26 ':xdl ':d8 27 ':bl! ~f7 28 ~g2 l:.d7 29 ~f2 a6 30 ~e2 ttJc7 31 .:n+ ~g8 32 h5! gxh5 33 gxh5 ttJe8 34 ':gl ttJd6 35 .itc2 h6 36 c5! ttJf7 37 .itf5 ':e7 38 e4 ttJg5 39 a4! ~f8 40 .:n ~e8 41 .itg6+ ~d8 42 b5 axb5 43 .ita5+ 'it>c8 44 ':dl b6 45 cxb6 c5 46 axb5 ~b7 47 .itf5 ttJf7 48 .itd7 .itf6 49 .itc6+ ~b8 50 .itc3 10 Bird Opening We aren't done with the Dutch Defence by any means, but I want to tum to the reversed open- ing, I f4, known as the Bird Opening, both to examine it on its own merits and in order to compare it to the Dutch. If4 (D) The Bird Opening has never had a steady fol- lowing at grandmaster level. For most players, its main drawback is that Black doesn't have to work hard enough to reach equality. In most openings, White has an initial advantage that persists for a while and requires accurate han- dling from Black in order to achieve equality. The Bird Opening doesn't present that level of challenge. In addition, some players are reluc- tant to deal with the From Gambit, I f4 e5 2 fxe5 d6, which takes the initiative away from White in the first few moves. Having said that, I f4 is perfectly respectable from a theoretical point of view and, along with other unorthodox openings, has been receiv- ing renewed attention. Today's players have an understandable desire to get away from 'theory' once in a while; that's not always pos- sible in standard openings because the most interesting systems include at least a few very lengthy variations which need to be memo- rized. By contrast, there are few truly critical variations involved if you pick a repertoire based upon I f4. The From Gambit is one of them: you have to study it (or play 2 e4, trans- posing to the King's Gambit). But this gambit has been looking increasingly shaky versus accurate play by White, and the relevant the- ory isn't too difficult to absorb (see the next note). The other lines that you'll probably want to master are those that stem from I f4 d5, a re- versed Dutch Defence. For one thing, statistics show that you will see 1.. .d5 far more often than any other reply. Although you can always avoid playing reversed Dutch positions, it's more promising and instructive to take up the challenge and see what you can do with your extra move. In fact, many I f4 players also use the Dutch Defence, so the two openings can reinforce one another.

192 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

In the first two games, I'm going to look at the reversed Leningrad Dutch variations, deal- ing primarily with the main lines. At the same time, there are many early options, and I'll try to supply enough background details so that you can get a feel for how the opening breaks down in general, and which lines might appeal to you when playing either colour.

1...d5

Obviously, Black can do without ... dS and thus side-step a main-line Dutch Defence posi- tion; for example: a) Black can contest the critical eS-square by 1...d6!?, with the idea 2 ttJf3 iLg4. Upon 2 e4, Black might play into a line of the f4 Sicil- ian by 2 ... cS, a King's Gambit Declined by 2 ... eS or choose a Pirc set-up with 2 ... ttJf6 3 ttJc3 g6 (or here 3 ... iLg4!?). You can imagine how many independent move-orders can result from this or other slow first moves. That's be- cause 1 f4 puts so few demands upon Black. b) The naturall...ttJf6 is another example: after 2 ttJf3, it can transpose to a reversed Dutch after 2 ... dS. Alternatively, Black can play 2 ... cS, 2 ... g6, 2 ... b6 or another noncom- mittal move. The position is practically uncon- strained, which is the reason so many games with the Bird Opening leave the beaten track earlyon. c) 1...ttJh6!? (D) is a curious way to get to unique positions. w This resembles variations of the Dutch De- fence in which White plays ttJh3. Black's idea is for his knight to occupy the fS-square; for ex- ample, 2 e4 (2 ttJf3 g6 and now 3 e4 dS is simi- lar; naturally, White has solid alternatives such as 3 g3) 2 ... dS 3 exdS!? (3 eS also opens the way for Black's knight to settle on fS, after 3 ... cS or 3 ... iLg4) 3 ... 'iVxdS 4 ttJc3 'iVd6 S ttJf3 ttJc6 (or S ... g6) 6 d4 iLfS 7 dS? (overextension) 7 ... ttJb4 8 ttJd4 O-O-O 9 ttJxfS ttJxfS with the ad- vantage. This is analysis by Reinderman. I won't go into further detail, but 1 ... ttJh6 is a legitimate choice. d) I'm going to refer the reader to books and databases for a detailed coverage of the From Gambit: 1...eS 2 fxeS (2 e4 is the King's Gam- bit) 2 ... d6 3 exd6 iLxd6. At the moment, it seems to favour White in the main lines after 4 ttJf3 (D).

Here are a few thoughts about theory, featur- ing some practical approaches: dl) 4 ... ttJf6 can be answered by the slightly unusual S ttJc3 (recommended by Larsen; the main line S d4 ttJg4 6 ~d3 cS 7 'iVe4+ is a bit hard to assess; for example, after the recom- mended 7 ... iLe7 8 e3 0-09 iLd3 fS 10 iLc4+ 'iii>h8 11 'ilVd3, l1...f4! 120-0 ttJc6 offers com- pensation; S e3 opens another can of worms following S ... ttJg4 6 'iVe2) S ... ttJg4 6 g3!; for example, 6 ... hS (6 ... ttJxh2 7 J::!.xh2 iLxg3+ 8 .l:tf2 has been analysed at some length and seems to favour White) 7 ttJe4 h4 8 gxh4 (8 ttJxd6+ ~xd6 9 gxh4 ttJc6 10 d3 is recom- mended by Vigus) 8 ... iLfS (8 ... iLe7 9 ttJegS .1:.xh4 is rather slow after 10 d4! .l:.hS 11 h3; for example, 11...ttJc6 12 'iVd3) 9 ttJxd6+ ~xd6

10 d3 with the idea 'ilVd2-f4, when White has

the upper hand. d2) 4 ... gS S d4!? (again, not the normal choice; loads of theory indicates that White can survive some dangerous attacks and emerge

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 193

with the better game after 5 g3 g4 6liJh4liJe7 7 d4 {7 e4 should get another look} 7 ... liJg6 8 liJxg6 {8 liJg2 is equally complicated, and un- clear} 8 ... hxg6 9 'ili'd3 liJc6 10 c3 i.f5 11 e4 'fiIe7 12 i.g2 O-O-O 13 i.e3, although 13 ... i.e6 can be interesting) 5 ... g4 6 liJe5 i.xe5 7 dxe5 'ili'xdl+ 8 'ltxdlliJc6 9liJc3 i.e6 (9 ... liJxe5? 10 i.f4 f6 11liJd5) 10 i.f4 O-O-O+ 11 ~c1liJge7

12 b3 liJg6 13 g3 (13 i.g5!?) 13 ... liJgxe5 14

i.g2, and White has two well-placed bishops with good prospects. e) The most important of Black's positional alternatives to 1...d5 and 1...liJf6, at least in practice, is l...c5 (D), often used by Sicilian Defence players.

Then: el) 2 e4 transposes to a Sicilian Defence sideline (1 e4 c5 2 f4), but that allows the well- known 2 ... d5! 3 exd5 liJf6 with the idea 4 c4 e6!, a gambit in which Black gets at least enough compensation after 5 dxe6 i.xe6. Note that White has holes on d4 and d3, while if he plays d3, then e3 becomes weak as well. What with good development and pressure down the d-file against White's backward pawn, most people prefer to play Black. e2) White typically continues 2liJf3 liJc6 3 g3 (3 e4 d5!? is again worth considering: 4 exd5 'fiIxd5 5liJc3 and 5 ... 'iIi'd6 6 i.e2 g6 7 O-O i.g7, or 5 ... 'iIi'e6+ 6 .Be2liJd4, or here 6 ... liJh6 with the idea ... liJf5; compare the English Opening line 1 c4 e5 2liJc3 f5 3 d4 exd4 4 'ili'xd4liJc6 5 'iVe3+ from Volume 3) 3 ... g6 4 i.g2 i.g7 5 O-O d6 (or 5 ... liJf6 6 d3 O-O 7 e4 d6), when White can't use the e5-square and should play along the lines of a reversed English Opening: 6 e4 e5!? (a common Closed Sicilian and King's In- dian Attack theme; 6 ... e6 and 6 ... liJf6 are con- ventional alternatives) 7 d3 liJge7 8liJc3 0-09 .Be3 exf4 (9 ... liJd4) 10 i.xf4 (10 gxf4 f5!) 1O ... liJd4 with equal prospects. Please forgive me a digression here. This idea of ... d6 to cover e5 comes up with reversed colours in the English Opening version of the Stonewall Dutch if Black is not very careful with his move-order: 1 c4 f5 2liJf3 liJf6 3 g3 e6 4 i.g2 d5 5 O-O c6?! 6 d3 (D).

This is strangely difficult for Black to play against; for example: a) 6 ... .Bd6 7 liJc3 O-O 8 e4! with the idea 8 .. .fxe49 dxe4liJxe4 10 liJxe4 dxe4 11liJg5. b) 6 ... liJbd7 7liJc3 i.e7 8 e4 (8 ~c2 is also good, preparing to play e4) 8 ... fxe4 9 dxe4liJxe4 10 liJxe4 dxe4 11 liJg5! (a trick from the Phili- dor Defence, among other openings) 11...liJc5 (ll....Bxg5 12 'ilVh5+ g6 13 'ili'xg5 with two strong bishops) 12 'ilVh5+ g6 13 'it'h6 .Bf8 14 'it'h4 i.e7 15 .Be3 and .l::i.fdl. c) 6 ... i.e7 7 i.f4 O-O 8 'fiIc2 with the idea 8 ... d4 9 e3 dxe3 10 i.xe3 grants White the su- perior centre and better development. d) 6 ... dxc4? 7 dxc4 'iVxdl 8 .l:Ixdl simply exposes Black's weaknesses. e) Avrukh-Shachar, Tel Aviv 2002 contin- ued 6 ... i.c5 7 'fiIc2liJbd7 8 cxd5 cxd5 (8 ... exd5?

9 d4 and 10 'i!i'xf5) 9 i.f4 O-O 10 liJbd2 with ad-

vantage. White has the plan of liJb3, l:!.ac1 and penetration down the c-file. The point is that the Stonewall structure em- phasizes control of e4, and Black's play flows more freely once White has committed to d4. Let's return to 1 f4 d5 (D):

194 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w 2 ttJf3 Naturally White can set up in numerous ways, such as 2 d3 or 2 e3, but it's probably worth delaying a fianchetto: a) 2 g3 h5 3 ttJf3 h4! is a theme we've seen before, with the idea 4 ttJxh4? J:lxh4! 5 gxh4 e5. Black will have a pawn for the exchange, as well as an attack and an ideal centre after 6 .llg2 'iVxh4+ 7 ~fl 'iVxf4+ 8 ~gl ttJf6. b) 2 b3 .llg4!? is a clever move, reversing White's line 1 d4 f5 2 .llg5 versus the Dutch. Here Black is a tempo down, but the extra move b3 will sometimes hurt White's position. Just for example, the tempting 3 h3?! .llh5 4 g4 e6! threatens ... 'iVh4# (here 4 ... e5 5:th2!? ~h4+ 6 :tf2 is unclear). Play can continue 5 .llg2 (5 ttJf3 .llg6 6 .llb2 c5 7 .llg2 ttJc6 gives Black a greater share of the centre and a good chance of playing ... d4 at some point, cutting off the b2- bishop) 5 ... ~h4+ 6 ~fl.llg6 7 ttJf3 'iVf6!, forc- ing the weakening 8 d4, and thus pointing to a drawback ofb3. We now return to 2 ttJf3 (D):

2  ttJf6 2 ... g6 will be seen in the following game. A couple of alternatives in brief: a) 2 ... ttJc6 parrots the popular line 1 d4 f5 2 ttJc3. This seems an acceptable choice after 3 g3 (naturally 3 d3 and 3 e3 are playable; after 3 b3 .llg4 4 .llb2, 4 ... d4 cuts into White's ambi- tions) 3 ... .llg4 (3 ... g6 4 .llg2 .llg7) 4 .llg2 'iVd7 (4 ... .llxf3 5 .llxf3 e5?! is too hurried after 6 c4! exf4 7 cxd5 ttJe5 8 'iia4+ 'iVd7 9 'iixf4) 5 d3 O-O-O!? 6 O-O!? h5 with dynamic play ahead. b) 2 ... .llg4 contemplates ... .llxf3, especially if that exchange can assist in achieving the move ... e5 with a central superiority: bl) 3 ttJe5 mimics the Trompowsky Attack move 1 d4 ttJf6 2 .llg5 ttJe4, and can lead to in- teresting positions after 3 ... .llh5. Then White should avoid 4 g4? e6 5 h4 f6 in favour of a line such as 4 c4 f6 5 'iVa4+ c6 6 ttJf3. Instead, 3 ... .llf5 and even 3 ... h5!? are reasonable alter- natives. b2) 3 e3 ttJd7 4 h3 (in response to 4 .te2, 4 ... c6 5 O-O .llxf3 6 .llxf3 e5 is one of a wide va- riety of defences; nevertheless, 4 .lle2 holds forth better long-term prospects than 4 h3) 4 ... .llxf3 5 'iVxf3 ttJgf6!? (5 ... e6 and 5 ... c6 are safe and solid alternatives, while the gambit 5 ... e5!? has the idea 6 'iixd5!? 'iVh4+ 7 ~dl O-O-O, when Black has a significant initiative; for example, 8 fxe5 'ile7 9 "iVa5 ~b8 10 ttJc3!? ttJxe5 11 'iVa4 ttJh6 12 d3 ttJf5 with active play, Hanegby-Pijl, IECG email 2001; of course, a pawn is a pawn) 6 g4!? c6 (or 6 ... e6 7 d3 h6) 7 g5 (7 d3 e5 8 g5 ttJg8 has also been played, with mutual chances) 7 ... ttJe4 8 d3 ttJd6 9 e4 dxe4 10 dxe4 e5 11 f5?! (11 ttJc3 h6 is unclear)

11.. .. lle7 12 h4, Jendrian-Boehmer, Internet

2004, and now 12 ... h6! breaks up White's pawn- mass, because 13 .l:!.gl hxg5 14 hxg5 'iVb6! 15 .l:i.g4 :th2 16 c3 O-O-O brings every black piece into play. We now return to the position after 2 ... ttJf6

(D):

3g3 White heads for a Leningrad Dutch set-up, easily the most popular of Black's choices when playing the Dutch. We shall see a reversed Classical Dutch, 3 e3 g6 4 .lle2 .llg7, below. The Stonewall formation with 4 d4 is particu- larly harmless to Black if he hasn't played ... c5 yet, and gives him more options if he hasn't cut

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 195

off his bishop by ... e6. For example, 4 ... i..g7 S .Bd3 0-060-0 i..fS!? (instead, 6 ... b6 with the idea ... .Ba6 is a favourite anti-Stonewall tech- nique; Black is a tempo down on a normal line for White, but should still have decent chances) 7 i..xfS gxfS with complex play. White has a very bad bishop, but Black's own bishop on g7 has few prospects and it's hard to open lines. Sometimes White can play for g4. 3 ... g6 4 i..g2 i..g7 Having strolled through the initial moves, let's tum to a game. The move-order illustrates a couple of new ideas:

H. Danielsen - A. Petrosian Schwerin 1999

1 f4 d5 2lLlf3 g6 3 g3 i..g7 4 i..g2 (D)

4  lLlf6 The following two moves by Black are ones sometimes played by White in the Leningrad Dutch: a) 4 ... lLlh6 with the idea ... lLlfS and some- times ... d4 is a legitimate alternative. In fact, when White plays lLlh3 in the reversed system, one of his problems is that Black will liquidate the centre and play ... eS with a rather dull equality. But in the Bird Opening, White would like to avoid that outcome on principle, and thus may not wish to prepare e4. One way to set up would be S O-OlLlfS 6 d3!? (6 e3 is less ambi- tious and anticipates playing e4 versus ... d4) 6 ... d4 7 c4 with the idea of lLla3-c2, covering e3 and expanding on the queenside by l:.bI and b4. In most cases, Black will play ... as, but has to decide whether to play ... cS and ... lLlc6, or ... lLlc6 alone. Then, in most lines, he will try to break with ... eS. This is a very technical line in which both sides should have fully-fledged play. b) 4 ... c6 can be slightly irritating for White. Play can continue: bI) S O-O 'iVb6+ attacks b2 twice and forces 6 d4, when White has a hole on e4. However, this is a structure which Black often plays in the reversed position, and rather more dou- ble-edged than it might at first seem. b2) White can also play S d3, when S ... 'fUb6 threatens b2 and intends ... lLlh6 followed by ... lLlg4 or ... lLlfS; these positions are playable for both sides. b3) S e3lLlf6 6 d3 O-O 70-0. White has vari- ous modes of development here such as 'fUe2 or lLlc3, usually followed by e4 at some point. With logical play, however, Black should reach equality. 50-0 c5 6 d3 (D)

6. O-O

196 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

6 ... ltJc6 will transpose in most cases, but does make the move 7 ltJc3!? more appealing to White than usual: a) 7 ... O-O permits 8 e4; it's unclear how 8 ... dxe4 9 dxe4 comes out, but White has the better prospects for an edge. White can also play 8 a3, which anticipates the need for b4 and is consistent with the idea that follows. Finally, Bucker's suggestion 8 h3!? is another useful semi-waiting move, in that it assists White slightly in most possible continuations, without hurting him in any obvious way; however, com- pare 7 'ieelltJc6 8 h3 in the note to 7 c3 below. b) 7 ... d4 8ltJa4ltJd7 (contemplating an ex- change sacrifice with ... bS) 9 c4 (9ltJgS 'ViIIc7 10 fS!? is Lars Karlsson's idea, leading to exotic tactical play; this is fun to analyse) 9 ... O-O (D). w We've arrived at what amounts to a King's Indian Defence (the YugoslavlPanno Variation), but with colours reversed and White having the extra move f4! Perhaps not surprisingly, f4 has both good qualities (increased central control) and drawbacks (central weaknesses, potentially exploitable by ... eS). Morozevich-Svidler, Inter- net 1999 continued 10 e4!? (10 a3 with the idea l:tbl, i.d2 and b4 is another thematic approach) 1O ... dxe3 11 i..xe3 ltJd4 12 ~bl llb8 13 b4 ltJxf3+ 14 i.xf3 cxb4 IS J:i.xb4 b6 16 d4, and White may be slightly for preference because of his good centre, but that's not clear. 7 c3 A very flexible move-order; of course, ev- erything is committal in some way, and White does forfeit the possibility of ltJa3 and c4 in one go. He also foregoes 7 ltJc3, a traditional but somewhat less popular move in the reversed Dutch position. Then if Black plays 7 . ..tDC6, White might want to reply 8 h3, as suggested by Stefan Bucker. After the more conventional 7 'iiVel (analo- gous to the main line ... 'iee8 in the Leningrad Dutch), a similarly thought-provoking line is 7 ... ltJc6 8 h3!? (D).

In reversed positions, it's hard to make a use- ful move that doesn't also give Black some- thing in return. In fact, h3 is a move that White will almost always make in conjunction with 'ViIIel, since g4 and ~h4 (or ~g6) can follow and it's useful to prevent ... ltJg4 in many lines. As an exercise in reversed positions, let's see what might follow: a) 8 ... b6 9 ltJa3 (9 g4 looks premature in view of 9 ... hS! 10 gS ltJe8 11 e4ltJc7) 9 ... i.b7 (9 ... i.a6!? 10 g4) 10 e4 dxe4 11 dxe4 is dou- ble-edged. Now ll...eS!? 12 fS!? (12 fxeS? ltJxeS!) 12 ... gxfS (or 12 ... ltJd4 13 ltJh4 ltJhS with the idea 14 c3? ltJxg3!) 13ltJh4 is a stan- dard attacking scheme seen in the Closed Sicil- ian, King's Indian Attack, and various Botvinnik set-ups in the English Opening. For example, 13 ... fxe4?! (13 ... f4 14 gxf4ltJhS) 14 i.gSltJd4? ISl:!dl'Ville7 16l:!.xd4! exd4 17ltJfS and White wins (17 .. .'iVeS 18ltJc4). Still, there's a line in which White's pawn on h3, and new weakness on g3, can be a negative: b) 8 ... ltJd4! 9ltJxd4 (9ltJa3 is playable; for example, 9 ... ltJxf3+ 10 J:i.xf3 b6 11 e4 i.b7 12 eS ltJe8 13 l:!.f2 ~c8 with chances for both sides) 9 ... cxd4 10 'iVf2 (Black in the same posi- tion - without ... h6 - plays ... ~bS here, but White's equivalent 10 'i!Vb4 runs into 1O ... ltJhS!

11 g4 ltJg3 12 .:r.f2 hS, taking advantage of

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 197

White's extra move h3; 10 liJd2 ii.d7! also ex- ploits the extra move h3 by threatening ... 'iVcs, with a double attack on h3 and c2) 10 ... ii.d7 11 liJa3 (11 'ii'xd4 'iVcS!) 1l...'ii'b6. It's hard to imagine that, with .. J:lacS coming, Black has any serious difficulties here. 7 ... liJc68 'iVe1 Now we have precisely the ... 'iVeS Leningrad Dutch with the extra move c3 in. You'll also recognize the alternative SliJa3 (D) from the re- versed position:

This is a position rich in strategic ideas: a) S. .. d4 9 e4! dxe3?! 10 ii.xe3 is good for White because he hasn't yet played 'iVel and left his d3-pawn hanging. b) S. .. b6 has various answers; for example, 9 h3, contemplating kingside action, or 9 'iVel again. 9 'ii'a4?! is thought to be a strong move, yet 9 ... ii.d7 10 e4 bS! 11 'iVc2 (11 liJxbS?! 'iVb6) ll...b4 looks less than ideal for White. One possible continuation is 12 liJbl dxe4 13 dxe4 'iVb6 14liJbd2 bxc3 IS bxc3 c4+ 16 'it>hl and now 16 ... liJg4!? 17 liJxc4 'iVcs with pres- sure or, more surely, 16 ... 'iVa6. c) Danielsen-Lauber, 2nd Bundesliga 200112 continued 8 ... l:tb8 9liJeS!? (9 'iVel bS with the idea ... b4) 9 ... 'ii'c7 (versus 9 ... 'iieS, Vigus sug- gests 10 liJbS!?, although I imagine that Black can play routinely with 1O ... ii.fS, not afraid of 11 liJc7 'iVdS 12 liJa6 l:tcS 13 liJxcs liJxeS 14 fxeS l:txcs IS exf6 ii.xf6) 10 'iVa4!? liJxeS (other ideas are 1O ... liJd7 l1liJxc6 bxc6 12 e4 c4 13 d4 cS and 1O ... l:tdS!, which is useful in the line llliJxc6 bxc6 12 e4 c4!? 13 eSliJd7 14 dxc4liJcS IS 'iVdl ii.fS) 11 fxeS ii.d7 12 'iVh4! (Black has a pawn, two bishops and much better-placed pieces for the exchange after 12 'iVf4liJhS 13 'iVf3 3LxeS 14 ii.h6liJf6 IS ii.xfS .l:!.xf8) 12 ... 'iWxeS 13 e4 dxe4 14 .Bf4 'iYe6 IS ii.xb8 .l:!.xbS 16 'iVf4 .l:.c8 17 dxe4liJg4 18 .Bh3 hS 19 liJc2. The game has been dynamically equal for some time, but here Black needs to protect against liJe3, and blockade the isolated e-pawn, which can be done by 19 ... .ibS 20 J:tfel .ieS 21 'ifgS (and not 21 .Bxg4 hxg4 22 'iYd2?! ii.c6) 2l...ii.f6 with a repetition. d) An online game with 8 ... l:!.eS shows White achieving his model attack: 9 liJh4!? eS!? 10 fS! liJhS 11 e4 (Vigus recommends 11 'iVb3)

11...dxe4? 12 .Bxe4! (now e4 is an outpost and

White is attacking) 12 ... .Bd7? 13 fxg6 hxg6?! 14 ':xf7! 'it>xf7 IS .Bxg6+ 'it>e6 16 3LxhS (or 16 'iVb3+!) 16 ... 'iWf6 17 'ifb3+ 'it>e7 IS ii.e3 b6 19 l:!.n 'iVe6 20 .igS+ 1-0 Danielsen-Relange, In- ternet Chess Club 2004. We now return to 8 'iYel (D):

8 ... d4 If White is a counterattacking Leningrad Dutch player, he will welcome this potential overextension and sharpening of the battle. For his part, Black gains space and cramps White's position. 8 ... b6 is a safe alternative, in that 9 e4 (9 h3 is more flexible) 9 ... dxe4 10 dxe4 .Ba6 11 l:tf2 eS! gives Black active counterplay. Then 12 fS (12 fxeS? liJg4 13 ii.gS 'iVc7) 12 ... liJg4 13 l:td2 'iVe7 14 h3 liJf6 IS g4 h6 doesn't bother Black. But if White doesn't play e4, Black can force simplification by threatening to make the ... eS advance. 9liJa3 As always, White's extra move will serve to give Black himself new possibilities. 9 a4 is

198 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the other reversed system, with the idea ltJa3- c4 and i.d2. If Black plays ... b6 and ... i.a6, White's knight might come to b5. Again, how- ever, the committal moves 'iVei and a4 com- bine to give Black an opportunity that he doesn't get in the reversed position: 9 ... i.e6!, which is a safe enough deployment in any case, hits the newly weakened b3-square; for example, 10 ltJa3 (10 ltJbd2 not only weakens e3, but gets in the way of i.d2, so Black can play any useful move, such as 1O .. :iVc7 or 1O ... l:tb8) 1O ... i.b3 (or 1O .. :iVd7, since the usual II ltJg5 is weak in view of 11...i.b3) 11 ltJc4 i.xc4 12 dxc4 dxc3 13 bxc3 (13 'ii'xc3 ltJg4 and ... ltJd4) 13 .. JIb8 14 e4!? and Black stands well after 14 ... e5 or I4 .. :~d3. We now return to 9ltJa3 (D):

9  k!.b8 Just as in the reversed position, Black doesn't want White's knight sitting on c4, so he re- moves the rook from the long diagonal in antic- ipation of ... b5. 9 ... .i.d7 isn't so ambitious, but is safe and sound, and 9 ... .i.e6 is also equal. Of course, White's main idea in the Bird Opening is to get a complex battle, not necessarily a the- oretical edge. 10 i.d2ltJd5 Black continues as White does in the reversed position; this lets White target his d-pawn. 1O ... i.e6 is a noncommittal and arguably better move; White might even be able to force through M, but he's unlikely to get any advantage from a position in which he controls less territory. llltJc2 11 ltJc4 b5 (or Il...i.e6) 12 ltJce5 ltJxe5 13 ltJxe5 'iid6 gives Black no special problems. 1l  b5 12 cxd4 cxd4 13 'iVf2 'iVb6 (D) w A familiar sight. Although Black had safer options earlier, it's not clear that White's extra tempo means much in this position either. 14ltJh4!? White wants to get the standard f5 attack go- ing, although he takes pressure off d4. 14 'iVd8 15 f5 i.b7 16 g4?! 'iVd6 17ltJf3? Taylor suggests 17 g5; otherwise the move

16 g4 is loosening without being helpful.

17  ltJf4 (D) Eliminating one or the other bishop. Black has the upper hand now. w 18 ltJg5 ltJxg2 19 ltJe4 'iVd7 20 'iVxg2 ltJe5 21 nabl nbc8 22ltJal?! i.d5 23ltJb3 nc2 24 nf2 nfc8 25 i.f4 At this point, 25 ... i.xe4! 26 dxe4 d3 would have been extremely strong. As the game went, Black missed several such opportunities, and the game eventually turned in his opponent's favour.

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 199

Let's return to the Dutch Defence and see what happens if White isn't so eager to play d5 himself. Dreev - Malaniuk USSR Ch, Moscow 1991

[diagram]
A popular set-up; this fianchetto can also be played after c4. 5 . .Bg7 6 .Bb2 O-O 7 O-O (D)

7 ... h6!? With this move, Black anticipates a few pos- sibilities. Directly, he wants to eliminate the combination of d5 and lOg5. He is also plan- ning ... 'ii'e8, when ... g5 and ... ~h5 becomes a possibility; or, if he wants to play .. :iWf7, the move lOg5 won't be available. Finally, h7 can be a handy place to tuck the king away. Of course, the move 7 ... h6 neglects the cen- tre for the moment, which is a little bit risky. In place of it, Black can always play moves such as 7 ... c6 and 7 ... a5, the latter with an eye to- wards gaining space on the queenside. But his most frequent move is 7 ... 'ii'e8, which bears a closer look. Then 8 d5 e5! 9 dxe61Oc6 followed by ... .Bxe6 develops smoothly, with equal pros- pects. And after 81Obd2, 8 ... lOc6 with the idea of an early ... e5 is better than usual, even if it doesn't immediately guarantee Black an even game. Finally, White's normal-looking 8 c4 has various possible answers, including 8 ... lOa6!?, intending ... e5; then 9 d5 c5 keeps a knight from travelling to e6 via d4, and it is apparently premature for White to embark upon 10 lOg5 h6!? 11 lOe6 .Bxe6 12 dxe6, because 12 .. .llb8 with the idea ... lOc7xe6 and .. :iWc8 scoops up the pawn on e6 without apparent punishment. Given all that, White will often allow ... e5, but he needs to avoid a standard attacking theme that everyone should know, since it has appeared in hundreds of games like this one: 7 ... llVe 8 8 c4 lOa6 9 lOc3 e5 10 dxe5 dxe5 11 e4?! f4! 12 gxf41Oh5! (D).

The point. Black's control of f4 is of enor- mous worth, as we see in many lines from a wide variety of openings. The game Barczay- Videki, Kecskemet 1990 continued 13 fxe5 c6 (versus lOd5) 14 .Ba3 lif7 15 'ifc1?! lOf4 16 .Bd6 .Bh3 17 lOg5 (17 .Bxh3 lOxh3+ 18 'it>g2 llVe6) 17 ... .Bxg2 0-1. There might follow 18 lOxf7 'ifxf7 19 e6 ~xe6 20 .Bxf4 .ixfl 21 'it>xfl 'ifh3+ 22 'it>gl .i.xc3.

[diagram]
Developing without getting in the way of the c8-bishop. Another function of this flexible move is to protect c7 against a potentiallOc3- b5/d5 by White. 10 lObd2 White makes it clear that his goal is to play e4. 10 .. c6 Alternatively Black can play 1O ... g5 (D), which is a normal part of his plan, opening a path for his queen to h5 or g6. Skembris-Vlassis, Athens 1989 went much as in our main game: 11 .:tael!? (11 d5 is the obvious alternative, when 1l...'ii'h5 121Od4 f4! 131Oe41Og4 14 h31Oe5 15 g4 'iWg6 isn't clear; given time, Black can continue ... .Bd7 and ... c6) 1l...'ii'g6 (to prevent e4) 12 a3 (this time, 12 d5 with the idea lOd4 might be met by 12 ... lOb4 13

200 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w 'iVb 1 cS 14 a3 lba6 IS e4 fxe4 l6lbxe4 .i.fS 17 lbfd2, which is more pleasant for White to play, but acceptable for Black) l2. .. c6 13 ~hl?! (this looks wrong as it's generally better to have f2 covered; White's idea was probably to meet .. .f4 at some point with gxf4 and occupy the g- file) 13 ... .i.d7. As in many of these positions, an e4 break can be good, but the timing has to be right; otherwise White's light squares can become a little weak in combination with the open f-file. Here, for example, 14 e4 fxe4 IS lbxe4 lbxe4 16 ~xe4 ~xe4 17 ~xe4 1:f7 might follow, with the idea of .. J:!.af8. ll.l:r.ael An interesting way to develop. Often White puts his king's rook on el, but after Black's ... 'WIf7, he won't be able to play e4 without con- siderable pressure on f2 resulting from ... fxe4. With his queen's rook on el, there's really no reason to avoid e4. 1l. . Ji'f7 11 ... gS, with the idea .. :iVhS, is more aggres- sive. Then White should probably be content with the modest edge afforded by 12 a3 or 12 .i.c3, as 12 e4?! lbb4! gives Black enough play; for example, 13 WVc3!? as (13 ... lbxa2?? 14 ~aS) 14 eS! lbxa2 IS 'iVe3lbe4! l6lbxe4 fxe4 17 ~xe4 .i.fS.

12.i.c3

It's still too early for 12 e4, which surrenders interior light squares after l2. .. lbb4 13 'ii'bl fxe4 14 lbxe4lbxe4 IS 'iVxe4 .i.fS 16 "WIxe7lbd3. ... g513 e4! (D) ... fxe4 13 ... f4 is a thematic response to e4. Then Black threatens ... g4 and intends to sink the knight into f4 following 14 gxf4 lbhS!. In this

case, however, White is far enough ahead in de- velopment to counterattack effectively by 14 eS! lbe8! (14 ... lbhS is answered by IS exd6 exd6 l6lbe4!, with the idea l6 ... .i.fS 17 g4! or 16 ... 'iVg6 17 dS!) IS 'iVdl!, intending IS ... g4 (what else?) 16 lbh4 f3 17 lbdxf3! gxf3 18 .i.xf3 .i.h3 19 .i.hS 'iVe6 20 dS! (20 exd6 'iVxd6 21 .i.g4 .i.xg4 22 'iVxg4 is also promising) 20 ... cxdS 21 cxdS 'iVc8 22 ~e3! with the idea 22 ... .i.xfl? 23 .i.g4 and Black's position col- lapses. There's a point at which space, centre, development and activity win out, even if it takes a piece sacrifice to prove it. 14lbxe4 .i.d7 14 ... lbxe4 IS 'ilixe4 .i.fS 16 'iVxe7 .i.d3 17 'WIxd6 .i.xfl 18 ~xfl gives White the bishop- pair and superior centre. 15lbxf6+ exf616 d5! (D)

This is basically what White has been look- ing for. He fixes the weakness on e6 and takes command of more of the board. Right away, lbd4-e6 is threatened.

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 201

16 .. eS 17 .l:!.e6! You'll see this sacrifice for light squares arise in numerous queen's pawn openings. Here it at- tacks d6 and gives White a much superior posi- tion. 17 .. ttJe7!? Black decides not to open up a diagonal for White's bishop on g2. After 17 ... ~xe6 18 dxe6, his light-square weaknesses are almost impos- sible to deal with: 18 ... 'iie7 (18 .. :iVxe6? 19 ttJxg5 attacks h7 and prepares .Bd5) 19 WVf5! ttJc7 20 ttJd2 .l:!.fe8 21 .l:!.el and Black's position is passive and depressing. 18 .l:!.xd6 'fie7 19 ':'xd7 ~xd7 In return for granting White a valuable passed pawn, Black has some room to manoeuvre and hopes to bring his knight to d6 in a blockading role.

20.l:!.dl

Good, but still better is 20 WV g6! 'fif7 21 'iYd3 with the idea 21... ttJe8? 22 b4! b6 23 bxc5 bxc5

24 d6 .l:!.d8 25 ttJxg5!, etc.

20  .l:!.ad8 20 ... ttJe8 is worth a shot, to blockade the passed pawn. Still, White controls too many squares after 21 .l:!.e 1 ttJd6 22Ite6 ':'ae8 23 iLh3 f5 24 .l:!.g6 .l:!.e7 25 .Be5!. 21 b4! b6 22 bxeS bxeS 23 d6!? ttJe8 (D)

24 'fig6?! 24 .Ba5! will win: 24 ... .l:!.c8 25 'fig6 ttJxd6?! (but 25 ... 'fia4 is also insufficient following 26 l:td3! 'iYxa5 27 .Bh3! and there's no good de- fence in spite of being a rook ahead) 26 ttJxg5! fxg5 27 .l:!.xd6 'fie8 28 'fid3 with too many available squares and threats. 24  .'~h8? Black can fight on by 24 .. :iVf7!, when 25 ttJe5! 'iYxg6 26 ttJxg6 Itf7 27 .Bd5 ttJxd6 (or 27 .. .lhd6 28 .l:!.el!) 28 ttJe7+ ~f8 29 ttJc6l:i.c8 30 .Bxf7 1:txc6 31 .Bd5 'u'a6 32 l:i.el favours White. Now it's over. 25 ttJxgS! fxgS 25 ... hxg5 loses to 26 'iVh5+ ~g8 27 i.d5+ 1:1f7 28 iLa5!. 26 'fixh6+ ~g8 27 ~dS+ lU7 28 'fixgS ~f8 29 .Bxf7 <J;xf7 30 .Bxg7 ttJxg7 31 'fixeS White has five passed pawns for the piece!

31.. ttJe8 32 'iihS+ ~f8 33 'fih8+ ~f7 34

'iYhS+ ~f8 35 eS 'fie6 36 Itd4 :d7 37 'iWh8+ ~f7 38 'fih7+ ~f8 39 l:If4+ 1-0 Classical Dutch The Leningrad may be the most popular inter- pretation of the Dutch, but it's not the only one, as we'll see in this game: De Boer - A. Rotstein Wijk aan Zee 1993

[diagram]
0-060-0 d6 7 ttJe3 (D)

The formation with ... e6, ... d6 and ... i.e7 is called the Classical Variation, or the Ilyin- Zhenevsky Variation. It gives Black a rather cramped but solid position. White's obvious plan is to break with e4 (or sometimes d5), and Black's response is first and foremost to re- strict the effectiveness of that advance. Then he can prepare ... e5 and/or tum his attention to a kingside attack. When we get to the reversed versions in the next game, we'll see that the

202 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Classical lines are just as subject to the para- doxes of time and information as any other. 7. JWe8 Bringing the queen to h5 is the standard ma- noeuvre in the Classical Dutch. Black has a number of other moves; for example, 7 ... tZ:\e4 and 7 ... c6. Of these, the modem 7 ... a5 is the most flexible. It has the idea of meeting 8 b3 tZ:\a6 9 i.a3 with 9 ... tZ:\b4!. The entertaining game Barlay-Canney, Colorado Springs 2003 went 7 ... a5 8 ~c2 (8 l:tel with the idea 8 ... tZ:\e4 9 ~c2 is more direct) 8 ... tZ:\c6!? 9 ~dl (White wants to prevent ... e5; there's nothing wrong with this move, of course, but White has to be careful about drifting away from the kingside; he can prevent ... tZ:\b4 by 9 a3, when 9 ... e5?! 10 d5 tZ:\b8 11 tZ:\g5! exploits Black's weakness on e6; for example, ll...c6 12 tZ:\e6 i.xe6 13 dxe6 e4 14 f3 d5 15 cxd5 cxd5 16 fxe4 fxe4 17 i.e3 and ~adl) 9 .. :iVe8 10 a3 e5 11 dxe5!? (11 d5) 1l...tZ:\xe5 12 tZ:\xe5 dxe5 13 tZ:\b5?! (tempting fate) 13 ... ~h5!? 14 tZ:\xc7 .i.c5! (D). w A rook sacrifice in the spirit of the opening; this type of attack is fairly common. The game continued 15 b4? (15 tZ:\xa8! f4 16 e3! tZ:\g4! 17 h3 tZ:\xf2! 18 Rxf2 fxe3++ 19 '>t>el i.xh3, and White has to walk a tightrope to draw; for ex- ample, 20 ~e4! .i.xg2 21 'ilYxg2 e2 22 ~d5+! 'it>h8 23 .i.f4! exdl 'ilY+ 24 .uxdl ~ha8 25 ~xc5 ~hl + 26 'it>e2 'iVh5+ with a perpetual) 15 ... axb4 16 tZ:\xa8 f4! 17 axb4 (or: 17 gxf4 tZ:\g4; 17 ~d3 e4! 18 i.xe4 i.xf2+ 19 Rxf2 ~xh2+ 20 .i.g2 fxg3+; 17 e3 tZ:\g4 18 h3 tZ:\xf2! 19 '>t>xf2 fxe3++ 20 'it>el .i.xh3 and Black will win; compare 15 tZ:\xa8) 17 ... tZ:\g4! 18 bxc5 (18 h3 .i.xf2+ 19 'it>hl fxg3 is no better) 18 ... ~xh2+ 19 'it>f1 tZ:\e3+! 20 i.xe3 fxe3 21 l:td8 ':xd8 22 'iVe4 i.h3 23 fxe3 i.xg2+ 0-1. A great attack with themes that Black uses in a variety of Dutch Defence positions. 8b3 The main variation for nearly a century has been 8l:tel (D).

Out of the many, many possibilities, I'll give a quick overview of which lines might be the most important and/or capable of improve- ment: a) 8 ... tZ:\e4 has a fair reputation, but I think 9 tZ:\xe4 fxe4 10 tZ:\d2 d5 11 f3 should give White the nod; for example, 1l...i.f6 (ll...e3 12 tZ:\bl i.b4 13 l:tf1 dxc4 14 'iVc2 is miserable for Black after both 14 ... b5 15 a4 and 14 .. :~'b5 15 .i.xe3) 12 fxe4 .i.xd4+ 13 e3 i.b6 14 exd5 exd5 15 cxd5! with the idea tZ:\c4. b) 8 ... ~h5 9 e4 fxe4 10 tZ:\xe4 tZ:\xe4 11 l:.xe4 tZ:\c6 12 .i.f4 .i.f6 13 ~d2 'it>h8 14l:tael is already clearly better for White, who has the dual ideas of d5 and c5, Keres-Simagin, Mos- cow 1951. c) 8 ... ~g6 9 e4 (this thematic break doesn't lose a pawn due to a tactical trick on move 11; the rare 9 'ilYb3!? has a good record in practice and is worth a look; one idea behind it is that 9 ... tZ:\e4 10 tZ:\xe4 fxe4 11 tZ:\d2 makes it impos- sible for Black to hold on to his material with- out large concessions, whereas normal moves such as 9 ... c6 and 9 ... tZ:\c6 are well met by 10 d5) 9 .. .fxe4 10 tZ:\xe4 tZ:\xe4 11 l:txe4 tZ:\c6 (11...'iixe4?! 12 tZ:\h4 traps the queen, and while 12 ... 'iixh4 13 gxh4 i.xh4 14 i.e3 is materially balanced, White's position is clearly better; al- ternatively, the gambit 11 ... e5 !? 12l:te I tZ:\c6 13

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 203

dxeS iLg4 used to be popular, but for one thing I think that White can improve upon 14 'ilVb3 ~f7 IS iLf4 iLxf3 16 iLxf3 with 16 ~xf3!, based upon l6. .. dxeS 17 'iVe2!) 12 'iVe2!? (12 l:tel iLf6 13 iLe3 eS has been extensively tested; then 14 dxeS dxeS is approximately equal) 12 ... iLf6 (D).

White has tried various ways to pursue an advantage here: c1) The normal line 13 iLd2 eS! 14 dxeS lZ'lxeS IS lZ'lxeS iLxeS 16 iLc3 iLxc3 17 bxc3 iLd7 is only equal. c2) 13dSexdS14cxdSlbeSlSlbd4maybe better than its reputation. After Is ... iLg4 16 f3 iLfS 17 lZ'lxfS 'iVxfS, Aagaard correctly sug- gests 18 g4!. He recommends instead IS .. J':te8 16 lZ'le6 iLxe6 17 dxe6 cS for Black, but the simple reply 18 iLe3 keeps White on top; for example, 18 ... lZ'lc6 19 l:tdl lbd4?! (19 ... .l:tad8 20 l:tg4 'iVfS 21 iLdS) 20 iLxd4 iLxd4 21 e7!. c3) After 13 iLf4 dS!? (ceding the eS point, but winning White's d-pawn) 14 cxdS exdS IS l:te3, White keeps modest pressure on Black's position; for example: c31) After Is ... iLxd4 16 lZ'lxd4 lZ'lxd4 17 ~d2 cS, 18 nc1?! iLg4led to an equal position in Iliushin-N.Pert, World Under-18 Ch, Oropesa del Mar 1998, but White could have secured a clear advantage with 18 iLeS! lbfS 19 .l:tc3! iLe6 20 l:txcS. c32) IS ... lZ'lxd4 16 lbxd4 iLxd4 17 iLxdS+ ~h8 18 iLe4!? 'iVf7! 19 l:td3 cS?! (19 ... iLb6) 20 iLe3! iLxe3 21 l:txe3 iLh3?! (2l...iLg4 22 ~c2 with an edge) 22l:tel 'iVd7 23 'iYhS leads to a comfortable advantage for White, Pomar- SJohannessen, Varna Olympiad 1962. Black will have to do his own research into this main variation with 8 l:.el. For the mo- ment, the variations seem to favour White. 8 ... 'ilVh5 (D)

9 i.a3! One of White's oldest ideas; he exploits the unprotected state of the bishop on e7. A com- mon alternative is 9 ~c2 lbc6 10 ii.b2. A typi- cal piece deployment took place in Koniush- kov-Vager, St Petersburg 1995: 1O ... i.d7 11 J:.adl .i:i.ae8 12 a3 i.d8 13 b4 (now is a good time for 13 dS) 13 ... eS! 14 dxeS lZ'lxeS IS lZ'lxeS dxeS (D).

Here the game ended peaceably following 16 lbdS iLc8 17 e3 lbg4 18 h3 lbh6 19 f4 (stop- ping ... f4 once and for all!) 19 ... c6 20 lZ'lc3 i.f6 liz-liz. Black's idea was to answer 16 i.xb7 with 16 ... lbg4 17 h4 i.xh4!, Which seems to be justi- fied after 18 ~g2! iLxg3! 19 l:thl 'ilVg6. Then, since 20 fxg3?? loses the queen to 20 ... lbe3+, White is in turn forced to play 20 l:txd7 lZ'lxf2!

204 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

21 ~f1! ttJxhl 22 .ixhl, when 22 ... J:td8 se- cures an unclear but ongoing attack. However, White can tum the tables with his own ex- change sacrifice 16 .l:txd7!? ttJxd7 17 .Bxb7, which wins the bishop-pair, cuts into Black's attack, and affords White a significant posi- tional advantage. The only problem is that 17 ... e4 prevents his bishop from returning to the kingside for defence, so the situation isn't entirely clear. 9 .. .l:U7?! (D) This makes sense, protecting e7, but it blocks the queen's retreat from hS. 9 ... aS looks better, with the idea 10 dS ttJe4, but not 1O ... eS? 11 ttJxeS!. w 10 e3 Rather slow. 10 ttJel!, with the idea of e4 or ttJd3-f4, would be a tempo up on Larsen- W.Schmidt in the Bird Opening game below. White should be better; for example, 1O ... ttJc6 11 ttJd3! eS! (ll...ttJxd412 ttJf4 ~h6 13.Bc1!) 12 dxeS dxeS 13 .Bxe7 lIxe7 14 ttJdS (or 14 ~d2) 14 .. .l::td7 IS ttJxf6+ gxf6 16 e3! with a significant positional superiority. 10. ttJbd711 ttJel ~h612 ttJd3 c613 d5!? White tries to create something in the centre without delay. Allowing ... eS doesn't appear as good; for example, 13 'iVd2 eS 14 dxeS dxeS IS .Bxe7lIxe7 16l:!.adl e4 17 ttJf4 ttJeS 18 'iVd6 .l:.e819h4(versus ... gS) 19 ... ttJf720~c7ttJg4 with the idea ... gS and sometimes ... ttJgeS- f3+. 13 cxd5 14 cxd5 e5 IS ttJb5 g5 Black pursues the attack. It's also reasonable to play IS ... a6, and then 16 ttJc7 .i:tb8 or 16 ttJxd6 ttJg4 17 h3 .i.xd6 18 .i.xd6 ttJxe3! 19 fxe3 'iVxd6 20 e4 ttJf6, which is balanced, since 21 exfS e4! may even favour Black.

16 J:tc1 e4 17 ttJb2 ttJe5 18 ttJc4 (D)

The position resembles a King's Indian De- fence. 18 ttJfg4!? Black can simplify the position to good ef- fect by 18 ... ttJxc4 19l:lxc4 .Bd7 20 ttJc7 l:lc8.

19 h3 f4?!

A bold and thematic stroke; unfortunately, White's attack in the centre is at least the equal of his opponent's on the kingside. 20 ttJcxd6 ttJf3+?? Black miscalculates. He can hang in there, albeit from an inferior position, by 20 ... .Bxd6 21 ttJxd6 (or 21 .l:.xc8+ J:txc8 22 ttJxd6) 21...f3 22 ttJxf7 ~xf7 23 .Bb2 .ifS!?

21.i.xf3 (D)

21...exf3

Probably Black had counted upon 21 .. :iVxh3 22 .Bxg4 .Bxg4, but then noticed 22 1:hc8+!.

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 205

22 l:t.xc8+ l:t.xc8 23 hxg4 fxg3 24 fxg3 'ii'h3 25l:t.xf3l:t.c2 (D) One last try. 26 ~xc2l:t.xf3 27 'iic8+ <t;g7 28 .ltb2+ <t;h6 29 ~f5+ l:t.xf5 30 ~xf5 'iixg3+ 31 <t;n ~h3+ 32 <t;e2 ~g2+ 33 ~f2 'iixg4+ 34 ~f3 'ii'g135 ~d4 g4 36 ~f2 ~bl 37 ~f5+ <t;h5 38 'ii'h2+ 1-0 Mate follows: 38 ... <t;g5 39 ~h6+ 'iii'xf5 40 ~h5+ .ltg5 41 ~xh7#. In terms of structural issues and its variety of positional and attacking themes, the game above, with its notes, is one of the best in this volume. Try giving it a careful study. Now let's take a look at the reversed Classi- cal/Ilyin-Zhenevsky Variation as played by White in the Bird Opening. As usual, the chal- lenge for White is to make use of his extra move without allowing Black opportunities beyond those already present in the position. That proves to be difficult. T. Taylor - Martinez Los Angeles 2002

1 f4 d5 2 ~f3 g6 3 e3 .ltg7 4 .lte2 c5 5 O-O

~f6 6 d3 O-O 7 ~el ~c6 (D) This is the main line of the Classical Dutch with colours reversed. 8c3 A flexible move that covers d4, so as to play e4 without a piece landing on that square. The text-move also prepares queenside expansion by l:t.bl and b4. But it's almost unnecessary to say by now that Black can get counterplay by

homing in on the drawbacks of White's extra move. The Dutch Defence move 8 'iVh4 was well met in Larsen-W.Schmidt, Arhus 1971: 8 ... b6 9 ~bd2 i.a6! 10 l:tf2?! (compare our last game with colours reversed; the extra move ~bd2 isn't helping matters) 1O ... ~e8! 11 c3 e5 (a good move, and 11...~d6 is also strong, threat- ening 12 ... ~f5 13 'iih3 .ltc8!, as we saw above; then 12 e4 dxe4 13 dxe4 .ltxe2 14 lhe2 e5! 15 'iYxd8 l:!.axd8 clearly favours Black) 12 'iixd8 (12 'iig3 e4! emphasizes the problems with d3, since 13 dxe4 i.xe2 14 .l:Ixe2 dxe4 15 ~xe4?? loses to 15 .. :~d3) 12 ... l'i.xd8 13 fxe5 ~xe5 14 ~xe5 iLxe5 and Black has a clear positional advantage. 8 ... b6 9 ~bd2 (D) White keeps his queen close to the centre. After 9 'Yi'h4, 9 ... .lta6! exploits the fact that White's d-pawn is pinned and the d3-square is weak, so achieving e4 will be difficult.

[diagram]
206 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black stands well here, and the knight's at- tack on e3 succeeds in disturbing White. But he can also play in straightforward fashion; for ex- ample, Taylor suggests 9 ... fic7 with the idea 10 e4? 'iWxf4 11 exd5 tiJxd5 12 tiJe4 "ilc7 13 "ilh4 'iVd7 or 13 ... f5. The natural response 10 'Yi'h4 ~a6! 11 J:tbl is a common device on the queen- side, intending b4-b5, but apart from ll...e5, 1l...~ad8 is effective, with the idea 12 b4?! cxb4 13 cxb4 tiJe4!, and then 14 b5? tiJc3 or 14 tiJxe4 dxe4 15 tiJg5 h6 16 tiJxe4 ~xd3. 10 tiJb3 ~b711 e4 (D)

1l. .. c4 Breaking up the centre. 11.. .d4 commits Black to playing ... tiJe3 in certain lines, but that's a common and effective move in the Dutch and King's Indian Defence, among other openings. For example, 12 c4?! (12 h3 dxc3 13 bxc3 tiJf6 has the idea ... c4; White also gets no- where in the line 12 tiJg5 h6 13 tiJxf7 !:!'xf7 14 ..txg4 dxc3 15 bxc3 'iWxd3) 12 ... a5 13 a4 tiJb4 14 ~h4 tiJe3!. 12 exd5 cxd3 13 dxc6 dxe2 14 ~xe2 .i.xc6 15 tiJfd4 .i.d716 f5! (D) Here's this key theme again: White frees his cl-bishop, attacks the knight and begins a king- side attack. 16  tiJf617 .ltg5 .l:.e818 ~ael 'iilc719 i.f4! ~b7 20 ~e5 :ad8 21 nf3 i.c6?! Perhaps 21...a6 should be played, asking White what he's doing. 22:h3 Taylor suggests simply 22 tiJxc6! 'iWxc6 23 tiJd4. 22. ~d5 23 ~e3 i.c6? 24 tiJxc6 ~xc6 25 tiJd4 "ilb7 26 .l:i.g3! Itd7

26. .. tiJh5?? 27 "ilxh5! gxh5 28 .l:!.xg7+ ~f8

29 tiJe6+ fxe6 30 fxe6 spells doom for Black. 27 'iVc2 tiJh5? 28 fxg6! (D) A nice finish that is a logical consequence of White's build-up. 28  tiJxg3 There's nothing to do: 28 ... hxg6 29 ~xg6! fxg6 30 'iWxg6 Itf8 loses to 31 tiJe6!. 29 gxf7+ ~xf7 30 'iWxh7 lIg8 31 hxg3 Or 31 l::!.fl+! tiJxfl 32 "ilh5+ 'iSi>f8 33 tiJe6#. 31  e6 32 i.xg7l:txg7 33 :f1+ 1-0 There follows 33 ... ~e8 34 ~h8+ ~e7 35 'iWf8#. This nice game illustrates White's at- tacking potential, but again, the opening analy- sis demonstrates that White's extra move c3 fails to deliver any advantage. The Bird Opening can also become a re- versed Nimzo-Indian Defence. I would be re- miss not to show you the following attacking theme, variants of which have won many games against masters and even grandmasters.

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 207

Hergert - Coenen berg Pont 1986

[diagram]
Obviously Black doesn't have to allow this pin. 4 . lbf65 O-O e6 6lbe5 "ilc7 7 b3 i.e7 8 i.b2

(D)

This is a case of White playing a reversed Nimzo-IndianiQueen's Indian complex, one in which his extra tempo is extremely valuable and has no serious downside. The correspond- ing reversed position would arise via 1 d4 lbf6

[diagram]
i.b7 7 i.e2 O-O 8 O-O i.xc3 9 bxc3 f5. To be fair, White won't usually play that way, and in our Bird Opening equivalent, a strong player will seldom be so cooperative as Black. As you know by now, he has plenty of other ways to react to White's opening, from the first few moves onward. 8  0-09 i.xc6 bxc6 10 l:tf3 Very 'Nimzo-like' would be 10 d3 i.a6? 11 c4! J:tad8 12 'ilVe2, intending lbc3-a4, i.a3 and l:tacl if necessary. Of course, the rook-lift tar- gets the king, a piece of more consequence than Black's c-pawns! 10  lbd7 1ll:th3 g6? This is played to prevent 12'ilVh5. However, the only correct move is 11...f6!; for example, 12lbxd7 (12 "iVh5 fxe5 13 "ilxh7+ ~f7 14 fxe5 i.a6 isn't so clear) 12 ... i.xd7 13 "ilh5 h6 14 l:tg3 ~h8 15lbc3 and White retains an edge be- cause of the pawn-structure, but this should be within acceptable bounds for Black. 12 "ilh5! (D)

Anyway! This queen sacrifice arises in mid- dlegames that can come from various openings, so it's good to know the associated tactics. 12 lbf6 12 ... gxh5 gets mated after 13l:i.g3+ ~h8 14 lbxf7#. After 12 ... lbf6, Black appears to be de- fending, but another surprise awaits: 13lbg4!! This attractive queen sacrifice threatens 14 lbxf6+ i.xf6 15 'iYh7#. 13 . gxh5 13 ... lbxh5? 14lbh6#! 14lbxf6+ ~g7 (D) 14 ... i.xf6 15J:i.g3+ i..g7 16 !:txg7+ ~h8 17 .l:!.xf7+ d4 18 .l:!.xc7 nabs a piece, with more to come. The win takes a bit longer after 14 ... ~h8 15 .l:i.xh5. That threatens 16 nxh7#, and Black has to settle for 15 ... ~g7 16lbxd5+ f6 (16 ... ~g6 17 lbxc7) 17 lbxc7 .l:tb8 and, for example, 18 lbc3 i.d8 19 lbe4 i.xc7 20 J:i.g5+ ~f7 21 i.xf6, with three extra pawns.

15 lbe8++! ~g6

208 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Or 15 ... ~h6 16 iLg7+ ~g6 17 :tg3+ ~f5 18 t'iJxc7. 16l:tg3+ ~f5 17 t'iJg7+ 'it'e418 d3# (1-0) Try it on your friends! Stonewall Dutch Finally, let's get a feel for the Stonewall Dutch, without any pretence of being thorough. This venerable opening produced some classic bat- ties in the olden days, with Black trying to rip apart White's kingside. Today, we usually see it with a modem interpretation. Gligoric - Tukmakov Palma de Mallorca (GMA) 1989

[diagram]
Black's move-order doesn't reveal which sys- tem he is heading for, which makes the follow- ing note significant. 4 t'iJf3 White commits to playing the main line against either the Classical or Stonewall, ac- cording to Black's preference. As in other Dutch variations, this knight can also go to h3 by, for example, 4 c4 dS 5 t'iJh3 c6 6 O-O iLd6 7 ii.f4

7 ... ii.e7!? (a shrewd idea: Black wants to show that White's knight has no good square other than f4, which is now occupied by his bishop; retreating loses time, but Black will gain it back if White moves his bishop again, and sometimes Black can play an effective ... gS) 8 t'iJc3 (obviously not the only move; upon 8 t'iJd2, Johnsen and Bern like 8 ... 'iVb6! with a double attack on d4 and b2; then 9 cxdS cxdS 10 t'iJb3 can be met by their suggestion 1O ... iLd7 11 :tel t'iJa6 intending ... iLa4 or ... iLbS, or 1O ... a5) 8 ... O-O 9 'ClVd3! t'iJa6 10 a3 t'iJc7 11 :tael. Black stands solidly, but White has more positive prospects. Actually, if Black wants to playa Stonewall Variation after 4 c4, he can avoid such prob- lems with the clever move 4 ... c6. This is de- signed to prevent t'iJh3, since Black preserves the idea of booting the knight with ... d6 and ... eS; for example, 5 t'iJh3 iLe7 6 O-O O-O and now 7 t'iJf4 d6, or 7 t'iJd2 d6 intending an early ...eS. Instead, S t'iJf3 dS reverts to a normal Stonewall. 4 ... d5 5 O-O iLd6 This active move has largely overtaken the older S ... iLe7 in popUlarity, so we'll focus on it. S ... iLe7 is still viable, however, and might even have some surprise value. 6c4c6(D) w This is the starting position of the modem Stonewall Dutch. It has a rather anti-positional look to it, because Black's bishop on c8 is al- ready very bad (even if he achieved ... eS, the pawn on fS would be in its way). White also has the wonderful eS outpost available to his pieces. In view of this, it's not easy to explain why the Stonewall Dutch is a respectable de- fence at all, but let's tackle the issue of that bishop on c8 first. Kramnik, who has played the Stonewall, defends the honour of that piece with the simple statement that it is no worse than White's bishop on g2! By this he means that White's fianchettoed bishop has virtually no scope as it runs into the 'stone wall' of

i-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 209

Black's pawns, which guard both e4 and d5 twice. In addition, White can hardly suppress the development of the c8-bishop forever. In nonnal practice, it will often come to b7 (or a6) after ... b6 or to h5 after ... .ltd7-e8. The activa- tion of this piece corresponds to what I think should be a chess mini-rule: that the earlier one assumes weaknesses or bad pieces, the more likely they are to be manageable problems, or not problems at all. As for that outpost on e5, it is indeed a nega- tive feature of Black's position. But in modern chess we can often accept a central weakness in return for other factors. For example, in the Sveshnikov Sicilian (and other variations of the Sicilian going back to the Boleslavsky), Black accepts a weakness on d5: 1 e4 c5 2ltJf3 ltJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4ltJxd4ltJf6 5 ltJc3 e5 6ltJdb5 d6 7 .ltg5 a6 8 ltJa3 b5 9 .ltxf6 gxf6 10 ltJd5

From this point, ignoring the details (which will be familiar to many players), White can in most cases only reinforce his outpost on d5 by moving his a3-knight to e3 via c2, completing an elaborate journey of six moves with that one piece. Black will usually put his good bishop on e6, from where it helps to contest the outpost. Returning to the diagram of the Dutch Stone- wall after 6 ... c6, we find that in practice, White will have to make a similarly arduous trip with his queen's knight if he wishes to reinforce e5; for example, by ltJa3-c2-el-d3. Black's bishop on d6 is analogous to his bishop on e6 in the Si- cilian. Furthennore, in the Sveshnikov, Black's bad bishop will go to g7 and he will work around the outpost on d5 by playing .. .f5. In the Stonewall, Black very often plays ... .ltb7 and ... c5. Well, it would be stretching things to claim too much for the analogy, because other factors in these positions obviously differ. But the Sicilian and Dutch Defences (whose first moves are mirror images of one another) share the principle that you can live with one signifi- cant enemy outpost in your midst. Finally, returning to the virtues of the Stone- wall Dutch, a black knight on e4 can be very powerful. True, that square isn't an outpost, as is White's e5, but White finds it difficult to ex- pel the intruder. If he plays, for example, ltJel and f3, then the pawn on f3 renders White's king's bishop particularly unimpressive, and a subsequent e4 has to be very carefully planned, because the d4-square can prove particularly vulnerable to ... c5 and ... e5 attacks. 7b3 White pursues his best-known strategy: to exchange Black's good bishop on d6 by means of .lta3 and thus strengthen his control of e5. He can also fortify that square by means of i..b2. Let me show two instructive battles be- ginning with 7 "iVc2 (the queen protects c4 from capture and potentially works along the c-file) 7 ... O-O (D), and now:

a) 8 .ltf4 pursues a similar policy of ex- changing off Black's good bishop: 8 ... .ltxf4 9 gxf4 (at first, the doubled pawns appear to as- sist in controlling key squares) 9 ... ltJe4 10 ltJbd2ltJd7 11 e3 (White's central pawns are on the colour opposite his remaining bishop, but again, that 'good' bishop hasn't much influ- ence) 1l..."iVe7 12 ':!'fcl (l2ltJe5ltJxe5 13 dxe5 ltJxd2 14 "iVxd2 .ltd7 is fine for Black, who can

210 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

combine ... .i.e8-h5 with the strategy that fol- lows) 12 ... ~h8! (this is the standard plan after ... .i.xf4: Black wants to prise open the g-file by ... .l:.g8 and ... g5) 13 lLlfl .l:.g8 14 lLle5 g5 15 cxd5 exd5 16 f3 lLld6 (both sides have awful bishops) 17 ~f2 g4!? (Black should be holding the balance after 17 ... gxf4 18 exf4 lLlf8 with ideas of ... lLlg6 or ... lLle6, with ... 'iVh4 when possible) 18 fxg4 fxg4 19lLlg3lLlf6 20 f5 .i.d7

21 XIfl lLlf7 lh-1f2 Portisch-Short, Reykjavik

1987. b) 8 lLlc3lLle4 911bl! (White intends b4-b5; this is his best plan in several Stonewall posi- tions) 9 ... ~e7 (9 ... a5 10 a3 'iVe7 11 c5 .i.c7 and now 12 .i.f4 has favoured White, who follows simply with b4-b5, while 12 b4 is also logical; 9 ... lLld7 with the idea 10 b4 lLlxc3 11 ~xc3 b5!? looks interesting) 10 b4 (or 10 c5 .i.c7 11 b4 with an edge) 1O ... .Bd7?! (Black initiates his ... .i.e8-h5 kingside plan, but most likely some- thing slower like 1O ... a6 is sounder) 11 c5 .i.c7

w Black's attack on the kings ide is lagging be- hind White's on the other wing. Kastanieda- Ulybin, Russia Cup, Krasnoiarsk 1998 contin- ued 12 .i.f4?! (simply 12 a4! and b5100ks cor- rect, and seems to give White the better of it; perhaps he feared ... lLlxc3 and ... f4 at some point, but Black lacks the forces to make that effective) 12 ... .i.xf4 13 gxf4 .i.e8 14 l;Ib3!? (14lLle5.i.h5 15 f3lLlxc3 16 ~xc3 is unclear; both bishops are mediocre, and Black's attack is no longer a threat to White) 14 ... ~h8 15 a4 a6 16 llfbl lLld7 17 b5 axb5 18 axb5 .i.h5 19 bxc6 bxc6 20 XIb7?! (White has finally man- aged to break through, but Black is ready as well; Schipkov suggests 20 lLlel, when 20 ... g5!? is messy) 20 ... .i.xf3! 21 .i.xf3 g5! 22 e3? (22 .i.xe4 with the idea 22 ... fxe4 23 f5! grants some counterplay on account of 23 ... exf5 24 lLlxd5 cxd5 25 c6 or 23 ... .l:.xf5 24 l;Ic7!, although then 24 ... g4! threatens ... .l:.h5 followed by ... 'iVh4) 22 ... gxf4 23 exf4 l;Ig8+ 24 ~hl 'iVg7! (sud- denly White can't defend) 25 l;Iel l;Ia3! 26 lLlxe4 fxe4 27 .i.xe4 dxe4 28 'iVxe4 0-1. White is already a piece down, and 28 ... l;Ih3 threatens 29 ... l;Ixh2+! 30 ~h2 'iVh6#. w 7 .. 'iVe7 (D) Black develops and stops ... .i.a3. 8a4 White insists upon trading bishops, but this comes at the cost of a queenside hole on b4. Naturally, 8 .i.b2 is also played, sometimes with the idea of'iVel and .i.a3. Then a strange- looking but important main line goes 8 ... O-O 9 "ficl b5 !? Black's idea is to respond to 10 i.a3 with 1O ... b4, and to 10 lLle5 with 1O ... a5. 8 lLle5 is a critical attempt to upset the bal- ance in the Modem Stonewall. 8 ... O-O 9 .i.b2 (D) and now: a) After the normal-looking 9 ... b6, White gets to demonstrate his main idea: 10 cxd5, when after the natural 1O ... cxd5?! 11 lLlc4! White finally gets to use the g2-bishop that Kramnik insulted! This tactic eliminates Black's dark-squared bishop while leaving White's on the board; after ll...lLlc6 12 lLlxd6 'iixd6 13 .i.a3lLlb4, an effective sequence is Johnsen and Bern's 14lLlc3! a5 15.i.el! .i.a6 16 .i.f4, when White has a useful bishop-pair and good queen- side play. Therefore Black has to make a struc- tural concession by 10 ... exd5, although this may

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 211

not be too great a problem. After 11 'iYc2, Johnsen and Bern suggest 11...~e6 with the idea ... I;!c8 and perhaps ... ~xe5, rather than the immediate 11...~xe5?! 12 dxe5 tDe4 13 ~a3 c5 14 f3 tDg5 15 tDc3 with excellent cen- tral pressure and a substantial advantage to White. b) Instead of all this, Moskalenko prefers not to weaken Black's queenside and has played 9 ... tDbd7 10 tDd2 a5 on several occasions. His idea is some combination of ... a4 and ... tDe4, worrying about his queen's bishop later. It seems a workable remedy. 8 ... a5 Black duly proceeds to fix the weakness on b4. Johnsen and Bern designate 8 ... O-O as '?!', and in the game Kasparov-Short, Rapid match (game 1), London 1987, after 9 ~a3 ~xa3 10 tDxa3, they also disapprove of 1O ... tDbd7. How- ever, it's not clear where they think White should have improved following 11 a5 b6 ('! =' according to Schipkov) 12 'iVd2 tDe4 13 'iVb2 ~b7 (Schipkov gives 13 ... ~a6 "with pressure"; this looks fine) 14 b4?! (14 e3 is better, al- though Black stands nicely after 14 ... bxa5 15 tDc2 dxc4 16 bxc4 ~a6) 14 ... bxa5 15 bxa5 1:tab8 16 lIfbl, and here 16 ... ~a6! would fa- vour Black. So 8 ... O-O appears to be a legitimate alternative. 9 ~a3 ~xa3 10 tDxa3 O-O 11 tDc2 (D) A basic position. Now Black tries to get his problem bishop into play. His queen's knight has b4 in its sights. 11 ... b6 12 tDcel This is a standard idea, to put both knights in touch with the superb outpost on e5. Neverthe- less, Black stands very solidly, and apart from a

knight on b4, one on e4 will be hard to drive away without concessions. 12 ... ~b7 13 tDd3 tDa6 14 'iVcl We're in one of the main lines of the Stone- wall, and 14 ncl, 14 e3, 14 tDfe5 and 14 tDf4 have all been tried. The first three are well an- swered by 14 ... c5, and the last by 14 ... tDb4.

14. .. c5! 15 'iVb2 tDe4!? 16 tDfe5 :fd8

16 ... cxd4 with ... tDac5 to follow is a satisfac- tory alternative. The play around this point of the game is balanced.

17 e3 !tac8 18 :fdl tDb4 19 tDf4 dxc4 20

bxc4 lld6 21 f3 tDf6 22 !td2 .l:Icd8 23 .l::!.adl tDd7 24 h4? Allowing an unfavourable simplification. 24 tDfd3 tDxd3 25 tDxd3 was roughly equal. 24 ... tDxe5 25 dxe5 l:txd2 26l::txd2 :txd2 27 'iVxd2 .i.c6! (D) The a-pawn can't be defended.

28 e4 ~xa4 29 exf5 'iVd7!? 30 'iVel 'iVdl! 31

'iVxdl ~xdl 32 fxe6 a4 33 tDd5 a3 34 e7 <l;f7 35 ~h3 tDxd5 36 cxd5 a2 37 d6 al'iV 0-1

212 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

King's Indian Attack The King's Indian Attack is a simple system in- volving the moves ltJf3, g3, .ltg2, O-O and d3, which can be played against nearly any set-up by Black. In most cases, the moves ltJbd2 and e4 follow, and in fact some lower-rated players will make those moves without thinking. Lovers of chess and readers of Volume 2 un- derstand that the King's Indian Defence is one of the most popular and exciting of Black's defences. And yet the King's Indian Attack, which reverses the King's Indian and even gains an extra move for White, is rarely played by grandmasters, international masters, or na- tional masters, and its use is discouraged for most students by their teachers. That seems sur- prising at first, but by now you can probably guess what's going on: almost any logical de- fence by Black equalizes, all the more so ones that don't try for an advantage, and it's hard to find lines where White poses real problems to his opponent. That's not what White wishes for in the opening. Again, the standard characteristics of re- versed openings apply. First, Black is able to adjust to the new information that White gives him with his extra move, especially because the King's Indian Defence is mainly a reactive and counterattacking opening. It's worth noting in that regard that the defining moves of the King's Indian Attack (listed above) give White little direct control of the centre, nor even pieces with much scope; suddenly it's not so surpris- ing that strong players aren't interested in it! Incidentally, another such opening is the classical Colle system, which begins with the moves d4, ltJf3, e3, c3, ltJbd2, .ltd3/e2 and O-O in some order. It's practically unknown in mod- em grandmaster play. With reversed colours, assuming that the game begins 1 d4 d5, those moves make up the Semi-Slav, which is proba- bly Black's most popular and dynamic response to 1 d4 in today's chess, and is used by many of the world's elite! The same reasons apply: ver- sus the Semi-Slav, White has to play aggres- sively and allow sharp positions if he wants to claim any advantage. Against the Colle, by contrast, Black can equalize in any number of ways; after all, by move 7, White has managed to put only one pawn on the 4th rank and has given himself a bad bishop on c 1 which already can't move! Returning to the King's Indian Attack, we find that, much as with the BirdlDutch duo, Black needn't even play modestly to secure eqUality. Remarkably, he can use most of the formations that are main lines when White uses them with colours reversed, even though those are aggressive and committal. Let's look at some games and see how that can be. Larsen - Ljubojevic Bugojno 1978 1 ltJf3 d5 2 g3 c5 3 .ltg2 ltJc6 4 O-O e5 Black is cooperating by setting up a big cen- tre and daring White to use the attacking meth- ods employed in the King's Indian Defence. You can argue that if this doesn't favour White, no other logical defensive set-up by Black will. In reply, White might say that the King's Indian Attack, like the Bird Opening, is not designed to produce an advantage, but only a game with chances for both sides.

[diagram]
Black has a particular idea in mind that de- pends upon him not having the standard move ... ltJf6 in. In the next game, Black plays 5 ... ltJf6 and makes similar adjustments a few moves later.

6 e4 d4 (D)

w 7 a4 This secures a spot for White's knight on c4, as we often saw in the King's Indian chapter of Volume 2. If White wants to avoid what happens

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 213

next, he could speed things up by 7 ttJa3. Then 8 ttJbd2 (D) 7 ... i.e6 (7 ... gS!? 8 ttJc4 f6 is a playable set-up) 8 ttJc4 'fic7 9 a4 compares well with the game, although Black is not objectively worse, and apart from the conventionaI9 ... ttJf6 might even B pursue the idea of 9 ... hS !? For example, 10 h4 ttJh6 (l0 ... ttJf6? 11 ttJfxeS! ttJxeS 12 ttJxeS with the idea of trapping the queen and winning the piece back after 12 ... 'fixeS 13 i.f4 i.g4 14 i.xeS i.xdl IS l:taxdl) 11 ttJgS i.xgS (or the similar 11 ... i.xc4 12 dxc4 i.xgS 13 hxgS ttJg8) 12 hxgS (12 i.xgS !? f6 13 i.d2 ttJf7 is dynami- cally balanced) 12 ... ttJg8, planning some com- bination of ... h4 and ... ttJge7-g6. This appears to yield at least equal chances.

[diagram]
This unusual flank thrust is a possibility af- forded by the fact that Black hasn't played ... tZ:lf6. Whether this equalizes or not (and it seems to do so handily), he is playing upon White's extra tempo to create new chances for himself. In fact, this is the case in more ways than one: compare the analogous situation in the King's Indian Defence following 1 d4 ttJf6

2 c4 g6 3 ttJc3 i.g7 4 e4 d6 S i.e2 O-O 6 g4,

when Black's traditional recipe is 6 ... cS, to strengthen the effect of his bishop on the long diagonal after 7 dS (D).

For example, 7 ... e6 and ... exdS can follow, with Benoni-like themes. The move ... cS would make little sense if ... eS were already in; for one thing, Black's knights wouldn't have access to cS, as White's do (to c4, that is) in the main game. Thus White's extra move e4 in our main game, while obviously good in some respects, becomes a mixed blessing.

8. .. i.e6

Not bad, but a direct attack appears more promising, and provides justification for 7 ... gS: 8 ... hS 9 ttJc4 f6. Now 10 h4!? is an attempt to halt Black's advance. There can follow 1O ... g4!? 11 ttJel i.e6 12 f4! gxf3 13 i.xf3 iLf7 14 \\Ve2 \\Vc7 with a dynamic balance. Another approach is 1O ... i.g4 11 \\Vd2!? \\Vd7 12 hxgS iLxf3 13 i.xf3 fxgS 14 ~e2 g4 IS i.g2 O-O-O 16 f4!? gxf3 17 ~xf3 ~b8 18 \\VfS \\Vc7!? 19 'fie6, which apparently leave.s White with a posi- tional edge, but he may not be able to do any- thing with it after 19 ... h4 20 gxh4 (20 l:IfS!?) 20 ... i.xh4 21 J::tf7 ttJge7. There's a lot to think about in these varia- tions. 9 ttJc4 f610 h4 h611 ttJh2! (D)

A trick directly out of the King's Indian playbook. 11 ... gxh4?!

214 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

ll...hS 12 .Bf3!? (12 lbf3 .Bg4) and now 12 ... .Bf7 looks all right for Black. Instead, White seems to gain a small and rather unstable edge from the lengthy line 12 ... g4 13 .Be2 fS!? 14 exfS .Bxc4 IS dxc4 e4 16 l:tel 'iVd7 17 .in 'iVxfS 18 .Bg2 lbf6 19 .igS O-O-O 20 .Bxf6 'iVxf6 21 .Bxe4. 12 'iVhS+ 'ii?d7 13 'itkxh4 fS Ljubojevic gives 13 ... hS!? 14lbf3lbh6, pre- sumably counting upon IS .Bxh6! .l:Ixh6 16 SLh3!? fS!? 17lbfxeS+ lbxeS 18lbxeS+ 'ii?c7 19 'iVf4 .igS to hold. Then 20 lbf7+ .Bxf4 21 lbxd8 ':'xd8 22 exfS .Bd7 23 gxf4 :f8 24.l:Iael yields something for White, perhaps not enough to win with. 14 'ii'h5?! 14 'iUh3! fxe4 IS lbg4! 'ii?c7 16 'iVhS is far from obvious, but seems to favour White. 14  lbf6 IS 'itke2 fxe4 16 dxe4?! White should accept the slightly worse posi- tion after 16 .Bxe4 lbxe4 17 'ii'xe4 SLxc4 18 dxc4 'iVg8! 19 b3 'ii'h7. ... 'ii'g8 17 b3 hS! Black has the initiative now. I won't go into the messy details, but he won in nice fashion: 18 f4.i.xc4 19 'iYxc4 'iUxc4?! 19 ... ~xg3! wins quickly; nevertheless, Black has a large advantage and goes on to convert it after some inaccuracies: 20 bxc4 nag8 21 fxeSlbxeS 22 SLf4 .i.d6 23 .l:Iabl 'ii?c7 24lbf3? lbxf3+ 2S !!xf3lbxe4 26 .l:i.tb3 b6 27 SLxd6+ lbxd6 28 .Bd5 l:i.gS! 29 .l:i.el J:Ih7 30 'ii?g2 l:thg7 31 'ii?h2 lbfS 32 as lbe3 33 axb6+ axb6 34 l:i.al lbxd5 35 cxd5 'it>d6 36 lhb6+ 'ii?xdS 37 :a3 h4 38 gxh4 .:tg2+ 39 ~h3 J:Igl 0-1 Piket - Timman Dutch Ch, Amsterdam 1996 Ilbf3 dS 2 g3 c5 3 .i.g2 lbc6 4 d3 eS If Black plays 4 ... e6 here, the game may en- ter into a variety of French Defence positions after S O-O; for example, S. .. lbf6 6lbbd2 .i.e7 7 e4 O-O, which is now regarded as fully equal for Black, or S. .. .td6 6 lbbd2lbge7 7 e4 O-O, which is another respected variation. For more equalizers against the King's Indian Attack, see Morozevich-Krarnnik, the last game in this se- quence. S O-O lbf6 (D) In the previous game, Black played S. .. i.e7 here. Incidentally, I've messed with the actual move-order of the game before us, which was 1 lbf3 cS 2 g3lbc6 3 .tg2lbf6 4 O-O eS S d3 dS. As you might imagine, there are other ways to reach the position; for example, beginning with

1 g3 or 1 lbf3 lbf6.

w 6lba3 This is the mirror image of ... lba6, which is Black's second most popular move in the main- line King's Indian Defence. After 6 e4 .Be7 the traditional main line would arise following 7 lbc3 d4 8 lbe2, with Black a move behind. As might be expected, he doesn't have to walk into the standard King's Indian pawn-storm, partic- ularly as he has not yet castled. You might want to play around with these positions, as well as with 7 exdS lbxdS 8 l:tel f6, to see how they compare with the reversed ones. 6 .... i.e7 7 e4 d4 8lbc4 'iYc7 9 a4 i.e6!? (D) We've arrived at a reversed King's Indian position; in the regular King's Indian line, White would already have castled by this point. In this actual position, Black can seek to benefit from not having castled, for reasons that be- come clear in a moment. 10 lbel Or: a) 10 lbfd2 hS! takes advantage of the delay in ... O-O: 11 f4 h4 12 fS (12lba3 hxg3 13 hxg3 exf4 14 gxf4 lbg4) 12 ... .Bxc4 (12 ... .Bd7!?) 13 lbxc4 hxg3 14 hxg3 O-O-O. In spite of his excel- lent knight on c4, White has no way to open lines safely and can become saddled with a ter- rible light-squared bishop, whereas Black has kingside prospects; for example, IS g4?! (1S

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 215

iLd2 ~dg8 16 g4 ttJh7 17 'iVcl {versus ... iLg5} 17 ... g6 18 fxg6 ~xg6 19 ~xf7 ~xg4) 15 ... ttJh7 16 iLd2 .tg5, and White is left with a miserable bishop and no promising plan of action. b) Black can also castle queenside if White plays 10 ttJg5; for example, 1O ... .txc4 11 dxc4 h6 12 ttJh3!? (12 ttJf3 ttJh7) 12 ... O-O-O, intend- ing 13 'iVe2 'it>b8 14 f4 h5!. 10 ... ttJd7 The normal move. Here's the point at which White can be faulted for following the main moves of the reversed variation too faithfully. Black can change the entire dynamic by 1O ... h5!

This primitive move is largely based upon discouraging White's standard attack with f4, followed by ttJf3 and/or f5 and g4. Some possi- bilities: a) 11 f4 h4 12 f5 .txc4 13 dxc4 hxg3 14 hxg3 O-O-O 15 ttJd3 ~dg8, with the idea ... g6, launches a kingside attack. Note how bad the white bishop on g2 is. b) 11 .tg5 and now ll...ttJd7 or ll...ttJg4 either exchanges White's good bishop or, upon its retreat, enables Black to pursue his kingside attack. c) 11 ttJf3 ttJd7 12 ttJg5 .txg5 13 .txg5 f6 14 .td2 h4 with good chances on the kingside. d) 11 h4 is reasonable, but now if White plays the thematic f4, he loses the g4-square. Black could even castle kingside here, but it's consistent with the pawn-structure to expand on the queenside; for example, 11...b6 12 .td2 .nb8 13 f4 (13 c3?! O-O! 14 ~cl.nfd8) 13 ... .txc4 14 dxc4 exf4 15 gxf4 (15 .txf4 iLd6 16 ttJd3 O-O followed by ... .:tfe8 and ... ttJg4 takes con- trol of e5 and leaves White with a backward pawn) 15 ... ttJg4 16 ttJf3 O-O 17 ttJg5 .l:Ibd8!, threatening ... d3. It's remarkable how being a move behind the reversed position opens up this whole set of new ideas for Black.

11 f4 f6?!

This is a positionally suspect move. Piket suggests 11...ttJb6, an unambitious attempt to simplify, after which there might follow 12 ttJa3!? (White doesn't seem to get anything special from 12 ttJxb6 axb6 13 ttJf3, 12 ttJd2 exf4 13 a5 ttJd7 14 gxf4 f6 or 12 b3 ttJxc4 13 bxc4 exf4 14 gxf4 O-O) 12 ... O-O 13 f5 .td7 14 b3. 12 .th3! (D)

You should remember this manoeuvre. By ridding himself of his only ineffective piece, White secures the better game. 12 ... .txh3 Black would like to retain his share of influ- ence over the light squares, but 12 ... .tf7 13

216 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

~g4! develops and attacks g7: 13 ... g6? (but 13 ... iLf8 14 lLlf3 favours White) 14 'iVxd7+! 'iVxd7 IS iLxd7+ ~xd7 16 fxeS iLxc4 17 exf6, etc., winning a pawn. 13 'iVhS+ g6 14 'iVxh3 lLlb6 IS fxeS fxeS IS ... lLlxeS? fails to 16lLlxeS: 16 ... ~xeS 17 iLf4 or 16. .. fxeS 17 'iiVe6!. 16~e6 16 lLlxb6! axb6 17 'ie6 is more accurate, with the idea 17 ... lLld8 18 ~b3 or 17 ... 'iiVd7 18 'iVb3 O-O-O 19 iLh6!, preventing ... hS. 16  lLlxc4 17 "iNxc4 After 17 dxc4!? lLld8 18 'iiVdS "iNd6 19 lLld3 ~xdS 20 cxdS White's better bishop and lead in development guarantee him some advantage.

17 . O-O-O (D)

w 18 iLh6 Piket suggests 18 lLlf3 h6 19 ~e6+ ~b8 20 ~xg6, although White is still subject to attack after 20. .. hS. 18  Jtdg8 19 1:tf7 lLld8 20 J::tg7 J::txg7 21 iLxg7 l:.e8 22 lLlf3 iLd6 23 iLh6 "iNf7 24 lLld2 'iVxc4 2S lLlxc4 ~d7 261:1.0 lLle6 27 h4 Now every white piece stands better than its black counterpart, although his advantage is difficult to convert into victory. He went on to do so after some inaccuracies. Nisipeanu - Volokitin European Ch, Silivri 2003 In this game we'll see another major varia- tion of the King's Indian Defence, the Classical Fianchetto, played with colours reversed. The players get there by means of a Sicilian De- fence:

[diagram]
lLlf6 It's worth noting that Black can play reliable, time-tested, systems with ... eS and ... lLlge7 or ... e6 and ... lLlge7. 60-0 dS 7lLlbd2 O-O (D) w Again, Black has made no attempt to tone down his central commitment. The King's In- dian Attack move-order would be something like 1 lLlf3 dS 2 g3 cS 3 iLg2lLlf6 4 O-O g6 S d3 iLg7 6 lLlbd2 O-O 7 e4 lLlc6; of course you can get to the same position in a number of ways by slightly reordering the moves. 8c3 In Radev-Pribyl, Tbilisi 1971, White did without c3 by 8 exdSlLlxdS 9lLlc4 eS!? (thumb- ing his nose at White's extra tempo, Black plays the move that makes his whole position most vulnerable!) 10 .l:tel l:te8 11 a4!?, and here Gufeld suggests l1...lLldb4('!'), a trick which comes from the white side of a standard King's Indian Defence line. Then White can't evict Black's knight by c3 because his pawn on d3 would be lost. Nevertheless, White can target Black's weakness on d6 and the vulnerability of his c-pawn by 12lLlgS! fS! 13 iLe3 h6 14lLlh3. Then Black should respond by 14 ... lLld4 IS iLxd4 cxd4, and if 16 'iiVd2lLlc6 17 b4, he has 17 ... as! with dynamic counterplay. 8 ... eS!? A daring move which exposes Black's centre to serious danger. He could also tum to the other standard technique in reversed positions, that is, picking a slow line which doesn't pre- tend to do more than equalize. In this position, one such line is 8 ... dxe4 9 dxe4 "fIIc7, with the

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 217

idea of simplification; for example, 10 nel .I;Id8 11 'irVe2 ttJg4! (D).

The fight for e5 defines the game: 12 ttJc4 b6!? (or 12 ... :tb8) 13 .i.f4 ttJge5 14 ttJfxe5 ttJxe5 15 ttJe3?! (Petursson gives 15 .i.xe5 .i.xe5

16 f4 .i.g7 17 e5 nb8 with equality, intending

... .i.a6) l5 ... e6 16 .i.g5 nd7! 17 f4 h6! 18.i.h4 ttJd319nedi and now 19 ... .i.a6?! 20c4! ttJe5!, with the idea of 21 fxe5 g5, was unclear in Vogt-Petursson, San Bernardino 1990. Instead, 19 ... c4! looks better, nailing down the knight on d3 and relying upon active pieces; for example,

20 e5 nb8 21 ttJg4 'irVc5+ 22 'it>f1 .i.b7! 23 ttJf6+

.i.xf6 24 .i.xf6 b5 and ... b4 followed by pene- tration on the b-file. White's king is exposed to various attacking ideas, so he doesn't have time to undertake anything on the kingside. 9 exd5 ttJxd5l0 nel h6 (D)

Now White is a full tempo ahead of the re- versed position from the g3 King's Indian De- fence. Since that variation has produced many exciting wins for Black, it's surprising that White would have any problem drumming up an advantage. But he does. It'irVa4 Or: a) The natural 11 ttJc4 .l:r.e8 12 a4 can be safely met by 12 ... ttJb6, with a solid game, and 12 ... .i.f5 13 a5 .l:f.b8 is also fine. b) 11 ~b3 is a tougher test: ll...ttJc7! (Nisi- peanu's suggestion; 11 ... ttJde7 is the most com- mon defence in this kind of position, but here 12 ttJc4! harasses Black's e-pawn, after which 12 .. :~c7 13 .i.e3 renders the c5-pawn impossi- ble to protect) 12 ttJc4 ne8 13 ttJfd2 .l:.e6! (not 13 .. .'iVxd3? 14 ttJe4! b6 15 .l:.dl ~e2 16 ttJed6; the alternative 13 ... ttJe6 14 ttJe4 ~e7 is play- able but a little awkward) 14 ttJe4 b6 15 l:tdl (15 .i.e3 .i.a6 16 l:tadl1!Ve7) 15 ... .i.b7 16 .i.h3 and Nisipeanu suggests 16 ... .i.c8!? 17 .i.xe6 .i.xe6 as a playable exchange sacrifice, which is true, although White needn't accept so quickly. He rejects 16 ... f5 due to 17 ttJed6, but then 17 ... .i.a6! 18 a4 ttJa5! 19 ttJxa5 'iVxd6 20 ttJc4 ~d7 leaves Black safe and in command of more territory. It . JlVe7!?

11.. .. i.e6 ! (D) is the most direct way to

equalize:

Black wants to play this anyway in order to develop and centralize while fortifying his po- sition. Those familiar with King's Indian De- fence theory will recognize this exact position as yet another in which White is playing the role of Black with an extra move. But White has the usual issue that if he plays the equalizing moves available to Black in the King's Indian

218 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Defence, he can't expect more than a level game. And the tactical possibilities appear in- sufficient to produce an advantage; for exam- ple: a) 12 'iVa3lLlde7! 13 'ii'xcS 'ii'xd3. b) 12 'iVbS lLlc7! can be followed by 13 'ii'xcS 'iixd3 or 13 'ii'xb7 i.dS!. c) After 12 lLlb3, which is the main move with reversed colours, Nisipeanu gives 12 ... lLlb6 13 'ibS (13 'ii'h4 'ii'xh4 14lLlxh4lLla4) 13 ... c4 14 lLlcs a6, which is good for Black after the forced IS lLlxe6 axbS 16 lLlxd8 l:tfxd8. Why does this work? In the King's Indian Defence position, White has played the extra move 'ic2, which is the equivalent of ... 'iVc7 in this line. So, after 14 lLlcs a6 IS lLlxe6, IS ... axbS?? would lose 16lLlxc7. The extra move hurts! We should remember that White's position is a King's Indian Defence that is designed to give Black ways to react to White's advances, not necessarily to force the pace. The recurring exchange of a pawn on d3 for a pawn on cS is an example of how Black can go for equality in a way that White wouldn't want to with colours reversed. 12 'ii'c4! i.e6! 13 'ii'xc5 :fd8 Black has a well-centralized position and pressure on d3, which seems enough for a pawn. 14 'ii'a3 (D)

14.. b5 Nisipeanu suggests 14 ... aS!, when White's queen is running out of room, so there may fol- low IS 'ilVa4 lLlb6 16 ~h4 gS (16 ... lLle7!?) 17 'ilke4 (17 'ii'hS?! 'ilVc8!) 17 ... a4 18 a3 "V/fje7 with the idea ... lLld7-cS. 15lLle4 i.f8 16lLlc5 i.f5 17 d4 17 lLlh4 as! 18 lLlxfS gxfS leaves White's knight stranded. 17  exd4 18lLlxd4 'ilkb6 19 b4lLldxb4! 20 cxb4lLlxd4 21 i.b2! 21 i.xa8? lLlc2 is virtually winning for Black.

21.  l:tac8 22 l:.ac1 a5?!

22 ... i.g7! is correct. 23 'ilke3! i.g7? Wrong timing. He can't play 23 ... lLlc2? in view of 24 lhc2 with the idea 24 ... i.xc2? 2S 'ic3, but 23 ... axb4 24 i.xd4 l:txd4 2S 'ii'xd4 i.xcs gives Black some compensation. 24 bxa5 'ixa5 24 ... 'ilkb8 2S a6 isn't much better. At this point White is simply winning. 25 lLlb7 'ii'xa2 26 l:txc8 i.xc8 27 lLlxd8 'ii'xb2 28 i.d5 ~h7 29 i.xf7 'ii'b4 30 l:tc1 i.d7 31lLle6 i.xe6 32 i.xe6 'ii'd6 33 i.a2 'ii'd7 34 'ii'e4 b4 35 l:tdl 'ia4 36 l:txd4! i.xd4 37 i.bl "V/fjdl + 38 ~g2 i..g7 39 'ilkxg6+ ~g8 40 'ii'e6+ ~f8 41 i..g6 1-0 Morozevich - Kramnik World Blitz, Moscow 2007 IlLlf3 d5 We've had fun playing reversed main lines for Black against the King's Indian Attack, and Black came out fine in spite of the apparent risk of being so committal. It's important to realize, however, that the slower the system that Black plays, the more easily he equalizes, which is why the KIA can be so unrewarding for White. Let me describe some standard options, with- out detailed analysis: a) l. .. cS is an extremely popular move; for example, 2 g3 (2 e4 is a Sicilian Defence; 2 c4 is a Symmetrical English) 2 ... lLlc6 3 i.g2 g6 4 O-O (4 d4 cxd4 S lLlxd4 i.g7 forces the d4- knight to move and affords White little chance for advantage) 4 ... i.g7 S d3 (D). Now Black can safely play S. .. e6 or S. .. lLlf6

6 e4 d6, both set-ups with good track records.

A slightly more ambitious move is S. .. eS (or S. .. d6 6 e4 eS), since 6 e4 (6 c4lLlge7 7lLlc3 O-O is a standard line of the Symmetrical English, which is equal; see Volume 3) 6 ... lLlge7 is not only equal, but easy to play. One frequently- played sequence is 7 lLlbd2 O-O 8 c3 d6 9 a4 (9 a3 is more sophisticated, but both 9 ... l:i.b8 10 b4 bS and 9 ... h6 10 b4 a6 are fine) 9 ... h6 10 lLlc4

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 219

i.e6 with smooth development for Black, who has ideas such as ... ~d7 and the possible pawn advances ... f5 or ... g5, or simply ... ~c7 fol- lowed by ... d5. b) l...ttJf6 2 g3 g6 3 i.g2 i.g7 4 O-O O-O 5 d3 c5 (5 ... d6 is still more flexible, if not neces- sary; then 6 c4 e5 is a 'reversed KIA'!) 6 e4 ttJc6 7 ttJc3 (after 7 c3, 7 ... d5 is fine, but 7 ... d6 can be effective if White tries to enforce d4; for example, 8 :tel h69 d4?! cxd4 10 cxd4 i.g4) 7 ... d6. This is a rather harmless type of Closed Sicilian. For White to create problems for his opponent, he would ideally have his pawn on f4 in front of his knight, or his king's knight on e2. All of these lines are equal, of course, but the latter set-ups force Black to play accurately.

2 g3 (D)

2... c6

This is the move we saw in the Reti Slav chapter. 2 ... ttJf6 3 i.g2 i.f5 is another popular set-up: 4 O-O (4 c4 can lead to some independ- ent lines, including 4 ... dxc4 5 ttJa3 i.e6!?) 4 ... e6 5 d3 h6 (not strictly necessary, but it will probably be played later anyway) 6 ttJbd2 i.e7 7 'iWel (again the most popular move, to en- force e4; I should mention that 7 b3 O-O 8 i.b2 is also played, when White will normally fol- low with c4 rather than e4; then the game can transpose into the Reti Opening) 7 ... O-O 8 e4 i.h7 9 'iVe2 (or 9 e5 ttJfd7 10 'iYe2 c5) 9 ... c5 10 e5 00 ttJe5 ttJbd7 II ttJxd7 'iVxd7 is harmless) 10 ... ttJfd7 11 .l:lel ttJc6 (D).

This position has occurred numerous times. Black's h7-bishop defends the kingside and will gain extra influence if ... c4 follows, whereas White's best strategy isn't clear. Stepak-Chand- ler, London 1985 continued 12 ttJn ~h8!? 02 ... b5 13 h4 ~b6 14 ttJlh2 c4 15 l:!.dl cxd3 16 cxd3l:!.fc8 gave Black a nice queenside ini- tiative in S.Kravtsov-Y.Geller, Samara 2003)

13 h4 l:!.c8 14 h5 f6! 15 exf6 i.xf6 16 'iYxe6

ttJb4 17 :te2 c4! and Black stood better, since 18 dxc4 ttJc5! 19 'iVg4 ttJxc2 20 l:!.bl dxc4! would leave him totally in charge. 3 i.g2 i.g4 An extremely popular line among grand- masters. Unlike the extravagant variations in which Black exposes to attack a large centre with pawns on c5, d5 and e5, this deployment has simple ideas relating to a smaller centre. 3 ... ttJf6 4 O-O i.f5 5 d3 e6 is a traditional de- fensive set-up - a reversed London System; it has an excellent reputation. As White plays moves such as ttJbd2, ~el and e4, Black fol- lows up with ... h6, ... i.e7, ... i.h7 and ... ttJbd7. At this point, White's standard manoeuvre 6 ttJh4 .i.g4 7 h3 i.h5 8 g4 doesn't accomplish much because of 8 ... ttJfd7!, hitting h4. Instead,

220 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the retreat 6 lbfd2!?, an idea from the London System versus the King's Indian Defence, de- serves notice, if only to mix things up. Then 6 ... h67 e4 i.h7 8lbc3 produces an unbalanced game. w 4 d3lbd7 (D) Slbbd2 Or: a) 5 O-O is the natural move. Then Black has played a variety of plans; for example, 5 ... e6 (covering h4 and thus preventing the bishop from being exchanged following 6 h3 i.h5 7 g4 i.g6 8 lbh4) , followed by development with ... i.d6 and either ... lbe7 or ... lbgf6. Also possi- ble is 5 ... e5 6 c4 dxc4 7 dxc4 i.c5 8 lbc3lbgf6 with equality. b) 5 h3 i.h5 (or 5 ... i.xf3 6 i.xf3 e6; when White has spent a tempo on h3, the exchange on f3 becomes more attractive) 6 g4 i.g6 7 lbh4 e6 (7 ... e5!?) 8 lbxg6 hxg6, and Black's h-file and smooth development balance out White's bishop-pair. S. . lbgf6 Naturally, 5 ... e5 and 5 ... e6 come into consid- eration, to prevent the following manoeuvre by White. 6h3 i.hS With 6 ... i.xf3 7 lbxf3 e5, Black gives White the bishop-pair in return for setting up an ideal centre and developing quickly. This has gener- ally been satisfactory for him; for example, 8 O-O i.c5 (8 ... i.d6 lets White's knight into f5 with tempo after 9lbh4 O-O 10 lbf5, which is slightly awkward) 9 c3!? (9 lbh4 O-O 10 e4 "fie7 lllbf5 'ilVe6 is about equal) 9 ... O-O 10 b4 Jtb6 11 a4 a6 12 lbd2 l:.e8 with a balanced position, Petran-Westerinen, Cappelle la Grande 1988.

7 g4 i.g6 8lbh4 (D)

8 ... e6 There's nothing wrong with 8 ... e5. White has a wide choice, but he doesn't command enough space to expect any advantage; for example, 9 c4 (9 lbxg6 hxg6 10 e3 i.d6 11 ~e2 ~e7 12 c4, Fuller-Greenfeld, London 1984; then heading queenside by 12 ... dxc4 13lbxc4 O-O-O is a good course for Black) 9 ... i.c5 (or 9 ... d4) 10 lbxg6 hxg611 e3?! (11 O-O) 11...O-O?! (l1...d4!) 120-0 d4!? 13 exd4 i.xd4 14 lbf3 i.b6, lBradford- Ki.Georgiev, Catalan Bay 2007. ge3 Naturally, White has other moves, but he wants to avoid the positional difficulties which follow 9 e4?!, when his g2-bishop can end up locked in. A simple response is 9 ... ~c7 101We2 Jtd6 11 g5?! lbh5.

9. .. i.d610 ~e2 "fic711 0-00-0-012 f4 h6!

Black concedes doubled pawns; his idea is to play ... i.h7 and then ... e5 or ... g5. 13 lbxg6 fxg6 (D) 14lbf3

14 c4 g5! 15 d4 gxf4 16 c5lbxc5!? 17 dxc5

~xc5 18lbb3 i.b6 is totally unclear; Black has three pawns and an attack for the piece, but White can loosen up Black's king's protection by 19 a4 a5 20 lbd4 (20 'ith1 ~e5) 20 ... ~he8 21 b4!? e5 22 bxa5 i.a7 with a disorderly posi- tion. 14 ... eS Islbh4 exf4 16 exf4l::t.he8?! 16 ... i.c5+! 17 'ith1l::t.he8 is a more accurate continuation. 17 "fif2 i.cs 18 d4 i.b6 19 b4?!

i-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 221

w Effectively wasting a move. 19 ttJxg6 ttJe4 20 iLxe4 l:txe4 21 c3! is better. 19 ... ttJe4 20 iLxe4 l:txe4 21 c3 l:tde8 22 ttJxg6 cS!? This breaks into White's position, although 22 ... l:te2 23 'it'f3 l:tc2 is a safer route to advan- tage. 23 bxcS ttJxcS 24 'ii'f3 ttJa4 2S iLd2 ttJxc3! 26 iLxc3?! l:te3 27 'ii'xdSl:txc3 28l:Iaell:td8 Black gets his pawn back and opens lines against White's vulnerable king. 29 'ii'fS+?! 29 'ii'g2 iLxd4+ 30 'iith1 iLf6! with the ideas of ... l:tc2 and in some cases ... IIdd3. 29 ... 'iitb8 30 'iith2 iLxd4 30 ... l:tc2+! 31 'iith1 'it'c3 32 ~e5+ 'iita8 33 'it'e3 'ii'b2 34 'ii'g3 'ii'xd4 is virtually winning for Black. 31 l:te2 a6 32 l:tfel 'iita7 33 ~e4 iLb6 34 ttJeS? But White has a terrible game anyway. 34 ... l:td4 3S ~fS gS 36 fxgS l:tdd3 37 'iitg2 l:tg3+ 38 'iitfl l:tgl # (0-1) Reversing Double e-Pawn Openings In this section, I'll present some examples of 1 e4 e5 variations in which either White or Black plays a known position in reverse (a tempo up or a tempo down, respectively). Let's start with a pairing oftwo openings that are out of to day's mainstream: the Vienna Game and the Ponziani Opening. We'll see how the most modest of ex- tra tempi impacts the resulting positions. Ljubojevic - Ciocaltea Skopje Olympiad 1972

1 e4 eS 2 ttJc3 ttJf6 3 f4 dS!

This is the standard reply, held in high regard for well over 100 years. 4 fxeS ttJxe4 S ttJf3 (D)

s. .. iLcS!? Black intentionally loses a tempo to set up a pin that in tum forces White to lose time on the queenside. 5 ... iLb4 is a sensible alternative; for example: a) 6 .i.d3!? has the idea 6 ... ttJc5 7 iLe2 d4 8 a3 .i.a5 9 b4 dxc3 10 d4 ttJe4 11 bxa5, when White seems to have a modest edge. But Black might try 6 .. .f5!?, which looks fully playable after 7 exf6 (7 iLe2 O-O 8 O-O iLe6) 7 ... ttJxf6 8 0-00-0 (a small joke is 8 ... ttJc6 9 iLb5?! O-O 10 d4 and Black has gained a move!) 9 .i.e2 ttJc6

10 a3 iLa5 11 d4 iLg4.

b) 6 ~e2! may be as good as anything; for example, 6 ... iLxc3 7 dxc3 O-O 8 iLf4 iLe6 9 O-O-O ttJd7 10 ~e1 c6 with active chances for both sides. Compare the reversed position with 6 iLb5 in the Ponziani Opening game below.

6 d4 iLb4 (D)

7 iLd2 7 'ii'd3 positions the queen slightly oddly: 7 ... O-O (7 ... c5 is also satisfactory) 8 a3 (8 iLd2 iLf5) 8 ... iLxc3+ 9 bxc3 c5 10 iLe2 ~a5 11 iLd2 c4 12 'iVe3 ttJc6 13 O-O ttJe7! with the idea ... ttJf5. In this position, strongly reminiscent of a French Winawer, Black's knights are aggres- sively placed and White's bishops have yet to find active roles.

222 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w 7 .. iLg4 (D) 7 ... cS! is the main line, after which Black is considered to have levelled the game. He may even do better than that; for example, 8 iLbS+ (White achieves nothing from 8 iLd3 lDxd2 9 'iVxd2 cxd4 10 lDxd4, when only Black can claim an edge after 10 ... lDc6 or 10 ... O-O; 8 lDxe4!? leads to the approximately forced line 8 ... dxe49 iLxb4 cxb4 10 iLbS+ lDc6 11 dS exf3 12 dxc6 f2+ 13 cJtn 'Yi'b6 followed by ... bxc6; again, Black has some advantage) 8 .. .'!tJc6 9 O-O O-O 10 iLel iLg4 11 iLxc6 bxc6 12 'iVd3 iLxf3 13 gxf3 iLxc3 14 bxc3lDgS IS cJthl c4 16 'iVe3 lDe6 intending 17 f4 fS, once more with the better of it. Compare the next game. w SlDxe4 8 iLe2 is the best chance to keep an edge, but after 8. .. lDc6 9 O-O O-O that seems unlikely. S  dxe4 9 iLxb4 exf3 10 'iVd2!? After 10 gxf3 ~h4+ 11 cJte2 lDc6 12 fxg4 'iVxg4+ 13 cJtf2 'iVf4+, White should take the draw by repetition. 10  lDe6 11 iLe3 'iVd5 12 h3 12l:tgl! isn't pretty, but threatens to invade on g7 after gxf3, so Black will count upon his superior development to make up for the pawn after 12 ... O-O-O 13 'iVf4 f2+! 14 cJtxf2 hS IS h3 iLe6. 12  iLe6!? 13 gxf3?

13 O-O-O 'iVxa2 14 'iVgS O-O IS gxf3l:tad8 16

ltgl g6 17 f4 'iVal+ 18 ~d2 'iVa2 19 cJtc1 re- peats.

13. . O-O-0140-O-O 'iVxa2?

14 ... lDxeS! is better, with the idea IS dxeS? 'iVxa2. 15 'iVe3lDe7 16 iLd3 lDd5 17 'iWel cJtbS IS h4 112-112 Now compare this with theory from the dual opening:

1 e4 e5 2lDf3lDe6 3 e3 (D)

This is the Ponziani Opening, which is per- haps a bit better than its reputation. 3  f5!? This is a Vienna Game (1 e4 eS 21Dc3lDf6 3 f4), with reversed colours and as if Black had an extra ... c6! The moves 3 ... lDf6 and 3 ... dS have always been the standard ones, but 3 ... fS has a good reputation. Speaking of reversed openings, Marin points out that after 3 ... lDf6 4 d4lDxe4 S dxeS?! (S dS is normal), S. .. dS 6 iLd3 leaves Black a tempo ahead of the respectable Pirc Defence line 1 e4 d6 2 d4 lDf6 3 iLd3 eS 4 c3 dS S dxeS lDxe4 6 lDf3 lDc6. To clinch the case against S dxeS, s ... iLcS! also looks effective; for example, 6 ~dS iLxf2+ 7 cJtdl fS 8 iLc4l:tf8.

I-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 223

4d4 It's logical to strike back in the centre in this way, as Black does in the Vienna Game. The W only other reasonable way to counter Black's threat of ... fxe4 is 4 exf5, when the obvious course is 4 ... e4, but 5 lbd4 with the idea d3, played in many games, seems to keep a small edge. Maybe Black could play 4 .. :~f6, trying to win the f-file in old-fashioned King's Gambit style. The play could go 5 d4! e4 6lbg5 d5 (D). w Here White needs to disturb the equilibrium: a) 7 ~h5+!? g6 8 fxg6 hxg6 9 "iVe2 .Bd6, and in terms of space, open lines, and develop- ment, Black has quite a lot for a pawn. b) White can also try to undermine Black's centre by means of7 c4; for example, 7 ... .Bb4+ 8lbc3 (watch out for 8 .Bd2?? ~xgS) 8 ... lbge7! (development comes first; the pawns are not as important) 9 g4 (9 cxdSlbxd5 10 lbgxe4 ~xd4) 9 ... ~xd4 with an obscure position, which is about equal. 4 ... fxe4 5 lbxe5 lbf6 (D) After S. .. ~f6, the blockading manoeuvre 6 lbg4 ~g6 7 .Bf4 (or 7 .Be2) 7 ... d6 8 lbe3 has had some success, but the resulting positions are playable for Black. Instead, S. .. lbxe5!? 6 dxeS threatens ~dS, when 6 ... dS 7 exd6 .Bxd6 8 ~a4+ wins the e-pawn. That may not be the end of it, however, because Black can tum the opening into a gambit following 8 ... c6 9 ~xe4+ lbe7 10 .Bc4 (versus ... O-O) 1O ... ~c7 with the idea ... .ifS. Of course, White has a pawn and no weaknesses, so this is speCUlative.

6.Bc4!?

As we've seen, this idea originates from the Vienna Game. White reasons that he'll be a tempo up on what is after all a pretty good line for Black. Naturally, White has other ways to handle the position, of which 6 .Bg5 may be the most important. White stands well after 6 ... .Bd6?! 7 lbg4! .Be7 8 .Bxf6 .Bxf6 9 dS!, 6 ... .Be7 7 .Bb5! or 6 ... d6 7lbxc6 bxc6 8lbd2 d5 9 ~a4 .Bd7 10 f3. Following 6 ... ~e7 7 .Bxf6 (7 lbg4 dS!?) 7 .. :iiVxf6 8lbg4 ~g6 White can try 9lbe3 or 9 dS. These ideas are barely explored, as is typical with some of the oldest openings. The entertaining and instructive attacking game Nakamura-Becerra, USA Ch, Stillwater 2007 continued 6 .ibS .Bd6 (6 ... ~e7 may be best, as in the reversed position) 7 lbc4 (7 f4! exf3 8lbxf3 is a fighting alternative; compare 6 .Bd3 fS in the reversed line) 7 ... .Be7 8 .Ba4 (8 dS a6 9 .Ba4 bS doesn't improve much upon the reversed position, because White's extra move c3 isn't generally useful; he can win a pawn at the cost of development by 10 dxc6 bxa4 11 'YWxa4 dS 12 lbe3 O-O, but Black has a strong centre and excellent attacking chances) 8 ... dS 9 lbeS O-O! (this is a typical sacrifice in double e- pawn openings, famously in the Two Knights Defence; it yields Black development and ac- tivity for a pawn) 10 .Bxc6 (10 lbxc6? bxc6 II .Bxc6lIb8 has ideas such as ... .Ba6, ... lIb6 and ... 'i!Vd6 with ... lbg4) 1O ... bxc6 I1lbxc6 'iNe8 12 lbxe7+ ~xe7 13 O-O (D). White has an extra pawn and no weaknesses; however, Black has his attack ready, assisted by the cramping pawn on e4 and his half-open f- file. The game went 13 ... lbg4!? (threatening ... ~h4; 13 ... .Ba6 and 13 ... lIb8 are good alter- natives) 14 h3 e3! (threatening ... e2) IS .Bxe3?! (15 fxe3! .Ba6 16 J:.xf8+ lIxf8 17 hxg4! "ifh4 18lbd2 'iVf2+ 19 <li>h2 J:.f6 20 g5 ~h4+ 21 <li>gl

224 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

is only a draw) IS ... liJxe3 16 fxe3 i.xh3!? (16 .. :iVxe3+! 17~h21:txflI8 "iVxfl i.xh3!) 17 .u.f3 i.g4! 18 .u.xf8+ .u.xf8 19 "iVel (19 ~xg4?! "iWxe3+ 20 ~h2 "i!!Vh6+! 21 "i!!Vh3 'iWf4+ 22 ~g3 "iWc1 ! and Black wins) 19 ... l:i.f6 20 liJd2 .u.g6 21 'iVg3 'ilVe6 22 'iVf4 i.h3 23 g3 h5! 24 e4?! .l:Ig4 2S 'ilVxc7? h4 with a decisive attack for Black. 6  dS 7 i.bS i.d7 (D) w We have arrived at the reversed Vienna Game (specifically, 1 e4 eS 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 f4 d5 4 fxe5 liJxe45 liJf3 i.cs 6 d4 i.b4 7 i.d2) with White having the extra move c3. 8 i.gS?! This actually produces a worse position than White would have without his extra move c3. White can also play 8 liJxd7 'iVxd7, which is equal, or try 8 c4!. Then he has lost a full tempo (c3-c4) and transposed exactly to Black's posi- tion from the corresponding Vienna Game po- sition from the last game (the note to 7 ... i.g4). As it happens, he gets better winning chances with that move than with any other! 8  liJxeS 9 dxeS i.xbS 10 exf6 ~d7 Now White would like to be able to play 11 liJc3, but can't! In fact, the bonus move c3 has hurt him and Black has a clear advantage. To close out the subject of reversed posi- tions, I'll put a number of other examples from the double e-pawn realm into the following game. J. Polgar - Ivanchuk Amber Blindfold, Monte Carlo 1994

[diagram]
Or: a) 2 liJf3 is a forcing move, but Black can still play variations with reversed themes, again involving the f-pawn: al) 2 .. .fS (D) is the Latvian Gambit. In comparison with the black side of the King's Gambit (1 e4 eS 2 f4), White has the ex- tra liJf3, a vital move that plays a role in most 1 e4 eS openings. But the knight development also has drawbacks. Now, upon 3 exfS, Black has a move which would be pointless for White in the King's Gambit, that is, 3 ... e4, when 4 liJe5 and 4 liJgI are playable, but certainly not cause for abandonment of the Latvian. Similarly, if White tries to 'decline' the gambit by 3 i.c4, Black has the opportunity to play 3 .. .fxe4, meet- ing 4 liJxe5 with 4 ... 'iVg5 or 4 ... d5, both standard variations that have been heavily analysed for over SO years and apparently still regarded as playable for Black, although that can be dis- puted. In the King's Gambit, the same idea 1 e4 e5 2 f4 i.cs 3 fxe5?? loses to 3 ... "iVh4+. Another

i-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 225

example is 2 liJf3 f5 3 liJc3 fxe4, when 4 ~5+ is illegal- the extra move gets in the way, as op- posed to 1 e4 e5 2 f4liJc6 3 fxe5?? ~4+. W Finally, 3 d4, trying to reverse the Falkbeer Counter-Gambit upon 3 ... exd4?! 4 e5!, runs into 3 .. .fxe4! 4 liJxe5 liJf6; note again that if White didn't have liJf3 in, 3 ... fxe4 would be a blunder due to 4 'i!Vh5+. All of the 3rd moves above are playable for White, in spite of the differences I've noted, but they aren't convincing ways for him to secure the better game. As a consequence, you will see the move 3 liJxe5 in most Latvian Gambit con- tests, which isn't a reversed variation, and yet offers the best chances for a substantial advan- tage. a2) 2 ... liJc6 (D) has its own twists: w a21) 3 liJc3 liJf6 is the Four Knights Game, which we shall look at in Chapter 7 as an exam- ple of symmetry in the opening. Now 4 ~c4 liJxe4 5 liJxe4 d5 6 ~d3 dxe4 7 ~xe4 is yet another reversed position, probably favouring White slightly. Its twin is 3 ... ~c5 4liJxe5liJxe5 5 d4~d6 6dxe5 ~xe5 7 ~d3, andif7 ... 'i!Vh4, 8 liJd5. In this version, White's tempo helps, and his superiority is clear. a22) 3 ~b5 f5 (D). This is the Schliemann Defence, which has a decent reputation. In terms of a reversed open- ing, it's a Vienna Game (1 e4 e5 2 liJc3 liJf6 3 f4), in which White has the extra move .tb5. Strange to say, this would hurt White if he tried the standard remedy to the Vienna position, which is 4 d4 fxe4 5 liJxe5?! (5 ~xc6 dxc6 6 liJxe5 liJf6 is about equal), as 5 ... liJxe5 6 dxe5 c6 (in the reversed position, White's bishop is still on fl, so this tempo-gain isn't possible) 7 ~c4 (having come this far, White normally tries the unclear piece sacrifice 7 liJc3 cxb5 8 liJxe4) 7 .. :~a5+ followed by 8 .. :iVxe5 wins a pawn. White should play otherwise; for exam- ple, by 4 d3 or the traditional main line, 4liJc3. b) 2 d3 is a bit odd for White, but the idea is to delay the move f4 until Black commits. Then 2 ... liJf6 (the equivalent of 1 e4liJf6 2 d3 e5) 3 f4 is a sort of reversed Philidor Counter-Gambit, an opening which goes 1 e4 e5 2 liJf3 d6 3 d4 f5. After 3 f4, there can follow 3 ... exf4 4liJf3 (4 e5 Wlie7 5 "iVe2 liJd5! is good, with the idea 6 c4?! Wlib4+!) 4 ... d5 5 e5liJh5!, and Black has a typical King's Gambit Accepted position, but with the move ... d5 in exchange for d3, clearly a trade-off in Black's favour. Compare the actual Philidor Counter-Gambit with 2liJf3 d6 3 d4 f5 4 exf5 e4, when 5 liJh4?? loses a piece. On the other hand, White can play 5 liJg5, which is theoretically favourable for him, so this com- parison merely reveals a drawback to the line with 2 d3 and 3 f4, rather than providing salva- tion for the Philidor Counter-Gambit. 2 ... liJf6 (D) 3~c4 Or: a) One of several replies to 3 g3 is 3 ... i..b4, a reversed Ruy Lopez (1 e4 e5 2liJf3liJc6 3 ~b5 g6) in which g3 and ~g2 is enough to equalize, but too slow for White to expect an advantage. After 4 ~g2, Mariotti-Korchnoi, Rome 1982 continued 4 ... O-O (4 ... c6 5liJf3 d6 is also equal) 5 liJge2 c6 6 O-O d5!? (or 6 ... d6 7 d4 ~e6) 7 exd5 cxd5 8 d4 exd4 9liJxd4 ~xc3?! (giving up his good bishop; it turns out that White's dam- aged pawn-structure isn't as important as his

226 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w active pieces; 9 ... liJc6 is better) 10 bxc3 liJbd7 11 i.f4 liJb6 12 liJb5 i.f5 13 liJd6 i.e4 14 i.h3?! (14liJxb7 ~c8 15 liJd6 'iVxc3; 14.:te1 i.xg2 15 'it>xg2 with a pull - moves like .:tb1 and ~d4 can follow) 14 ... liJc4 15 liJxe4liJxe4 16 'iVd4 'iVa5 17 lIfel l:i.ae8?! (17 .. JUe8! 18 i.f1 .:tac8) 18 i.nliJa3 19 i.d3 .l:te6 20 f3liJc5 21 i.f5 ~f6?! 22 ~xd5 ~xc3 23 ~ad1 with nu- merous threats, beginning with i.e5. b) 3 liJf3 i.b4 is a reversed Ruy Lopez in which White has played the extra move liJf3. Now the obvious try is 4 liJxe5 (4 ..tc4 trans- poses to the main game) 4 ... O-O 5 i.e2 (another try is 5 i.c4, producing an unbalanced ending after 5 .. :Wie7 6liJf3 i.xc3 7 dxc3 iVxe4+ 8 ~e2 ~xe2+ 9 i.xe2, with a familiar situation with two bishops versus doubled pawns) 5 ... ~e8 (af- ter 5 ... d5?! 6 exd5, neither 6 ... .:te8 7 liJc4 nor 6 ... liJxd5 7 O-O gives Black enough for a pawn) 6liJd3 i.xc3 7 dxc3liJxe4 (D). This looks like a cross between an Exchange Variation and a Berlin Defence to the Ruy Lopez. In spite of Black's weakness-free posi- tion, White is slightly better and can work to prevent ... d5 by 8 liJf4; for example, 8 ... d6 9 O-O liJd7 and now: b1) 10 c4 liJdf6 (1O ... h6!?) 11 .:tel b6 (or

11...i.f5) 12 f3liJc5 13 b3 "fIIe7 14 "fIId2 "fIIe5 15

:b1 i.b7 16 i.b2 "fIIg5 17 :bd1 and White's pieces make a better overall impression, Svidler- Gashimov, Dagomys 2008. b2) In Shirov-Akopian, Linares 1995, White contested e4 by 10 f3! and got the better of it in spite of the weakness on e3: 10 ... liJef6 11 c4 liJf8!? 12 b3 "fIIe713 .:tf2 "fIIe5 14.:tb1 .ltd7, and here Shirov likes simply 15 liJd5liJxd5 16 cxd5 with an edge because of the bishop-pair. 3 ... i.b4!? (D) A much-analysed Vienna Game line goes 3 ... liJxe4 4 ~h5; you will see the same idea in the next couple of notes. w Now we have a reversed Classical Variation of the Ruy Lopez (1 e4 e5 2 liJf3 liJc6 3 i.b5 i.c5), with Black a whole tempo down. The Classical can be a pretty active system, so let's see if White can make good use of the extra tempo. 4liJf3 This is the purest reversed system, imitating the normal Classical Ruy Lopez with 3 ... liJf6 4 O-O 1i.c5. Two alternatives: a) 4 d3 isn't bad, of course, but it does make 4 ... d5 possible, which is at any rate close to equal, if not fully so, after 5 exd5 liJxd5 6 i.d2 (6 liJe2liJc6 7 O-O liJb6 8 i.b3 O-O 9liJe4!? has the odd-looking intention of playing f4; this is probably about equal following 9 ... a5! 10 a3 i.e7 11 h3 ~h8!? 12 f4 a4 13 i.a2 f5 14liJ4c3)

f-PAWNS AND REVERSED OPENINGS 227

6 ... lZJxc3 7 bxc3 .1i.d6 8 'iVh5 ~f6!? 9lZJf3 O-O 10 lZJgS ~g6? (1O ... .1i.f5 is better) 11 ~xg6 hxg6 12 O-O .1i.e 7 13 .l:'t.ae IlZJc6 14 .1i.dS .1i.d7 IS .1i.xc6 (IS f4! is strong) IS .... 1i.xc6 16 J:txeS .1i.xgS!? liz-liz J.Andersen-Velicka, Germany tt 1993/4. b) 4 f4 has White playing the Schliemann Defence to the Ruy Lopez (l e4 eS 2lZJf3 lZJc6 3 .1i.bS fS; see the discussion above), but with the extra move .1i.c4. The problem is that this gives Black the tactic 4 ... lZJxe4!. Then if White follows the normal Vienna Game strategy of S ~hS (which is probably best, since S lZJxe4 dS is at least equal), Black plays S ... O-O!, a move unavailable in the Vienna Game (as opposed to S ... lZJd6 6 ~xeS+ ~e7 7 ~xe7+ <j;xe7 8lZJdS+ 'it>d8 9 .te2 .1i.c5 10 lZJf3 with better-coordinated pieces for White; he has ideas of b4, d4, or in the case of 1O ... lZJc6, 11 c3 with the idea d4). Then 6lZJxe4 dS 7 lZJgS h6 wins the piece back with a good position for Black. We now return to 4lZJf3 (D):

After this move, Black really should deviate from the reversed position at a fairly early stage, rather than put up with an attack by lZJdS and/or d4. He picks a good way to do so: 4 ... .1i.xc3 Or: a) 4 ... lZJxe4?! SlZJxe4 (there's no 51\h5, as in the Vienna Game) 5 ... dS (D). Once again we encounter this tactic. How- ever, Black's bishop is poorly placed on b4, and 6 lZJxeS! dxc4 7 lZJxc4 is almost certainly in White's favour. Compare the reversed line with 2 lZJf3 lZJc6 3 .1i.bS lZJf6 4 O-O .1i.c5 S lZJxeS lZJxeS 6 d4lZJxe4? 7 dxcSlZJxcS? (but 7 ... 1\e7 8

.l:.el lZJxf2 9 <j;xf2 ~xcS+ 10 ~g3 isn't ade- quate either) 8 nel and White wins; in our po- sition, Black hasn't castled. Interestingly, after 6 c3 .1i.e7 the sequence 7 lZJxeS dxc4 8 lZJxc4 fS may not be as good, as the white c3-pawn sits on the knight's best re- treat-square; so 9 lZJg3 f4 follows, and Black gets practical chances after 10 lZJe4 'iVdS or 10 lZJe2 ~d5 11 d3 f3. Nor is 7 'iVa4+!? simple, in spite of winning a pawn after 7 ... c6! 8 i..e2 dxe4 9 ~xe4 lZJd7 10 O-O O-O 11 lZJxe5 lZJxeS 12 'iVxeS i..d613 ~hS g6I4 ~f3 .1i.e61S d4.l:.e8. b) 4 ... O-O (D).

5 d3 (or 50-0, when S. .. .1i.xc3 6 dxc3lZJxe4!?

7lZJxeS favours White's superior development by a small margin) 5 ... d5 (5 ... lZJc6 6 O-O .1i.xc3 7 bxc3 d5 8 exd5 lZJxdS 9 I:tel! is a tempo-up version of a Classical Ruy Lopez line; White's development gives him some advantage after 9 ... .1i.g4 10 .1i.d2 f6 11 ltbl b6 and now 12 'iVe2 or 12 ltbS with the idea 12 ... .1i.e6?! 13lZJd4!) 6 exdSlZJxd5 7 O-O! (D).

228 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

This is a thematic pawn sacrifice, based upon speed of development more than anything else. 7 .. .lbxc3 (7 ... .txc3?! 8 bxc3 ttJxc3?! 9 'i!Vel and 'iUxe5 cedes the bishops for nothing) 8 bxc3 .txc3 9 .l:i.bl ttJc6 10 ttJg5 h6 11 ttJe4.tb4 12 'iVh5 with a nice initiative and notions of'iVg6 and .txh6. 5 dxc3 d6 (D) w The last reversal: Black has played the Ex- change Ruy Lopez, and apparently given White much better development than he gets in the re- versed position. But in fact, Black doesn't gen- erate many powerful attacks in the Exchange Ruy Lopez, and in this reversed position, White has nothing to be particularly excited about. 60-0 White could try to lure Black into an infe- rior line by 6 'iWe2, and if Black replies 6 ... O-O, and then answers 7 .tg5 with 7 ... h6, White can playas Black does with reversed colours: 8 h4!, with the idea 8 ... hxg5?! 9 hxg5 ttJg4 10 O-O-O .te6 11 .l:i.h4 .txc4 12 J:1dhl, etc. But that is wishful thinking, and among other ideas, simply 6 ... ttJbd7 7 .tg5 h6 8 .th4 ttJc5 9 O-O-O 'iWe7 is fine for Black. 6 ... ttJbd7 7 l:i.el O-O 8 a4?! A strange move. 8 b4! would stop ... ttJc5, a move which now puts White on the defensive. 8  ttJc5 9 ttJd2 a510 'iWf3 .tg411 ~g3 .te6 12 .to ttJh5 13 ~f3 (D)

13  ttJf4 Black has already got the upper hand, and the game quickly turns worse for White: 14 ttJc4?! f5! 15 exf5l:i.xf5 16 ttJe3? ttJxg2! 17 ttJxf5 ttJxe118 'iVe2 .txf5 19 'iVxel ~f6 20 .tg2 'iVg6 21 ~hll:i.f8 22 b4 .te4 23 f3l:i.xf3! 24 'i!Ve2 (D) 24 bxc5 .l:i.e3! wins for Black. 24  :YIUg4 25 bxc5l:i.f7! 0-1 Most of this 1 e4 e5 analysis has been in the nature of an exercise, but it might give you an idea of why the main 1 e4 e5 variations do not lend themselves to profitable reversal.

7 Symmetry and its Descendants

Students often complain about how this or that opening is 'drawish'. However, it's hard to find convincing examples. Even well past the open- ing stage, simplified and equal chess positions can be won by the better player on that day. This is all the more true when the players are below master strength, because their more fre- quent mistakes will present opportunities for the opponent. The charge of drawishness is regularly lev- elled at symmetrical openings, or ones that in- volve a symmetrical pawn-structure. There's a huge difference, however, between a 'drawish' opening and one which seems boring to you or not dynamic enough. In fact, I think that a dis- taste for dry openings can be a healthy thing for developing players; after all, most masters have energetic styles and strive for the initia- tive. And even those who ultimately adopt highly positional styles usually start out with some ambitious openings (Karpov and Kram- nik come to mind). However, it's important to realize that just because an opening seems te- dious, it doesn't follow that a drawn result be- comes likely. Also, fortunately, you'll find that positions which previously bored you become increasingly interesting as you study them more deeply. Understanding the issues related to symmetry in the opening can expand your overall under- standing of chess. The game would be impover- ished if one side could simply imitate the other, or even if White were the only one who could productively avoid symmetry. As it happens, there are few if any variations in chess in which neither player can productively break symme- try. As is the case with reversed openings, in- formation can be the key factor. That is, the knowledge of what White has done makes it easier for Black to find an independent set-up. For his part, White can break symmetry simply by setting up positions in which imitation leads to inferior positions. You will see how easy that is. We've already seen' numerous examples of symmetrical openings in this series, notably in Volume 3 with the many variations of the Sym- metrical English (l c4 c5). After I d4 d5, the best-known truly symmetrical opening is the Exchange Variation of the Slav Defence, I d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 cxd5 cxd5. We examined this in Volume 2, Chapter 3. While it's true that some players use this variation to gain early draws, we saw that either player can deviate from symmetry with full confidence of maintaining equality while unbalancing the play. The sym- metrical variation I d4 d5 2 c4 c5 is a different matter. Whether White plays 3 cxd5 or 3 dxc5, he can quickly reach asymmetrical and favour- able positions, which accounts for the obscurity of2 ... c5. In this chapter, I'll concentrate upon a few fairly important openings that aren't dealt with elsewhere in this series, in which symmetry begins on move one. In doing so, I'll also be able to consider a number of pawn-structures I haven't previously addressed. Petroff Defence

1 e4 e5 2 liJf3 liJf6 (D)

This is called the Petroff Defence, also known as the Russian Defence. w

230 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Like many symmetrical variations, it has a reputation for dry or even drawish play. This stems from the perceived drawish nature of games between elite players and years of com- mentary from books and magazines. To be sure, of the 900+ Petroff Defence games in my data- base between opponents who are both rated above 2600, we find that 63% of the games are drawn, as opposed to 50% for both the Sicilian and French Defences. Nevertheless, White has an overall success rate of 58% (well above av- erage), and a solid lead over Black in perfor- mance rating. Clearly Black doesn't get his normal share of wins, a fact which can easily be missed as we see elite players like Kramnik us- ing the Petroff in order to secure effortless draws (and even occasional victories) as Black. But just because a world champion manages to pull off a draw doesn't mean that you, as White, won't find ample winning chances. Let's explore some theory of the Petroff De- fence, keeping an eye on the way that symmet- rical structures influence the play. At the same time, I'll give an overview of how this classic opening breaks down. Keep in mind that many variations are necessarily omitted, and this cov- erage doesn't reflect the proportion in which they are played in practice. Shirov - Yusupov Ter Apel1997

1 e4 eS 2 4:lf3 4:lf6 3 d4 (D)

In the next game we'll see 3 4:lxe5; the two variations can end up in similar positions. For a discussion of 3 4:lc3, see the Four Knights sec- tion below.

3 .. 4:lxe4 These days, 3 ... exd4 is less popular. One main line goes 4 e5 4:le4 5 ~xd4 d5 6 exd6 4:lxd6 7 4:lc3 4:lc6 8 ~f4 with the idea of .1i.e3 and O-O-O, posing Black some problems.

4.1i.d3

If White plays 4 dxe5, Black usually replies 4 ... d5, when after 5 4:lbd2, 5 ... 4:lxd2 and 5 ... 4:lc5 are the main lines. White has been finding his way to modest advantages versus those moves. But 4 ... .1i.c5 may be considerably stronger than previously thought, especially with variations like 5 .1i.c4 4:lxf2 6 .1i.xf7+ ~xf7 (6 ... ~f8 7 ~d5 4:lxhl 8 .1i.h5! is unclear) 7 ~d5+ (follow- ing very old theory) 7 ... ~g6!' This was played in Short-Smeets, Wijk aan Zee 2010: 8 i.g5 ~e8 9 4:lh4+? (9 O-O) 9 ... ~xg5 10 4:ld2 ~h6? (1O ... d6! should win, as the black king survives its walk) 11 4:lf5+ ~g6 12 4:lh4+ ~h6 13 4:lf5+ ~g6 14 4:lh4+ with a draw. Of course, White has many alternatives early on, but nothing that looks particularly attractive. 4 . dS S 4:lxeS (D)

S  .1i.d6 Black opts for perfect symmetry. Countless high-level games have proceeded 5 ... 4:ld7 6 4:lxd7 (playing so as to preserve the pawn- structure without losing time; 6 O-O 4:lxe5 7 dxe5 4:lc5 8 4:lc3 c6 has the idea of an early ... 4:lxd3, to get another pair of pieces off - this position is unclear, but high-level games so far indicate that Black is close to equality) 6 ... .1i.xd7

7 O-O and now:

a) After 7 ... ~h4, 8 c4 O-O-O 9 c5 is complex and probably in White's favour; for example, after 9 ... g5!? 10 4:lc3 .1i.g7 11 g3! ~h3 12 4:lxe4

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 231

dxe413 i.xe4 i.b5 14 i.g2 ~f5 15 i.e3! i.xfl 16 i.xfl, as in several games, White drums up a major attack after ~a4 and l:!.dl-d3-b3/a3. The modest 8 g3 is also good; then 8 ... ~3? is poor in view of 9 f3! tbf6 10 lIe 1+ i.e6 11 l:.e5! with the idea i.fl. So 8 ... ~f6 9 tbc3 tbxc3 10 bxc3 O-O-O 11 ~5 usually follows, with pres- sure. b) 7 ... i.d6! (D) pursues a quasi-symmetri- cal strategy: w Black is reasonably well developed, and it's difficult for White to remove the knight from e4 without oversimplifying. His most thematic ap- proach involves targeting d5. Briefly: bI) 8 tbc3 tbxc3 9 bxc3 O-O 10 ~h5 f5 11 l:.el c6 is solid for Black. b2) 8 ~h5 creates more problems for Black. After 8 ... tbf6 (Kramnik has tried 8 .. :~f6) 9 ne 1+ ~f8, one example is 10 ~e2 tbg4 (popu- lar, but 1O ... c6 is probably better) 11 h3 'iYh4 12 ~f3! tbf6 13 tbc3 c6 14 tbe2! tbe8?! 15 i.f4 ~f6 16 i.xd6+ tbxd6 17 ~xf6 gxf6 and White has much the superior pawn-structure, Caru- ana-Motylev, European Ch, Plovdiv 2008. b3) 8 c4 c6 9 cxd5 cxd5 10 ~h5!? (again hitting d5; a similar line is 10 tbc3 tbxc3 11 bxc30-0 12 ~h5, when Rublevsky-Volokitin, Poikovsky 2008 went 12 ... g6! 13 ~xd5 ~c7 14 i.h6 l:!.fd8 15 "i!Vg5 ~xc3 16 l:tfdl i.a4 with balanced play) 1O ... O-O! 11 ~xd5 i.c6 12 ~h5 g6. Here Black achieves sufficient counterplay; for example, 13 ~h3 tbg5 14 ~g4 tbe615 i.h6 l:!.e8 16 tbc3, and although Karpov twice chose 16 ... i.f4 versus Anand, it seems easiest to re- gain material by 16 ... tbxd4; for example, 17 l:!.ad 1 i.e5 18 f4 f5 19 i.c4+ ~h8 20 ~h3 i.f6. 60-00-07 c4 (D) White can't get much out of 7 tbc3 tbxc3 8 bxc3 tbd7 (8 ... c5!?) 9l:i.el due to 9 ... i.xe5 10 dxe5 tbc5; for example, 11 ~h5 tbxd3 12 cxd3 'tid7 (shamelessly heading for ... "i!Vg4 or ... ~f5) 13l'r.e3 'iV g4 14 ~xg4 i.xg4 with a quick draw, Shanava-Mchedlishvili, Tbilisi 2008.

7 . tbc6 Black develops and attacks d4. Other moves: a) The line 7 ... c6 8 tbc3 tbxc3 9 bxc3 pretty much expresses White's strategic goals with re- spect to undermining the knight on e4 and main- taining central pressure. He generally keeps some advantage; for example, 9 ... tbd7 (in the game Maroczy-Marshall, Paris 1900, Black chose 9 ... i.xe5?! 10 dxe5 dxc4 11 i.xc4 'ilxdl?! 12 l:hdl i.f5 13 i.a3, when White had the bishop-pair and a mobile kingside majority) 10 f4 tbf6 11 'ii'c2 (or 11 'i!Vb3) 11 ... dxc4 12 tbxc4 i.e7 13 :el i.e6 14 tbe5 c5 15 f5!? i.c8, Z.Almasi-Forintos, Hungarian Team Ch 1993/4, and now 16 i.a3! is the easiest way to maintain the pressure. b) 7 ... i.xe5 8 dxe5 tbc6 9 cxd5 "i!Vxd5 10 ~c2 tbb4 11 i.xe4 tbxc2 12 i.xd5 .Bf5! 13 g4! is an ancient line that has been analysed at great length to a moderate endgame advantage for White. S tbxc6 bxc6 9 c5 i.e710 tbc3 (D) 10 ... f5 10 ... i.f6 leaves White several ways to pur- sue an advantage, including these two: a) 11 tbe2 (covering f4 in addition to d4) 1l...:tb8 12 ~c2 g6 13 i.e3l:!.e8 14.l:!.ael i.g7 15 tbc3 f5 16 f3 and in Mulyar-Goodall, Cherry Hill 2007 Black miscalculated with 16 ... tbxc5?

232 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

17 dxc5 d4? 18 ..tg5 1-0. Since 16 ... f4?! 17 fxe4 fxe3 18 e5 'Yib4 19 ~a4! Ihb2 20 'iixc6 is also good for White, Black should try 16 ... ltJf6 17 ..tg5 ..te6 18ltJe2!, when White can claim positional superiority, but it's still a game. b) After 11 ltJxe4 dxe4 12 ..txe4, Yusupov suggests 12 ... ..ta6; then 13 ..te3! ..txf114 ~xf1 looks to be a promising exchange sacrifice: White gains a pawn, the bishop-pair and the ini- tiative.

11 f3 ltJgS 12 ~a4 ..td7 13 ..tf4 ..tf6 14

I:!.aelltJe6 IS ..teS (D)

White has achieved two basic positional ad- vantages: the better light-squared bishop and an outpost on e5. In the meantime, Black's queen- side pawn-structure is less than ideal. IS.  ..txeS 16 I:!.xeS ~h417 f4! ltJxf418 g3 ltJh3+ 19 ~g2 'iWh6 20 ltJxdS f4? White stands clearly better after 20 ... .l:!.ae8?! 21ltJe7+ ~h8 22 "iVc2!, but only moderately so following 20 ... 'iWd2+ 21 ..te2 .l:i.ae8! 22 ltJe7+ ~h8 23 ~xh3 I:!.f7 24 "iVdl. 21ltJe7+ ~h8 22ltJfS! ~gS Shirov gives 22 ... ..txf5 23 I:!.xf5! I:!.ae8(?) 24 'ii'd 1 !. 23ltJh4 ~h6 24 ..tfS! fxg3 2S hxg3 g6? Black's last shot was 25 ... g5! 26 'it'd I ! gxh4 27 ..txd7 'it'g6! 28 g4! ltJf4+ 29 ~h2 ltJd5 30 ..tf5, although White is still well on top. 26 ..txd7 ~d2+ 27 ~xh3 I:!.xfl 28 ..txc6 I:!.af8 29 ..tg2 I:!.lf2 30 ~d7 gS 31 I:!.e7 ~c2 32 ..te4! White finds a pretty finish, marching his king up the board.

32  I:!.h2+ 33 ~g4 I:!.xh4+ 33 ... ~e2+ 34ltJf3. 34 gxh4 'iWe2+ 3S ~xgS I:!.g8+ 36 ~f61-0 Solodovnichenko - Backlund Rochefort 2005

1 e4 eS 2 ltJf3 ltJf6 3 ltJxeS (D)

3 ... d6 Full-blooded symmetrical play can be pur- sued by the amazing 3 ... ltJxe4!?, which for years books assigned a '?', simply giving the line 4 iYe2ltJf6?? 5 ltJc6+. Actually, 4 "iVe2 isn't the disaster that it looks like, because of 4 .. .'iVe7! 5 'iWxe4 d6 (granted, 5 ... 'iWxe5?? would be taking symmetry too far!). Black recovers his piece and is sacrificing a pawn for compensation. It's hard to believe that White can't retain some advan- tage, but it's fun to see how even this discarded line is taken seriously in the age of computers. Briefly, the main line is 6 d4 (the only impor- tant alternative is 6 f4, when after 6 ... dxe5, 7 "iVxe5?! ~xe5+ 8 fxe5 ltJc6 9 ..tb5 ..td7 10 ..txc6 ..txc6 gives Black obvious compensation;

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 233

instead, 7 fxe5 f5! is a line analysed in depth by O.Cohen - whether or not it equalizes com- pletely, as he suggests, Black has lots of play) 6 ... dxe5 7 dxe5! (7 'iVxe5 ~xe5+ 8 dxe5 iLf5 is equal, based upon 9 iLd3?! iLxd3 10 cxd3 ttJc6, with moves such as ... ttJb4 and ... O-O-O to fol- low) 7 ... ttJc6 (D). w We have seen the idea of exploiting such an e5-pawn on an open file in many openings be- fore. The success of this strategy depends upon developing quickly and maintaining the initia- tive; for example: a) 8 iLb5 iLd7 9 ttJc3 'ilVb4! was played and analysed by Friedrich Volkmann and others and seems sufficient for equality. b) 8 f4!? may be underrated. Then 8 ... iLg4 with the idea ... O-O-O has been recommended, along with 8 ... 'iVb4+ 9 ~xb4 ttJxb4, but I sus- pect that White retains the better game in both cases. c) 8 .tf4 g5! 9 iLd2 (not 9 iLg3?? in view of 9 .. .f5!. and ... f4 will win the bishop) 9 .. .f5 10 ~e2 ng8 with the idea .. .i Le6 and ... O-O-O, Baron-O.Cohen, Givataim 2007. d) Of course, White has less ambitious pos- sibilities; for example, Cohen analyses 8 ttJc3 'iVxe5 9 ~xe5+ ttJxe5 10 iLf4 f6 with a slight edge for White, which is perhaps not the goal of either player! 4 ttJf3 I'll mention some lesser-played lines as I go along. A rather silly sacrifice that has had peri- odic success is 4 ttJxf7?! ~xf7, the Cochrane Gambit, and now White can play 5 ttJc3, 5 iLc4+ or 5 d4. Having written about these moves in detail, I can only say that this sacrifice is wildly overrated, and that Black gets a definite advantage with correct play. On the other hand, Black seldom plays correctly, and in fact the few times elite players have faced 4 ttJxf7, they have reacted with playable but inferior moves! 4 .. ttJxe4 (D) w 5d4 The Petroff Defence is not as limited as you might think from watching top-level technical games over the years, most of which repeat the same lines over and over. Here is a brief outline of some early alternatives for White, of which 'c' and 'd' are the most attractive: a) 5 d3 ttJf6 6 d4 d5 (an Exchange French) is not the most inspiring of symmetrical positions, but the players can always get creative later. b) Another attempt to break symmetry has been used extensively over the years: 5 ~e2 ~e7

6 d3 ttJf6 7 iLg5, threatening to double Black's

pawns on f6. This has tended to allow Black easy equality; for example, 7 ... ttJbd7 (or 7 ... 'ilVxe2+ 8 iLxe2 i.e7 9 ttJc3 h6 10 iLh4 ttJbd7) 8 ttJc3 'iVxe2+ 9 iLxe2 h6 10 iLM g5 11 iLg3 ttJh5 12 ttJd5 ~d8 with a good game, Reinderman- Kasimdzhanov, Wijk aan Zee 1999. c) A very interesting asymmetrical line at this point begins with 5 c4!? Then if Black plays slowly by 5 ... iLe7, White can try to trans- pose into a pleasant main line by 6 d4, and upon other moves such as 5 ... c6, 5 ... ttJc6 and 5 ... d5, he plays 6 ttJc3, answering 6 ... ttJxc3 with 7 dxc3, a pawn-structure which lends itself to ac- tive development. For those looking for variety, it's worth experimenting with this. d) 5 ttJc3 ttJxc3 6 dxc3 has been played a great deal at the very top levels. If Black is

234 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

well-prepared, he should equalize; often, how- ever, the resulting position will be sufficiently unbalanced for either side to play for a win. I'll leave this one for you to research as well. S. dS (D) Some strong players have done all right with S. .. J..e7 6 J..d3 lbf6, but after White sets up with h3, O-O, c4 and lbc3, he has more territory under control and an undoubted, if small, ad- vantage. w A funny picture. It's as though Black had the first move of the game, and after four symmetri- cal moves (e.g., in an Exchange French), played S ... lbe4. Normally, in other openings, such an advanced and supported knight is a force to be reckoned with. But here it is actually a minor disadvantage, in that White can undermine the knight's support by c4 and .i.d3, subsequently forcing its retreat or exchanging it under more favourable terms than are presently available. He usually does this via moves such as.:tel, ~c2 and lbc3. Crucially, the knight on e4 doesn't defend dS, which can be attacked. By contrast, White's knight on f3 protects the d4-pawn. Note also that there is only one file open in this position, so you might think that rooks would inevitably be ex- changed on it. However, as in the Exchange Variation of the French Defence, that seldom happens unless the players are mutually intent upon drawing. For one thing, all the key squares down the e-file are protected by pawns or minor pieces, so the rooks may find better prospects somewhere else on the board. 6 i.d3 i.d6 Maintaining the near-symmetry. The other main line is 6 ... i.e7 (after 6 ... lbc6 7 O-O, 7 ... J..e7 transposes, while 7 ... J..g4 8 c4 lbf6 9 cxdS i.xf3 10 ~xf3 ~xdS 11 ~e2+!? i.e7 12 i.bS gives White the better of it, since Black can't castle and 12 ... ~xd4 l3lbc3 is quite risky for him) 7 O-O lbc6 8 c4 (there are a few alterna- tives here, and many more along the way; 8 ~el i.g49 c4 lbf6 has been played and ana- lysed extensively - of late, 10 lbc3 i.xf3 11 'iVxf3lbxd4 12 ~dl has been a critical theoret- icalline) 8 ... lbb4 9 i.e2 (over the years, 9 cxdS lbxd3 10 ~xd3 'iVxdS 11 ~el i.fS 12 lbc3 lbxc3 13 'ifxc3 i.e6 14 ~eS ~c6 has proven equal, or close enough) 9 ... 0-010 lbc3 (D).

Now: a) After 1O ... i.e6, the odd and time-con- suming 11 lbeS! f6 12 lbf3 has actually had plenty of success due to the loosening of Black's central position and the a2-g8 diagonal. The moves 'iYb3 and ~el are thematic follow-ups. b) lO ... i.fS 11 a3 lbxc3 12 bxc3 lbc6 l3 J::!.el J:.e8 14 cxdS ~xdS IS i.f4 ~ac8 is per- haps slightly better for White, and has been the starting point for many grandmaster battles. Anand-Kramnik, Wijk aan Zee 2010 continued

16 h3 i.e4 17 ~cl!? lbaS!? 18 'iVe3 J..f8? 19

c4! ~d8 20 lbeS i.fS 21 ~c3 with a consider- able advantage in space and activity.

7 O-O O-O 8 c4 c6 9 cxdS

9 lbc3 is also used extensively by leading players, the most frequent continuation being 9 ... lbxc3 10 bxc3 dxc4 11 J..xc4 i.g4. 9 ... cxdS (D) This is the last juncture at which we'll be in- volved in issues of symmetry; the position be- comes structurally unbalanced after White's next move.

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 235

w 10 ttJe3 ttJxe3 11 bxe3 ..tg4 12l:!.bl ttJd7 White gets an excellent attack following 12 ... b6 13 l:!.bS ..tc7 14 h3 a6 (D). w IS l:!.xdS! (1S hxg4 axbS 16 'iUc2 g6 has won some pretty games for White, but is probably about equal after 17 ..th6 l:!.e8 18 ..txbS l;Ie4! 19 c4 l:!.xg4 20 cxdS ..tf4 21 l:!.e1 ttJd7 22 ..txf4 .:txf4) lS ... iVxdS 16 hxg4 gives White a nice ini- tiative in return for the exchange; for example, 16 ... ttJc617 ttJgS h6 18 ..th7+~h8 19..te4 ~d6 20 ttJf3 l:!.fe8 21 ..tc2 ~d7 22 gS with a terrific attack, Benjamin-Sammour Hasbun, Philadel- phia 1999.

13 h3 ..thS 14 l:!.bS

White attacks the d-pawn and pins it laterally. Instead of this, 14 nxb7!? ttJb6 traps White's rook, but it's not clear whether that can be ex- ploited. The sequence IS g4 ..tg6 16 ..ta6 'iVe8 with the idea .. :iVc6 is still being debated, and undoubtedly other possibilities will be discov- ered. 14.. ttJb61S e4!? (D)

White insists upon grabbing the initiative. The threat is cS, and Black's loose bishop on hS has tactical drawbacks. IS ... i.xf3! Other moves are worse: a) Black will suffer after lS ... dxc4?! 16 ..txh7+~xh717l:!.xhS+~g818 ttJh4! with the idea of'iVg4 and ttJfS. b) White's two pieces will be superior to Black's rook after IS ... ttJxc4?! 16 l:!.xdS ..th2+ 17 ttJxh2! ~xdS 18 i.xc4 'iVxc4 19 'iVxhS, as in Brandenburg-S.Ernst, Dieren 2008. 16 ~xf3 dxe417 ..te2 White has the bishop-pair, open lines and a potential kingside attack; Black has an extra pawn and active pieces. .. JWd718 a4 lUe8!? (D) 19h4 There's a saying attributed to Larsen: when in doubt, advance a rook's pawn! With this move, White gains space, helps fortify some kingside attacking ideas, and leaves open his

236 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

options as to the placement of his dark-squared bishop, which might go to e3 or to the al-h8 di- agonal. In other games, forcing the pace with 19 .i.f5 'V/iic7 hasn't been effective: 20 .i.e4 (20 a5 ~c6 has scored well for Black) 20 ... a6 21 .l:i.g5? .l::txe4! 22 'V/iixe4 lLlxa4. This position oc- curred in both Ponomariov-Safin, Erevan 2001 and Kristjansson-l.Gunnarsson, Icelandic Ch, Seltjarnarnes 2002. Black's queenside pawns should prove superior to White's temporary threats. 19 .i.e7?! Black has the double idea of playing ... ~d6 and attacking White's d4-pawn. But neither idea means that much, so Black might prefer 19 ... .l:!.ad8 or M.Ivanov's suggestion 19 ... h6 20 g3 J:.e7!? with the idea ... .l:i.ae8 and ... J:.el. Then White still has to prove the worth of his bish- ops.

20 g3 a6

20 .. J:!ab8 21 .i.f5! is complex, with the im- mediate idea 2l...'V/iixd4?? (21...~e7) 22 .i.b2 and White simply mashes Black on the king- side; for example, 22 ... ~d8 23 .i.xh7+ 'it>xh7 24 ~xf7, etc. 21 lIeS! .i.d6 22l:IgS! (D) 22  .Bf8 A standard but nevertheless very pretty com- bination is 22 ... lLlxa4?? 23 .i.xa4 (23 .i.xh7+ also wins, based on 23 ... 'it>xh7 24 ~h5+ 'it>g8 25 .l::txg7+! 'it>xg7 26 .Bh6+, mating) 23 ... ~xa4 24l:txg7+! 'it>xg7 25 .i.h6+! 'it>g6 26 ~g4+ 'it>f6 (26 ... 'it>xh6 27 ~g5#) 27 .Bg5+ 'it>g7 28 .i.e7+ 'it>h6 29 ~g5#. Everyone should know these tactical patterns. 23 as lLle8 24 dS! lLld6?! Probably Black should stunt White's attack by going into the simplifying line 24 ... g6 25 .i.b2 .i.g7 26 .i.xg7 'it>xg7 27 h5 'iile7 28 hxg6! hxg6 29 'iii g4 'iJlf6, when 30 l:!f5 'iJle7 31 l:!g5 'iVf6 is equal, and White may have to take chances if he is to do better. 2S .i.b2 h6 (D) 25 .. .f5!? 26 .i.xf5 lLlxf5 27 l:!xf5 l:!ac8 28 .i.c3 with the idea h5 gives White some edge. w 26 'V/iihS lLle4? Black had to try 26 .. .f5 27 'iVxh6 lLle4, but then 28 'V/iih5! intends 28 ... lLlxg5? (28 ... c3 29 .i.xc3!) 29 hxg5, winning, because 30 g6 fol- lows. 27 .Bxe4 .i:!.xe4 28 'iVxh6 fS 29 ~g6 l:!g4 30 .l:i.xg4 fxg4 At this point, instead of 31 h5?! (which could have been answered by 31 ... l:!c8), White had the clever 31 !Ie I! intending l:!e5 or l:!e4 with a clear superiority. The point is that upon

31...'iiVxd5?, 32 .i:!.e7! wins outright.

These last two games demonstrate how, al- though the symmetry of this opening can hurt its reputation, both sides have more than enough ways to unbalance both the pawn-structure and the position. Four Knights Game Yuldachev - Kholmov Kazakhstan 1994

[diagram]
The Petroff Defence, 2 ... lLlf6, also affords White the chance to aim for the Four Knights

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 237

Game by 3 liJc3, to which Black can acquiesce with 3 ... liJc6. However, Black can deviate and playa reversed Ruy Lopez with 3 ... J1i.b4, as we described in Chapter 6 in the context of re- versed openings (see the notes to the game J.Polgar-Ivanchuk there). 3liJc3 (D)

[diagram]
15 c3 J1i.f5?! liz-liz Potkin-Khruschov, Moscow

2000; White should have continued with 16 ~b5!, intending 16 ... .l:ted8 17 'iVc6) 13 J1i.c4 .iLe6 (this is a place to look for improvements) 14liJxd5 cxd5 15 .iLxd5 J1i.xd5 16 'iYxd5 'iib4 17 ~g5 'i!Vb4 18 ~3 'iYc5 19 .l:td5 'iVc6 20 'ilVd3 :ab8 21 b3 and although Black still has dan- gerous play, White consolidated the pawn in Svidler-Geller, Moscow 1992.

4~b5 (D)

4. .. J1i.b4

Or: a) Rubinstein's move 4 ... liJd4, with the idea 5 liJxe5 'iVe7, has traditionally been a sound theoretical answer to the Four Knights with 4 J1i.b5. White has many ways to proceed, such as the traditional main line 5 J1i.a4 and less common ideas such as 5 O-O, 5 J1i.e2 or 5 J1i.c4. There is currently a good deal of research going into the Four Knights, and this last move, 5 ~c4, in particular is unresolved. For example, after 5 ... liJxf3+, 6 gxf3! is enjoying consistent suc- cess, even on a grandmaster level (d4 and/or f4 follow), and some analysts believe that 5 ... .iLc5 6liJxe5, while risky-looking, results in a small advantage for White. From Black's point of view, a potential drawback to 4 ... liJd4 is 5liJxd4 exd4 6 e5 dxc3 7 exf6 ~xf6 (Black falls too far behind in development following 7 ... cxd2+? 8 .txd2 ~xf6 9 O-O J1i.e7 10 l:!.el O-O 11 J1i.c3, and

238 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

then 11..:~ g5 12 .l:f.e5! or 11... 'iW d6 12 'ii'f3 c6 13 .1c4 .1g5 14 .l:.e8! with a very strong attack) 8 dxc3 (D).

Marin points out that Black has "no active prospects at all if White so wishes", and that he "has to play carefully ... to avoid falling behind in development". This is true, but the majority of games are drawn, so as a practical matter this can't be to White's liking either. Alekhine- Capablanca, StPetersburg 1914 was an early il- lustration: 8 .. :~'e5+ 9 ~e2 (9 .i.e2!? with the idea 9 ... .i.c5 10 O-O O-O 11 .i.d3 d5!? 12 'iff3 gives White a few chances) 9 ... 'iVxe2+ 10 .i.xe2 d5 11 .i.f4 c6 12 c4 .i.e6 13 cxd5 .i.xd5 140-0 .i.c5 15 .l:.fe 1 O-O 16 .i.d3 .l:.fe8 17 a3 f6 18 ~fl g6 19 f3 ~f7 with dead equality. The point is not that 4 ... .i.b4 is a superior move, but that it seems to be a better way for Black to guarantee himself an unbalanced game. b) 4 ... .i.d6!? illustrates the creativity in mod- em opening play. Black has had reasonable success with this move, which prepares the re- organization by ... O-O, ... l:i.e8, ... .1f8 and per- haps ... d5, while protecting the e-pawn so as to give the opportunity for ... a6 if desired.

[diagram]
Once again, White has to decide when and how he wants to break symmetry. 6d3 Or: a) The natural 6 tLJd5 tLJxd5 7 exd5 tLJd4 8 tLJxd4 exd4 returns to a symmetrical position in which White hasn't yet demonstrated an effec- tive way to disturb the equilibrium. In this re- gard, however, he might try 9 c3 i.c5 10 'ii'f3, or the more ambitious, if committal, 9 ~g4 .1c5 10 .i.d3!? d6 11 ~f4 with the idea b3 and .i.b2, or sometimes c3. b) After 6 .1xc6 dxc6, White gets nowhere with 7 tLJxe5 l:te8, and so plays 7 d3. This is another type of Exchange Ruy Lopez position. Black has tried many moves here, such as 7 ... ~e7, 7 ... .1d6, 7 ... l:te8 and 7 ... tLJd7. They are all playable, but direct and active solutions are generally easier to handle, so I like Marin's recommendation of7 ... .1g4 8 h3 (after 8 ~e2, Black can play 8 ... tLJd7 with the idea 9 tLJdl 'iVf6!) 8 ... .1h5. Then Soffer-Alterman, Tel-Aviv 1998 continued 9 'iVe2 (9 g4? tLJxg4! 10 hxg4 .1xg4 11 'iitg2 f5 is too strong; this is a sacrifice which comes up in several e-pawn openings) 9 ... tLJd7 10 g4!? .1g6 11 tLJdl .1d6 12 tLJe3 tLJc5! (D). Black imitates White's idea: he intends to play ... tLJe6, hitting the weak point at f4. The game continued 13 tLJc4 f6 14 tLJh4.i.f7 with a balanced contest. In place of this, Alterman suggests the tactical device 13 tLJxe5!? i.xe5

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 239

14 f4. After 14 ... i.d4 15 f5 "iVh4 16 ..t>g2, Marin says that Black should choose among 16 ... l:tae8, 16 ... lZJe6 and 16 ... h6!? The first two moves let White reorganize with 17 lZJc4 and in some cases i.e3, but 16 ... h6!? forces 17 fxg6 fxg6, which establishes control of some dark squares and keeps White's knight from f5. That should be fine, and 16 ... h5 17 fxg6 fxg6 might be even more accurate, since 18 gxh5? allows 18 .. .l:txfl 19 lZJxfl ~f8 20 i.e3 i.xe3 21 lZJxe3 lZJe6!. 6 ... d6 Maintaining the symmetry. 6 ... i.xc3 7 bxc3 d6 is also possible, if only to avoid White's al- ternative in the next note. 7 i.g5 (D) With this move White threatens 8 lZJd5. 7 lZJe2 is another standard idea; then Black's bishop is a bit stranded on b4 and the move lZJg3 is useful for kingside action. In top-level encounters stretching back to Tarrasch, Rubin- stein and Euwe, Black has chosen to imitate White by 7 ... lZJe7 (Smyslov once played 7 ... i.d7

[diagram]
with a perfectly symmetrical position. After 11 d4, Black finally deviates with 1l...l:te8; for ex- ample, 12 i.c2 h6 13 h3 i.b6 14 i.e3 and now 14 ... i.e6 is sound enough, but 14 ... d5! is also sufficient, particularly if after 15 exd5 (as in Kozlov-Atalik, Moscow 2005) Black chooses 15 ... e4!.

7 ... i.xc3 White's last move has truly succeeded in breaking symmetry in view of 7 ... i.g4?! 8 i.xf6! gxf6 (not 8 ... i.xf3? 9 'iVxf3 'iVxf6 10 'fVxf6 gxf6 11 lZJd5 lZJd4 12 i.a4 i.a5 13 c3, etc.; 8 ... 'iVxf6? loses at least two pawns: 9lZJd5 1!Vd8 10 i.xc6 bxc6 11 lZJxM a5 12lZJxc6 'iVe8 13 lZJcxe5) 9 i.xc6 (9 lZJd5 lZJd4!) 9 ... bxc6 (9 ... i.xc3 10 i.xb7) 10 h3 i.e6 l1lZJe2!, when White threatens to conquer f5 by lZJg3 and lZJh4, and after 11 ... f5, 12 exf5 i.xf5 13 c3 i.a5 14lZJg3 has the ideas of lZJxf5, d4 and 1!Va4. 8 bxc3 Wie7 Sometimes called the Metger Unpin, Black's idea is to play ... lZJd8-e6 and drive the bishop away from g5. This has been the main line since the first part of the 20th century, and constitutes the bulk of master practice, but naturally there are other moves such as 8 ... a6, 8 ... i.d7 and 8 ... h6.

9.u.el

White protects e4 and plans to use his extra time to expand in the centre. 9 ... lZJd810 d4lZJe6 (D) w This position, the result of a manoeuvre by Black which is not intuitively obvious, has nev- ertheless been reached in over 800 games in my database. After 115 years or so of practice, it is still the main line of the Four Knights Game. Historically, 4 i.b5 i.M has a drawish reputa- tion, but in fact White has a 57% score from this point, and a considerable lead in performance rating. Even the drawing percentage, at 37%, is not out of the ordinary, and includes a large number of quick draws in which the variation went essentially untested. In other words, this position is full of life. 11 i.el! White has ideas of using this bishop on a3, but his retreat is also a reaction to the lack of promising alternatives. He has to preserve his bishop-pair as compensation for his structural

240 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

problems, but 11 ..te3? loses the pawn on e4 and 11 ..td2 is passive. After 11 ..th4, ll...lLlf4! intends ... ..tg4 or ... lLlg6. For example: a) 12lLld2 (played in anticipation of ... ..tg4 and, in some variations, ... lLlh5) 12 ... 'ifo>h8!? (Marin points out that the simple 12 ... lLlg6 breaks the pin, with easy equality) 13 ..tfl h6!

14 f3 g5 15 ..tg3l:!.g8 16lLlc4l:[g7 17 lLle3 h5

18 c4 ..td7 19 c3 nag8 20 lLlf5 ..txf5 21 exf5 h4

22 ..tf2, Kamsky-Timman, Tilburg 1991, and here 22 ... c5 (versus dxe5 followed by ..td4 or ~d4) leads to double-edged play. b) 12 h3 h6 13 ~d2 lLlg6 14 ..tg3 lLlh5 15 ..th2 lLlhf4 with a solid defence. As previously explained in the context of the King's Indian and Pirc Defences, a knight on f4 has more ef- fect if there's a pawn on h3. We now return to the position arising after 11 ..tc1 (D):

After this bishop retreat, we can see the ba- sic features of the position developing. White has a bishop-pair and prospects of gaining space, which is generally a good combination. But the difficulties with his structure are worth noting. White has three options regarding what to do with the d-pawn: 1) He can exchange it on e5, but that isolates his c-pawns and frees the c5-square for one of Black's pieces. 2) He can advance the pawn to d5, but this seriously reduces the mobility of his pawns, be- cause c4-c5 is easily prevented (by ... b6, if nothing else). Worse, if Black can play ... c6 and ... cxd5 (or recapture with a piece if White plays dxc6), then White's pawns on c2 and c3 will be especially exposed down the half-open c-file, and Black will have permanent outposts for his pieces on c4 and c5. Therefore White will nor- mally make the advance d5 only when he has a strong attack elsewhere (for example, on the kingside with f4), or when Black has already committed to ... c5 and cannot open the c-file. These themes are almost the same ones that we saw in the Nimzo-Indian Defence in Volume 2, and especially in the Samisch Variation. 3) White can and usually does leave the d- pawn where it is, exerting some pressure on e5. Then he can organize f4, to attack that square further, and/or play for lLlh4-f5 . Black would like to neutralize White's bish- ops by locking the position, but there's no way to rule out some pawn-break by White, regard- less of whether d5 has been played. So he will generally try to reserve activity somewhere else on the board. Depending upon circumstances, that may well involve a queenside advance such as ... b5 (particularly in the ... c5 main lines); sometimes he can aim for ... d5, either with or without ... c6. Black will also try to prevent or anticipate any attempt to play f4, and in doing so he can even play on the kingside himself if the opportunity arises. 1l. .. c5 The most direct move, trying to resolve the central situation. Black has a row of legitimate alternatives; for example: a) ll...c6 12 ..tfl (intending a double cap- ture on e5) 12 .. .'iVc7 (or 12 .. J:td8) 13lLlh4l:[e8

14 g3 (14lLlf5 might be better) 14 ... h6 15 f4!?

~a5, Sturua-A.Mikhalevski, Biel 1999, and now Mikhalevski suggests 16 lLlf5 exf4 17 ctJxd6, but then the tactic 17 ... 'iVxc3! 18 ctJxe8 ctJxe8 19 ..txf4 ctJxd4! wins back material, in view of 20 ..td3 'iVxe1 +! 21 'iVxe1 ctJf3+. In all of these positions, White has to prepare f4 care- fully or risk overextending his position. b) 1l...l:[d8 12..tfl (12 ctJh4 c5 13 ctJf5 'iVc7) 12 ... b6!? introduces a strategy of luring the d- pawn forward so as to eliminate the central ten- sion and target White's queenside. For example,

13 g3 (in Grishchuk-Morozevich, Dubai 2002,

White avoided committing to d5 by 13 ctJh4 g6

14 g3 .tb7 15 .tg2) 13 ... ..th7 14 d5?! (14 i.d3)

14 ... ctJc5 15 i.d3 (D). This is Fauber-Bisguier, Las Vegas 1973. Now the most promising course comes di- rectly from Nimzo-Indian positions in which

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 241

White has doubled c-pawns: Black should play 15 ... c6!, when 16 dxc6 i.xc6 leaves White's c-pawns exposed along the c-file, and 16 c4 can be answered by 16 ... b5! or 16 ... cxd5 17 cxd5 .tc8 with the idea of ... i.d7 and ... l':!.ac8. c) ll...a6 12 i.n 4:Jd7 13 g3 (D) (13 a4 would restrain Black's queenside for the mo- ment) and now: cl) In the game Shabanov-Hecht, Dresden 2004, Black simply overprotected the e5-pawn by 13 ... 'ilVf614 i.e3l':!.e8 15 i.g2 h616 ~d2 b6, at which point the players agreed to a draw. White might try 17 4:Jh4, intending f4, when 17 ... i.b7 18 4:Jf5 4:Jg5! hits e4 and plans 19 f3 d5! 20 h4!? dxe4 with great complications. c2) 13 ... c5 14 i.g2 l':!.b8 15 h4 b5 16 h5 a5 17 4:Jh4 (Aagaard suggests 17 d5 4:Jc7 18 4:Jh4) 17 ... g6. Here, instead of 18 i.e3 b4 19 d5, as in Conquest-Ledger, British Ch, Liverpool 2008, when Black should have played 19 ... 4:Jf4!, White can close the centre and try to activate his bishops by 18 i.h6l':!.d8 19 d5 4:Jc7 (19 ... 4:Jf4?? 20 gxf4 "iVxh4?? 21 i.g5) 20 a4 b4 21 'ilVd2 with the idea f4. These are not dull positions. You can see that the symmetrical nature of the Four Knights doesn't limit its strategic complexity. We now return to 11...c5 (D): w 12 i.ft Another bishop retreat to its home square! There are several points to this move, but the main one is that White would like to play g3 in order to support the move 4:Jh4 and, in the best of worlds, f4. But if he is to do this, his bishop is needed to defend the kingside light squares. Instead, 12 dxe5 dxe5 13 4:Jxe5?? loses to 13 ... ttJc7, and 12 d5 releases the tension before it's necessary; in response, Black can smoothly develop his queenside play via 12 ... 4:Jc7 13 i.n i.d7 14 a4l':!.ab8, with ... b5 to follow shortly. White's main alternative is the flexible move 12 a4, to restrain ... b5 and see how events de- velop. Then: a) In Spassky-Xie Jun, Copenhagen 1997, Black committed a common error by opening up the central position: 12 ... 4:Jc7 13 i.n i.g4 14 h3! i.xf3?! 15 'ilVxf3 cxd4 16 cxd4 exd4 17 e5! 4:Jd7 18 i.a3 4:Jxe5 19 'i!Vxb7, threatening 20 l':!.xe5!. b) 12 ... l':!.d8 (D) is much better: bl) In Short-Anand, Linares 1992, White clarified the centre and tried to advance on the kingside by 13 dxe5 dxe5 14 'ilVe2 ~c7 15 i.c4 h6 16 4:Jh4 l':!.e8 17 4:Jf5 4:Jf4 18 'iWf3, where- upon Anand suggests that 18 ... i.e6 19 i.n c4 would at least equalize. b2) After 13 d5, Black can employ a stan- dard set-up by 13 ... 4:Jf8 14 i.n 4:Jg6 15 g3 h6.

242 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w oj) 13 .i.c4 b6!? 14 bJ IiJt8 l5liJb4 cxd4 (Shirov gives 15 ... g5! 16lbf5 i.xf5 17 exf5 e4, when 18 h4! puts some pressure on Black) 16 cxd4 exd4?! (Black shouldn't open the position) 17 i.b2 d5?! (this faulty combination leads to a nice finish) 18 exd5 ~b4 19 'iVxd4 lbe6 20 dxe6! i.xe6 (Shirov analyses 20 ... l1xd4 21 exf7+ ~h7 22 i.xd4 i.f5, when the easiest way to win is 23 i.n! 1i'xd4 24 lbxf5 'iYc5 25 i.d3 g6 26lbe7 with material and attack) 21 1i'e3! 'iYxb2 (2l...~xc4 22 i.xf6 gxf6 23 ~xh6) 22 i.xe6 fxe6 (22 .. J:te8 23 1i'b3) 23 'iUxe6+ ~h8 24 lbg6+ ~h7 25 ~f5 and in Shirov-Lesiege, North Bay 1994 White went on to win. 12. l:tdS13 g3 A sort of main line, although 13 a4 is often played. 13.. ~c7 After 13 ... cxd4 14 cxd4 b6, Marin recom- mends 15 a4, which is probably a bit better for White. He also suggests that Stoica's 13 ... d5!? might be best, with lines like 14 dxe5lbxe4 15 c4 dxc4 16 ~e2 lb4g5 17 lbxg5 lbxg5 18 f4 lbh3+. 14 dslbfS1Slbh4 (D) This direct move aims for an early f4. 15 i.g5 ~e7 l6lbh4 h6 17 .tel g5! 18 lbg2lbg6 produced a fairly balanced game in Short-Tuk- makov, Solingen 1991. IS.  J:i.eS!? Stopping f4. Other defensive possibilities: a) In Bondarevsky-Lilienthal, USSR Abso- lute Ch, LeningradIMoscow 1941, White gen- erated an attack after 15 ... lbg6 16 i.g5! lbxh4 17 i.xh41i'e7 18 f4 h6 19 i.g2 exf4?! (19 ... b6 20 "iVf3) 20 gxf4 g5 (a familiar manoeuvre from the Sicilian Defence) 21 fxg5lbg4 22 e5! lbxe5

23 "iifh5 hxg5 24 .fi.xg5 f6, and instead of 25 i.h4? ~ g7, as played in the game, White had at his disposal 25 J:i.xe5! dxe5 26 "iVg6+ "iVg7 27 ~xf6 .:tf8 28 'Yi"xg7+ ~xg7 29 d6, when the bishops are very strong. b) 15 ... h6 looks best, since White should avoid 16 f4?! exf4 17 gxf4 (17 i.xf4 g5 18 e5 lbe8) 17 ... ~e7, which threatens ... lbxe4. 16 i.gSlb6d7 17 "iVh5! White's pieces are clustering around the kingside. 17 .. lbb61S a4! i.d7 Serper gives the cute line 18 ... a5 19 i.b5 .td7 20 lbf5! with the idea 20 ... i.xb5? 21 i.f6! i.d7 22 'iUh6!? (or the more brutal 22 lbh6+, forcing mate), winning (22 ... lbe6 23 i.xg7).

19 a5 lbcs 20 lbfS i.xfS 21 exf5 lbe7 22

i.b5 J:i.ecS 231i'g4! lbxd5 (D) w

24 J:i.adl?!

24 i.c4! lbe7 25 f6 gxf6 26 i.xf6+ lbeg6 27 .l:ted 1 is much easier. 24 ... lbxc3?

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 243

24 ... hS! delays matters, although White stays on top after 2S 'iVxhS lOxc3 26 .Bc4 dS 27 nxdS! lOxdS 28 .ixdS (28 l:!.e4!!) 28 ... nd8 (28 ... 'iWd7 29 .Be4 'iVa4 30 f6) 29 .Bxd8 1:Ixd8 30 nxeS lOh7 31 'iVe2. 25 .Bf6 lOg6 26 fxg6 gxf6 Serper gives 26 ... hxg6 27 .Bc4! gxf6?! 28 'iWxg6+ 'it'f8 29 'iVxf6 lOxdl 30 l:!.e4! lOc3 31 nh4 'it'e8, when 32 .Be6! wins. 27 gxf7 ++ 'it'h8 27 ... <3;xf710ses to 28 .Bc4+ or 28 'iVc4+ and 29 'iWxc3. 28 'iVe61-0 The end would be 28 ... <3;g7 29 nxd610xbS 30 'iVxf6+ <3;f8 31 'iVh8+ <3;e7 32l:!.xeS+! <3;xd6 33 'iWf6+. Symmetry in the English Opening The English Opening with 1 c4 cS is a major source of symmetrical play (as well as a gold- mine of reversed lines). As you can see by ex- amining Volume 3, most variations become unbalanced by move S at the latest, but a few are likely to exhibit extended symmetry. Two generalizations seem to apply to these lines. First, Black can depart from symmetry in vari- ous ways with little risk. However, the longer Black imitates White's moves, the greater are White's chances to reach a favourable and dou- ble-edged position. Let me briefly cite some variations from Volume 3 to illustrate this. One of the best-known symmetrical varia- tions is 1 c4 cS 2 lOc3 lOc6 3 g3 g6 4 .Bg2 .Bg7, when after S 1Of3, the old main line is S. .. lOf6 6 O-O (or 6 d4) 6 ... O-O 7 d4 cxd4 8 lOxd4. Then White has a small advantage and has enjoyed excellent results. However, Black doesn't have to imitate White to this extent; he can break the symmetry earlier with S ... eS, S. .. e6 or S. .. d6, all respectable moves which grant him fully-fledged play. Similarly, after S a3, Black can imitate his op- ponent for a long time, notably in this variation:

[diagram]
a6 6 l:!.bl nb8 7 b4 cxb4 8 axb4 b5 9 cxb5 axb510 lOf3 (D) IO .. e5

Black decides to be the one to break symme- try. Continued imitation is risky, but not fatal; for example, 1O ... lOf6 11 d4 dS 12 .Bf4 (12 lOeSlOxeS 13 dxeSlOg4) 12 ... .ifS (12 ... nb6 is also possible) 13 .Bxb8 .ixbl 14 .i.f4 .ifS (14 ... .Be4 probably improves) IS O-O O-O 16 lOeS!, and now the symmetry is finally broken, in view of 16 ... lOe4?? l71Oxc61Oxc3 18 'iiel. Black should play 16 ... 'iib6 17 .ixdS! lOxeS! (17 ... lOxd4 18 .txf7+ l:txf7 19 .i.e3 and White will emerge a pawn up) 18 dxeS (18 .i.xeS nc8!) 18 ... lOg4, although he hasn't yet equal- ized following 19 .Bg21OxeS 20 lOdS. This is a typical result of too slavish an imitation, but it was fun while it lasted! 11 d4! White chooses the best point at which to seek an imbalance, rather than play 11 e4 and revert to the status quo. 11 ... exd4 12 lOd5 This unresolved and unclear position is ana- lysed in Volume 3, Chapter 7, in the notes to M.Domingo-Alekseev, Berlin 2006. The point is that you can find plenty of promising mate- rial in a symmetrical variation if your goal is to play for a win. Here's another variation that is traditionally considered drawish, probably more so than any other imitative line in the English. It won't sur- prise you that its evaluation is also unclear.

[diagram]
e6 Black can easily break symmetry with sound and interesting variations such as S. .. eS and S. .. lOf6, and the ambitious S. .. .Bxc3!? com- pletely unbalances the situation.

244 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
1 c4 c5 2liJf3liJf6 3 g3 b6 4 .Bg2 .Bb7 5 O-O

g6 This defines the Double Fianchetto Varia- tion. Note that 5 ... e6 introduces the Hedgehog Variation, examined in Volume 3.

6 b3 .Bg7 7 .Bb2 O-O (D)

w White has chosen to enter into the truly sym- metrical version of the Double Fianchetto. Black is supposed to equalize rather easily here, and indeed, the variation has a high percentage of draws. The key for Black is that he's under no pressure, and can therefore break the symmetry without much risk. Often this takes the form of a central liquidation. SliJc3 In a position this flexible, there are always too many lines to mention, so I'll limit myself to some common ones: a) 8 d4 cxd4 9 ~xd4 d6 10 l:.dl liJbd7 sets up a standard Hedgehog structure. 11 liJe1 (11 liJc3 liJe4 12 'ilYe3 .Bxc3 13 .Bxc3 liJxc3 14 'iVxc3 lic8 presents Black few problems; for ex- ample, 15 'iVd4liJf6 16:tac1, and 16 ... 'ilYc7 with the idea ... 'Yj'c5 is equal, whereas 16 ... :tc7 17 \i'e3 'i!Va8 is a bit more interesting) 1l...~8 (or 1l....Bxg2 12liJxg2liJc5) 12liJc3liJe4 13 'ilYe3 liJxc3 14 .Bxc3 .Bxc3 15 'ilYxc3 liJf6 16 :tac1 .:rc8 17 \i'e3 'i!Vc7 18 liJd3 .Bxg2 'Iz-'Iz Diz- darevic-Psakhis, FIDE Knockout, New Delhi 2000. b) 8 e3 d5 9 cxd5 leads to tedious play: 9 ... liJxd5 (9 ... 'Yj'xd5 equalizes as well: 10 liJc3 'i!Vd7 1 1 d4 cxd4 12liJxd4 .l:!.d8 13 J:Ic 1 SLxg2 14

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 245

~xg2 ctJc6 15 ctJcb5 ctJxd4 16 ctJxd4 ltacS, Gerber-Babula, Zemplinska Sirava 2004) 10 i..xg7 ~xg7 11 d4ctJa6!? (or simply l1...ctJd7 12 'iVe2 cxd4 13ctJxd4ctJ7f6) 12 'iVe2 cxd4 13 ctJxd4 e5 14 ctJb5 'iVe7 15 .l:f.dl IUdS 16 ctJd2 ctJac7 with an uneventful position, Kurajica- Atalik, Sarajevo 2001. 8 . ctJa6 The move ... ctJa6 shows up in several vari- ants of the Double Fianchetto line. It leaves the b7-bishop's diagonal open, while positioning the knight to go to c5 if White plays d4 and Black replies ... cxd4. The most important role of ... ctJa6, however, is to support Black's central pawn-break, as follows: 9d4dS This is the standard solution. 9 ... e6 and 9 ... ctJe4 are among the sound alternatives. For those looking for longer-term play, a Hedgehog set-up might be of interest; for example, 9 ... cxd4 10 ctJxd4 i.xg2 11 ~xg2ctJc5 12 f3 e6 13 e4 a6 14 'tIVd2 d6 15 .l:i.fdl 'iVc7 16 .l:i.acl .l:i.fdS. 10 cxdSctJxdSllctJxdS (D) Moves such as 11 .l:i.c 1 and 11 e3 aren't much more exciting.

11 . :~xdS 11 ... i.xd5 is also satisfactory; then a plausi- ble follow-up would be 12 e31lVd7 131lVe21lVb7 14 .l:f.fel i.e4. 12ctJh4 ~d7 13 dxcS1lVxdl14 .l:i.fxdl i.xb2 IS i..xb7ctJxcS 16 i.xa8 i.xa117 .l:i.xal J:txa8

18.l:i.dl

It's hard for either side to find a serious plan in this position. 18 .. aS 19 ctJf3 a4!? 20 bxa4 .l:i.xa4 21 .l:i.d2 ctJe4 22 .l:i.c2 bS 23 ctJd2 ctJd6 24 ~f1 liz_liz It's worth noting that, although the positions in this variation are equal and often dull, most of them can be played for a win by either side. An opening like this can signal drawish intent in grandmaster play, because White doesn't aim for the initiative or an attack. But that doesn't preclude a normally contested game if the players choose to pursue one. Having said that, it's still a relief to tum to the following modem treatment: Pantsulaia - Gelfand FIDE World Cup, Khanty-Mansiisk 2005

1 c4 cS 2 ctJf3ctJf6 3 g3 b6 4 i.g2 i.b7 S O-O

g66ctJc3 White avoids the excessively symmetrical b3 lines above. 6 .. i.g7 (D) w 7d4 This is the most ambitious move. There are two alternatives which delay immediate con- frontation: a) 7 ltel tries to enforce e4, and secures long-term chances if White can get e4 and d4 in. One problem with it comes from the move 7 ... ctJe4, which has generally proven satisfac- tory. For example, SctJxe4 i.xe4 9 d3 (9 d4 cxd4 10 i.h6!? is clever-looking, but not particularly effective after 1O ... i.xh611 ~xd4 O-O 121lVxe4 ctJc613 :adl.l:i.cS 14 h4 i.g7, Stohl-Tukmakov, Bled 1997) 9 ... i.b7 10 e4 O-O (1O ... ctJc6! 11 .l:i.bl O-O is dead equal) 11 e5!? (trying to stir something up by laying claim to some territory;

11 d4 cxd412ctJxd4 and now 12 ... d6 is a pleas-

ant Hedgehog position for Black, since White's

246 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

king's bishop is restricted, while 12 ... ltJa6 is another good way to develop) 11...d5!? (after the logical 11...d6, 12 e6!? is worth a whirl, but Black should be fine after 12 ... fxe6 13 ltJg5 .Bxg2 14 'it>xg2 'iVd7 15ltJxe61H5! 16 f4 ltJc6) 12 .Bf4 (12 e6 dxc4) 12 ... dxc4?! 13 dxc4 'iVxdl?! 14 naxdl and it's not easy for Black to develop, Beckhuis-Sulskis, Vienna 2005. b) 7 d3 has the same idea of e4 and prevents ... ltJe4, but now it will take two moves to play d4: 7 ... O-O (after 7 ... d5, 8 cxd5ltJxd5 9 .Bd2 O-O is equal: ... ltJc7, ... ltJc6, and in some cases ... ltJe6 and ... ltJcd4 can follow; White might as well try something like 8 ltJe5) 8 e4 ltJc6 9 h3 d6 10 .Be3 e6 (1O ... e5 is equal and dull) 11 d4 ltJa5!? 12 iVd3 d5 13 cxd5 exd5 14 dxc5?! (14 e5 ltJe4 15 ltJd2 is better) 14 ... ltJxe4 15 cxb6 axb6, Berkes-Z.Almasi, Budapest 2003. Black has very active pieces, plans of ... ltJc5 and ... ltJc4, and a modest advantage. 7 .. cxd481i'xd4 In contrast to the lines with 6 b3 above, the symmetrical characteristics of the opening have vanished. 8 ltJxd4 is an older move, which was dealt a blow after 8 ... .Bxg2 9 'it>xg2 O-O 10 e4

Here Black found 1O .. :~c7! (hitting c4) 11 b3 ltJxe4! 12 ltJxe4 1i'e5, a pseudo-sacrifice that neither Karpov nor Kasparov was able to crack as White in their 1984/5 match. To this day, it remains the principal deterrent to 8 ltJxd4.

8. .. d69l:1dl

The slightly odd-looking 9 .Be3 is the most popular move at this juncture. It very often transposes to the note to Black's 10th move after 9 ... ltJbd7 10 nfdl, so I'll defer a discus- sion about it until then. 9  ltJbd7 (D) Black often delays castling in these lines to keep more options open. Here 9 ... O-O should be answered by 10 'iVh4, as in the game. If the queen remains on d4 it is subject to discovered attack by ... ltJe4 or ... ltJd5. w You may recognize this as the Hedgehog Variation from Volume 3, but with ... g6 and ... iLg7 replacing ... e6 and ... .Be7. It's an inter- esting trade-off. At first blush, this seems to fa- vour Black, who can boast that his bishop is more active on the long diagonal, and that he has no weaknesses, in contrast to the weakness of the pawn on d6 which can be so important af- ter ... e6 and ... iLe7. Needless to say, that's not the end of the story. For one thing, in the Hedgehog, a pawn on e6 covers d5, so Black needn't worry about ltJd5 in most lines. In addi- tion, Black's kingside structure (with pawns on f7, g7 and h7) is ideal for protection against a direct attack, whereas Black's structure with ... g6 in the Double Fianchetto leads to the pos- sibility of attack via 'iVh4 and .Bh6. In the end, the two systems are roughly equivalent in worth, with the Double Fianchetto having a slightly safer feel, and the Hedgehog giving more coun- terattacking prospects. 10 'ii'h4 The most common move-order is 10 .Be3 (which is the equivalent of 9 .Be3 ltJbd7 10 l:!.fdl). As mentioned, the bishop covers c5 against a rook -lift, and it also aims at b6; the lat- ter tends to be a sensitive point because the move ... a6 is almost always included in Black's

SYMMETRY AND ITS DESCENDANTS 247

plans. One game went 1O ... .l:!.c8 11 b3 O-O 12 't!i'h4 a6 13 .l:!.ac1 (protecting c3; 13 i.h6 i.xh6 14 ~xh6 invites 14 ... bS!) 13 ... .l:!.c7 (this prepares ... ~a8; see the next note) 14 i.h3! (you'll see this in many games: now White can play ttJd4 or ttJd2 without exchanging bishops, and the bishop on h3 proves to be an influential piece) 14 .. :~a8? (14 ... .l:!.e8 IS i.h6 .l:!.cS!? 16 i.xg7 rt;xg7 17 'ii'd4 'it>g8 gives White some extra space, but Black seems comfortably placed) IS i.xd7! .l:!.xd7 (lS ... ttJxd7 16 'fixe7; lS ... i.xf3 16 i.h3 i.c6 17 i.xb6) 16 ttJa4 (White threatens liJxb6 and wins a pawn) 16 ... i.xf3 17 ttJxb6 ~7 18 exf3 :c7 19 ttJdS ttJxdS 20 .l:!.xdS and White went on to win in Anand-Gomez Esteban, Santurtzi 2003. We now return to 10 'fih4 (D):

.... l:!.e8 This is sometimes played after ... O-O, and will often transpose. Black wants to have ... :tcS available at the right moment, helping to defend against a potential kingside attack by White; to that end, ... .l:!.cS-hS is a theme. He also prepares ... .l:!.c7, in order to shift his queen to a8 and then double rooks on the c-file. The latter manoeuvre, in conjunction with ... a6 and ... bS, can create great pressure on White's queenside. In fact, Black's discovery of this rook manoeuvre was key to making the Double Fianchetto popular some years back and remains essential to the variation today. As regards move-orders, the game's 10 'ii'h4 is less frequently played than 10 i.e3, perhaps because of the response 10 ... h6 (D). Then the simple idea of ... gS can be a prob- lem in various lines, especially since the retreat w 'iWh3 runs into ... g4, and ~d4 might subject the queen to discovered attack. Kramnik-Nikolic, Amber Blindfold, Monte Carlo 1999 continued 11 i.e3 (11 ttJel ~c8!? 12 i.xb7 1Wxb7 13 i.e3 .l:!.c8 14 I;lac1 gS! IS ~d4 ttJhS 16 ~g4 ttJhf6 17 ~d4 ttJhS was later drawn in Korch- noi-Gulko, Hastings 1988/9; 11 ttJd4 i.xg2 12 'it>xg2 .l:!.c8! has the idea 13 b3?! gS 14 'iVh3 g4 IS 'ilVh4.l:!.cS) Il..Jlc8 12l:tac1 gS! 13 'ii'd4 O-O 14 ~d3 (what else?) 14 ... i.xf3! IS exf3 ttJeS 16 'ii'e2 ttJxc4 17 i.d4 eS 18 ttJbS 'iVd7! 19 b3 1WxbS 112_112. In fact, Black has had the better game for some time, and following 20 bxc4, he would stand better after either 20 .. :~d7 or 20 ... 'iVa4. lli.h6 O-O (D) After 1l...i.xh6 12 '1Wxh6 .l:!.xc4 13 ttJd2! 'uc7?! 14 ttJbS White wins the exchange. w

12 b3 a6 13 .l:!.ael .l:!.eS!

Threatening ... :hS. Instead, 13 ... i.xh6!? 14 'ii'xh6 bS IS ttJgS! i.xg2 16 'it>xg2 bxc4 17 :d4! with the idea :h4 is very difficult for

248 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black. In Gustafsson-Babula, Hamburg 2004, Black continued 17 ... cxb3? (D) (17 ... ':eS IS ItMlDf8 19lDd5lDh5! 20 bxc4! threatens g4). Now Kosten points out the winning move IS lDxh7!!, based upon the beautiful line Is ... lDxh7 19 l:!.MlDdf6 20 lDd5 lIeS 21 lDxf6+ exf6 22 'it'xh7+ 'it>fS 23 l:!.xcS 'iVxcs 241Ie4!! ':xe4 25 'iWhS+. After the seemingly better IS ... l:.eS, 19 lDxf6+ lDxf6 20 lIM lDh5 21 lDe4! threatens lDg5; then 2l...~d7 22 lDg5 e5, to protect f7, still falls short after 23 ':xcS ':'xcS 24 lDh7!, threatening :txh5. A great set of tactics! 14lDd5!? (D) White has his own ideas about Black's rook, and this move cuts it off from the kingside. A calmer approach is 14 lDg5 i.xg2 15 'it>xg2 'iWaS+ 16 f3 (or 16 e4) 16 .. JHcS 17 a4 with the idea of e4. White has a bind, although the posi- tion is only slightly better for him.

14  i.xh6!? Or: a) 14 ... i.xd5?! 15 cxd5 ':xd5 has no tacti- cal refutation, but White can switch sides by 16 ':xd5 lDxd5 17 i.xg7 'it>xg7 IS 'lYc4! with a clear positional superiority after 19 'lYxa6. b) 14 ... lDxd5! is a good solution, with the idea 15 lDg5 (15 cxd5 lDf6 16 lDg5 i.xh6 17 'lYxh6 'iWc7) 15 ... lD7f6 16 i.xd5 i.xd5 17 Itxd5 'iYcS!. 15 'iYxh6 i.xd5? Again, 15 ... lDxd5 is best; for example, 16 lDg5 lD7f6 17 i.xd5 i.xd5 IS ':xd5 'lYcS! 19 e4 b5 20':c3 ':xd5 (20 ... bxc4?? 21 e5! dxe5 22 l:!.f3 threatens ':xf6) 21 exd5 (with the idea ':f3 and l::txf6) 21...'ilVg4! 22 l::tf3 'iYh5 23 'lYxh5 lDxh5 with approximate equality. 16 cxd5 l::txd5? 16 ... 'lYc7 17 lDd4 gives White an outpost on c6 and a solid positional edge. But the capture on d5 is worse. 17 l::txd5 lDxd5 18 lDg5 lD5f6 19 l:!.c4! :r.e8 20 l:!.h4lDrs 21 i.c6 (D)

The hidden point of White's combination, netting the exchange.

21...d5 22 i.xe8

Or 22 e4! dxe4 23 i.xeS iVxeS 24lDxe4, etc. White consolidated successfully anyway: 22  'iYxe8 23lDf3 e5 24 ~cl d4 25 e3 d3 26 'iVc3 lD8d7 27 1:!.c4 'iYe6 28 e4 lDc5 29 w.vxe5 'iWxe5 30 lDxe5lDfxe4 31 b4 d2 32 l::td4lDa4 33 lDc4 lDac3 34 l::td8+ 'it>g7 35 lDxd2 lDf6 36 a3 as 37 bxa5 bxa5 38 l::td3 1-0

8 Irregular Openings and Initial Moves

In this series, I've focused primarily upon what I call the 'important' openings, which are gen- erally the ones used most, but also on those that have an established history of practice. In this chapter I'll devote some time to a discussion of irregular openings, and then look at unusual first moves in detail. I'm using the adjective 'ir- regular' to denote openings that are not fre- quently employed by master players, but still enjoy a following on lower levels. Sometimes such openings are called 'unorthodox'; that isn't such a bad word, but from the point of view of strategy, 'unorthodox' techniques can still be popular ones, whereas certain 'orthodox' treat- ments of positions fall into relative disuse (per- haps because they are too easy to meet). For example, the Trompowsky Attack 1 d4 ttJf6 2 .tg5 has become popular and universally ac- cepted, but one could argue that 2 .tg5 itself is not an 'orthodox' move; on the flip side, the form of the Torre Attack with 1 d4 d5 2 ttJf3 ttJf6 3 .tg5 is orthodox by the classical stan- dards of development, but it isn't very popular any more. In a similar way, classically-oriented openings such as the Ponziani Opening (1 e4 e5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 c3) and the Hungarian Defence (1 e4 e5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 .tc4 .te7) are orthodox in strategic terms, but rare in master practice; to- day, they could legitimately be called 'irregular'. This distinction can extend to eccentric-looking openings which were until recently irregular and have moved into the mainstream; for exam- ple, the Chebanenko Slav (1 d4 d5 2 c4 c6 3 ttJf3 ttJf6 4 ttJc3 a6). While this variation could hardly be called 'irregular' any more, being the respectable subject of books and articles, I'm still not sure who is so advanced as to call Black's strategy 'orthodox'! Of course, the ter- minology isn't terribly important; the point is that the openings I refer to as 'irregular' in this chapter aren't yet used by masters or grand- masters on an ordinary basis, although many remain stubbornly popular with average play- ers. The Appeal of the Irregular Some irregular openings are perfectly playable; others are used merely for surprise value and have limited or no logic behind them. In either case, their attraction is undeniable. The Web is surfeited with articles on various unusual ways to begin the game, and there are numerous sites solely devoted to them. If you go often enough to any chess club, or to the skittles rooms of tournaments, you'll eventually run into people who are discussing some strange and dubious opening, usually having a great time doing so. What is the appeal? First, there's something lib- erating about playing around with an opening that you haven't seen before, and having the feeling (illusory or not) that the move you're suggesting hasn't been thought of by anyone until this moment. Along the same lines, chess- players like having 'their own' special opening, be that an eccentric first move, a speculative gambit, or even something that they've in- vented. Furthermore, a lot of irregular openings have an exciting, paradoxical feel to them: you make counterintuitive moves, waste time, or sacrifice pawns, and yet some not-so-obvious factor is working in your favour to give you positive chances. It's a break from the drudgery of 'cor- rect' play and following those tired old princi- ples. Even if you don't secure the better game, you can at least irritate your opponent and pres- ent him with multiple opportunities to go wrong. The most entertaining irregular openings also contain tactical traps into which one innocent victim after another falls. It takes a confluence of forces for this to happen, but makes every- thing more fun. Then there's the issue of convenience, un- derestimated by the professionals who write chess literature. The most obvious reason to go out of the mainstream is to have something to play without needing very much preparation.

250 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Depending upon the time you have available, getting away from your opponent's favourite opening can be a practical necessity. Just don't forget that opening preparation has benefits that go well beyond the immediately practical; as I'm constantly stressing, it will increase your understanding of middle games and of chess in general. Perhaps that's why we see so few un- compromising adherents of irregular and even out-of-the-way openings reach the top of the chess hierarchy. There are exceptions, of course, but you will find that the successful grand- masters who play anti-theoretical lines (includ- ing obscure sidelines of mainstream openings) have previously or concurrently spent years playing and studying more conventional open- ings. The knowledge and skill derived from knowing a wide variety of standard opening ideas and associated middlegames informs their use of irregular openings; it's not so clear that the reverse is true. In any case, most masters who employ unconventional openings aren't simply tossing out the moves; they have usu- ally put a great deal of time into examining their consequences. Properly motivated, this kind of investigation can increase your under- standing and playing strength, just as any other kind of opening study can. Thus, by itself, play- ing out of the mainstream shouldn't do damage to one's results; after all, a strong player can win with any opening. But playing something just because it gets you 'out of the books' prob- ably won't payoff, because your overall under- standing of how to play openings is a more important factor than the specific opening you use. Finally, the major openings have for the most part achieved their status because they tend to produce the best practical outcomes in master play. I don't believe this consideration affects the inexperienced player much, if at all, nor even the average one. Playing gambits, for example, can be very healthy for your rating at the club level. Nevertheless, as you begin to improve and play stronger opponents, the ob- jective worth of an opening takes on more sig- nificance. So there's a point at which you will want to know which irregular openings are ac- tually inferior, which are acceptable but unpop- ular, and which are easy to play. In addition, if you're going to use such an opening, you'll want it to conform to your personal tastes. We still find a widespread snobbishness about irregular openings among masters and teachers, many of whom seem to ignore the finer dis- tinctions among them. Teachers find it easy to inculcate their students with the popular open- ings they themselves are studying and playing; that is fine, but at the same time many become dismissive of everything outside the received wisdom. Thus we see juniors who feel that anything except main-line Sicilians are infe- rior (and, as a result, we see a monotonous stream of Dragons, Najdorfs and Sveshnikovs at scholastic tournaments). It turns out, however, that much of what is ir- regular today becomes conventional tomorrow. The contemporary literature on irregular and unusual moves, in both book and periodical form, is increasingly professional, much of it written by masters and grandmasters. They are discovering that more opening ideas, including old ones, are playable and can lead to rich posi- tions. By keeping an eye on such literature, you can more easily separate openings with real worth from those with only shock value. Adventures with 1 e4 It's staggering how much is going on at the most fundamental levels of opening theory. By way of example, and with an eye on ways that we might spice up our chess experiences, let me list a se- lection of unconventional variations following from the initial move 1 e4. They all arise within just the first five moves, all have been played by grandmasters, and all are good enough to be worthy of consideration for practical play. Most of them are truly irregular lines; to the extent that a couple have assumed top-level respect- ability, they have only done so recently. And, in spite of being recommended by players and theoreticians, the majority of these lines haven't gained large followings or elite approval. To be clear: I'm not including the countless ingenious new ideas that are refreshing already estab- lished openings. Rather, I am selecting very early moves that define a unique opening varia- tion. Let me begin with what is easily the most popular 1 e4 opening, the Sicilian Defence.

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 251

Players on both sides of the board are discover- ing that variations previously ignored at the top levels are in fact legitimate. To put that in con- text with an older example, it's worth remem- bering that about two decades ago, 1 e4 c5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 .tb5 (the Rossolimo Variation) was still considered somewhat irregular (or at best harmless), and now it has driven some grand- masters away from their lifelong preference for the move 2 ... ttJc6! As Black in the Open Sicilian, there are many irregular set-ups which now seem quite playable; for example: a) The Lowenthal Sicilian with 1 e4 c5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 e5 5 ttJb5 a6, al- lowing 6 ttJd6+. When I compare the various recent books and articles on this system, in- cluding those by grandmasters recommending particular systems for White, I see nothing to indicate that Black doesn't stand perfectly well. b) The Grivas Sicilian with I e4 c5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 'iVb6. This isn't terribly ambitious, but gives you thematic Sicilian po- sitions without requiring memorization of the ultra-critical variations of, say, Dragons and Najdorfs. A related and playable irregular sys- tem is the 'Gaw-Paw': 1 e4 c5 2 ttJf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 ttJf6 5 ttJc3 'iUb6, and a move ear- lier in this sequence 4 ... 'iUb6 is also used (the Kveinys Variation). c) The O'Kelly Sicilian: 1 e4 c5 2 ttJf3 a6, which is undergoing a great resurgence of inter- est. Properly handled, it consistently produces unbalanced positions in which the better player on that day will win the majority of games. d) Various lines of the amazingly flexible PaulsenlKan Sicilian. For example, 1 e4 c5 2 ttJf3 e6 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 a6 5 .td3 g6 is still an irregular line, but has serious theoretical backing. After five moves, Black appears to have the weakest dark squares imaginable - but a playable position! Next, let me tum to some irregular early moves on the white side of the Sicilian. As White, you can have fun with slow and eccen- tric moves because of your extra tempo: a) 1 e4 c5 2 a3. This is Grandmaster Bezgo- dov's move; he has written a 200+ page book on it. White's idea (among others) is to play b4 in some lines to get a favourable form of Sicilian Wing Gambit (1 e4 c5 2 b4) while avoiding some of Black's most active defences. Each of 2 ... ttJc6, 2 ... e6 and 2 ... d6, for example, are an- swered by 3 b4. There are also elements of the English Opening reversed; for example, 2 ... g6 3 c3 !? is 1 c4 e5 2 g3 c6 with the extra a3 for White. Incidentally, there have been a number of articles about the Wing Gambit itself, and that might be another choice for the well-prepared player. b) A related, somewhat older line is 1 e4 c5 2 ttJc3 ttJc6 3 f4 g6 4 ttJf3 .tg7 5 a3. White in- tends to play b4 (especially on a move like 5 ... e6) and otherwise uses a2 as a potential re- treat-square for his bishop (for example, after 5 ... d6 6 .tc4), while holding up ... b5-b4 under some circumstances. c) 1 e4 c5 2 ttJa3 has been played by the strong and experienced grandmaster Zviagin- tsev (7 times against 2600+ rated opponents!), as well as a few other prominent grandmasters such as Malakhov and Sashikiran. This is a sound line with some surprisingly positive fea- tures. It's also a real mix-and-match. For exam- ple, White can enter into a sort of c3 Sicilian with ttJc2 or ttJc4 via a sequence such as 2 ... e6

3 c3 d5 4 e5 ttJc6 5 ttJf3 with the idea ttJc2 and

d4. Or, against 2 ... ttJc6, the Rossolimo-like 3 .tb5 leaves the Grand Prix move f4 available to be played later. Moves like 2 a3 and 2 ttJa3 will probably never become wildly popular, but they are sound lines which will doubtless see periodic usage by strong players. d) The Closed Sicilian with 1 e4 c5 2 ttJc3 ttJc63 g4. The idea is to accelerate White's ex- pansion on the kingside; normally, he plays 3 g3 and only later, g4. Another offbeat Closed Sicilian is 1 e4 c5 2 ttJc3 ttJc6 3 .tb5, used by a number of grandmasters. e) I'll also mention Vasiukov's variation 1 e4 c5 2 ttJf3 d6 3 d4 cxd4 4 'iUxd4, playing for rapid development, which is orthodox by com- parison with the ones above. This has been around for ages, and although it has never really caught on at the elite level, it has scored reason- ably well. It is also wide open to new interpreta- tions. What about 1 e4 e5? For Black, irregular old lines are being reconsidered; for example:

252 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a) 1 e4 e5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 .ltb5 g6, played by Smyslov, is an interesting alternative to the con- ventional Ruy Lopez lines. b) I e4 e5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 .ltb5 f5, the Schlie- mann Defence, is still irregular but has been ap- pearing in elite practice and has much new high-level theory devoted to it. As a practical consideration, very few opponents will enter the lengthy and tactical main lines of the Schlie- mann (starting with 4 ttJc3), so you will often see modest responses, such as 4 d3, which is generally regarded as more or less equal. After I e4 e5, many of White's newer ap- proaches come well beyond the first few moves and don't define independent systems. How- ever, we do see the revival of some older lines. Remember that the Scotch Game (1 e4 e5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 d4) had arguably become an 'irreg- ular' opening by the time that Kasparov revived and popularized it. Here are some other double e-pawn openings which have recently had at- tention drawn to them: a) I e4 e5 2 ttJf3 d6 3 d4 ttJf6 4 ttJc3 ttJbd7 5 g4 is Shirov's gambit in the Philidor Defence (an opening which nowadays more often arises via I e4 d6 2 d4 ttJf6 3 ttJc3 e5 4 ttJf3 ttJbd7). It continues to do well and for many players, that beats 20 moves of positional manoeuvring! b) In Chapter 7, I covered the Four Knights Game, 1 e4 e5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 ttJc3 ttJf6 (this is also a possible outcome of the Petroff De- fence: 2 ttJf3 ttJf6 3 ttJc3 ttJc6). White is play- ing several 'irregular' moves following 4 .ltb5 ttJd4, whereas Black has deviated successfully before that with 4 ... .ltd6 !? A half-move earlier, White can get a fresh set of positions out of 4 a3!?, the Gunsberg Variation; this little move prepares d4 without having to worry about ... .ltb4, and tries to create new problems based upon 4 ... .ltc5?! 5 ttJxe5 and 4 ... d5 5 .ltb5. c) 1 e4 e5 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 .ltb5 a6 4 .i.a4 ttJf6 5 'iie2, the Worrall Attack, has never been in bad standing, but has generally been treated as an irregular variation. Now it is seeing a revival. Incidentally, various Ruy Lopez lines with 4 d3 and 5 d3 have been increasingly employed by top grandmasters. In the French Defence, Black has always had great leeway in how to bring his pieces out. For example: a) Recently, I e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 ttJd2 is being answered by irregular moves such 3 ... h6 and 3 ... b6, even at master and grandmaster level, as well as by the better-established but still non- mainstream moves 3 ... ttJc6 and 3 ... a6. b) In the Advance Variation, after I e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 e5, 3 ... b6 is increasingly respectable. Black can also play the odd-looking 3 ... .ltd7, which reserves the option of the normal ... c5 (when d7 is the most common square for the bishop), but also ... a6 and ... .ltb5 in the right sit- uation. c) After I e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 ttJc3, 3 ... ttJc6 has been an irregular byway for years, but now has strong adherents and a respectable body of theory behind it. Strange to say, even 3 ... i..e7 and 3 ... h6 are being played by strong players. With regard to the latter move, the seemingly unrelated and bizarre 1 ttJf3 h6!? (the subject of intense analysis by Wind), may well have drawbacks, but it can lead to 2 e4 e6 3 d4 d5, and the pawn on h6 proves useful. Indeed, 4 ttJc3 ttJf6 is then a transposition to the French Defence variation 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 ttJc3 h6 4 ttJf3 ttJf6, a line which has been played by nu- merous masters and grandmasters. For his part, White periodically experiments with irregular moves in order to keep the play outside the main lines of the French; for exam- ple: a) On the second move, in addition to the previously irregular but now-established 1 e4 e6 2 'iie2, I e4 e6 2 b3 d5 3 .ltb2 is being seen as a provocative way to mix things up. b) 1 e4 e6 2 ttJf3 d5 3 e5 c5 4 b4 cxb4 5 a3 (or 5 d4) is the French Wing Gambit. Although infrequently used at grandmaster level, it has an earnest following below that and considerable theoretical backing. In the Caro-Kann Defence, BJack has many new ideas in established variations, but also some within the first few moves: a) 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 ttJc3 b5, with the idea 4 exd5 b4, is an old line by Gurgenidze. It is be- ing reinvestigated and seems a useful weapon. b) Against I e4 c6 2 ttJf3 d5 3 ttJc3, often a dull variation, some high-level players have used the line 3 ... ttJf6 4 e5 ttJe4. Much of the experimental action for White is taking place in the Advance Variation:

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 253

a) After 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 e5 .i.f5, the varia- tions 4 .i.e3 and 4 lbd2 have gone from being wholly irregular to respectable enough that they now have numerous grandmaster practi- tioners. b) Versus 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 e5 c5, we are seeing 4 c4 and 4 lbf3 lbc6 5 c4. Up until re- cently, these moves were virtually unknown. c) The pseudo-Advance variation 1 e4 c6 2 lbe2 d5 3 e5 has drawn some high-powered at- tention of late, both in theoretical articles and grandmaster play. In the Pirc and Modern Defences, Black's flexibility is such that irregular or at least un- usual move-orders are commonplace. Essen- tially, he can play the moves ... .i.g7, ... c6, ... a6 with ... b5 and ... O-O in almost any order to keep White guessing. Several unconventional lines have recently attracted attention in the Modem Defence: a) I e4 g6 2 d4 .i.g7 3lbc3 d5!? is a surpris- ing thrust, mentioned in Chapter 3, with the idea that 4lbxd5 c6 wins back White's d-pawn, and 4 exd5 lbf6 will either do so or extract other con- cessions from White. I'm doubtful that Black can achieve real equality after 5 .i.c4 (5 h4!? in- tending 5 ... lbxd5 6 h5 could be tried) 5 ... lbbd7, but it's a position into which many strong play- ers have entered. b) A whole complex of ... a6 systems, some- times referred to as 'Tiger's Modem', can be played against White's main set-ups, especially

1 e4 g6 2 d4 .i.g7 3lbc3 d6 (even 3 ... a6 is possi-

ble) 4 lbf3 a6, 4 .i.e3 a6, and 4 f4 a6. I exam- ined these in detail in Chapter 3. White can also play outside the main lines; for example: a) He can launch early h4 attacks, the most common one going 1 e4 d6 2 d4 lbf6 3 lbc3 g6 4 .i.e2 .i.g7 5 h4. b) 1 e4 d6 2 d4lbf6 3 lbc3 g6 4 .i.e2 .i.g7 5 g4, less frequently seen, has had some success. c) In the Austrian Attack, 1 e4 d6 2 d4 lbf6 3 lbc3 g6 4 f4 .i.g7, the move 5 a3 was almost unknown a decade ago. Pushing the a-pawn avoids the standard line 5 lbf3 c5 and the large amount of theory associated with it (that is, 5 a3 c5 6 dxc5 "iVa5 allows 7 b4). 5 a3 O-O 6 lbf3 (equivalent to 5 lbf3 O-O 6 a3) is a related line which has met with some success. The Modem Variation of the Alekhine De- fence, 1 e4lbf6 2 e5 lbd5 3 d4 d6 4lbf3, is an astonishing example of the increasing interest in what had been minor sidelines. First, the top grandmasters are treating 4 ... dxe5 5lbxe5 as the main line of the entire defence (with first 5 ... g6 and more recently 5 ... c6 as the follow-up), even though it was a minor irritant just two decades ago compared to 4 ... g6 and 4 ... .i.g4. Then, on the same move, we see a distinct revival of the irregular moves 4 ... lbb6 and 4 .. . lbc6, accompa- nied by much analysis. Even Miles's unlikely- looking move 4 ... c6 has a following and contin- ues to perform reasonably well. Finally, in the Scandinavian Defence with 1 e4 d5 2 exd5 1Wxd5, so much has been discov- ered over the last decade that it's hard to distin- guish what's irregular from what isn't. As a general observation, I find it amazing that after 3 lbc3, Black's popular move 3 ... 1Wd6 was an irregular sideline just 10 years ago. It is now ar- guably the main line, especially at grandmaster level. Incidentally, it wasn't so long ago (per- haps 30 years or so) that the Scandinavian was seldom played and considered marginal by most masters. A number of older opening books even dismissed it entirely on the basis of Black's loss of time with his queen. The great Bent Larsen was instrumental in changing that assessment. In this by no means complete review, I've limited myself to 1 e4 openings, and to the first five moves; as you can imagine, a similar array of irregular lines is associated with 1 d4 open- ings. There's a feast of offerings out there. Of course, some of these ideas will prove wanting in the long run, just as new ones will appear. The real point is not to fill your repertoire with unusual openings. In fact, I personally advise against that, and believe that you willieam more about chess if you mostly play (and study) major openings. But I also think that the judicious use of some irregular variations can make your chess more fun, and stimulate you to think creatively. Responding to the Unfamiliar Of course, a lot of the time you'll be on the other side of the board when the surprising

254 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

move or variation appears. What should you do when faced with an unfamiliar opening, or even an unfamiliar move in an opening that you know? Your first reaction should be to take a deep breath and try to understand what your op- ponent is doing. Is he attacking or planning to attack any weak points? Is he preparing a cer- tain positionally desirable move? Are there any tactics involved? Once you've got a feel for the key factors of the position, you can react ac- cordingly. For example, against most slow moves that don't engage your pieces, it's appropriate to oc- cupy the centre with pawns (many irregular openings permit you to do so, which is part of the reason that they're irregular!). Then de- velop pieces towards the centre, just as you would do in the majority of openings. Of course, even if your moves are more principled than your opponent's, you shouldn't expect an imme- diate payback. The game of chess is forgiving enough that most pawn and piece deployments, however strange, can be coordinated in some logical fashion, so that the disadvantages of most irregular openings won't lead to disaster. If the situation is turning tactical or excep- tionally dynamic, you should take extra time to assess the problems and do as much calcula- tion of concrete sequences as possible. In that way, you may not be able to solve the position but you'll get a clear idea of what the issues are. You shouldn't be intimidated; after all, it's unlikely that an irregular opening will win by force, and it's quite possible that there's some serious flaw or drawback to it. Be alert and take advantage of specific mistakes. Say that you have a fair general knowledge of open- ings, but within the first few moves, your op- ponent plays a gambit that you've never seen. It's likely that the reason you haven't seen it is because you can safely accept the pawn. For example, the sequence 1 d4lZ:lf6 2 g4 has a cult following, and might make some sense in con- junction with the moves g5 and perhaps iLg2. But 2 ... lZ:lxg4 3 e4 really isn't very impressive; among others, 3 ... d6, followed by ... lZ:lf6 ifthe knight is attacked, leaves White short of com- pensation. Similarly, a gambit such as 1 d4 e5 2 dxe5 d6 should be accepted by 3 exd6; White has no weaknesses to assist Black, who has only slightly better developmental prospects. Declining such gambits lets your opponent off the hook. Assuming that the irregular opening is logi- cal and contests important squares, it's useful to keep your pawn-structure in mind. Quite often, unusual openings either come with weaknesses or they allow you to create weaknesses in your opponent's position. Regardless of the specifics, replying with common-sense moves and apply- ing what you know about analogous situations will serve you well. Assessing the Initial Moves If you look through a listing of irregular open- ings, you'll find that a majority of such openings include weakening moves, unjustified sacri- fices, or a disdain for central control. You are also confronted with an intimidating reality: ir- regular openings, even limiting ourselves to named ones, are more numerous than conven- tional ones! The cynic might say that's because there are more bad moves in chess than good ones. Indeed, when we find out that there are at least four named openings beginning with 1 a4, including 1 a4 b6 2 d4 d5 3 lZ:lc3lZ:ld7 (with the 'idea' 4lZ:lxd5 iLb7), which has been called the 'Cologne Gambit' of the 'Ware Opening', it's easy to agree with that. By the time we get to move 5, the number of 'irregular' moves ex- plodes for both sides. Rather than tackle the near-infinite subject of irregular openings in general, I thought that it would be fun and in- deed revealing to look at openings defined by the very first move. This exercise is particularly appropriate for the average player, because the logic of these openings does not depend upon prior knowledge of variations leading up to it. As it is, there's not nearly enough room to cover even these first moves in a comprehensive fash- ion. But I think that there's much to learn from how the variations break down, even if they can't be subject to detailed analysis. For many players, unusual first moves are the most attractive; after all, what's better than playing an initial move that makes your oppo- nent think? This psychological motivation has its effect, as evidenced by the number of games played with the least promising of first moves. For example, in one of my combined databases,

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 255

here is the number of games (in parentheses) with the following first moves for White. In ev- ery case, numerous masters (over 2200 rating) are represented: 1 f3 (166); 1 lbh3 (231); 1 c3 (437); 1 e3 (1,190); 1 a3 (1,829); 1 g4 (2,845). Non-transpositional games with llbc3 (which is used frequently for transpositional purposes) number 9,152; and 1 b4, respectable but nowhere near mainstream, is represented by 20,689 con- tests, more than the main lines of many major openings. These figures include some joke draws and I-move contests, but not enough to have a significant effect. And, to be sure, they represent small percentages of the entirety of games. Nevertheless, given the thousands of conventional (and unconventional) variations to choose from that stem from 1 e4, 1 d4, 1 c4 and llbf3, I'm surprised that tournament play- ers are inclined to choose those above so fre- quently. And you should keep in mind that these numbers would surely balloon if you in- cluded amateur and club games (which are for the most part absent from standard databases). So what are the characteristics of these first- move openings? First, it's useful to classify them according to evaluation. I'll call some openings' good enough' (if they were worthy of an unqualified 'good', they'd probably not be irregular!), others 'substandard', and still oth- ers 'bad'. 'Bad' and 'good enough' are readily understandable categories; I'll get more spe- cific on a case-by-case basis. A 'substandard' opening is generally uninspiring and tends to produce below-average results. This kind of opening is functional at lower levels, especially if it's tricky and has surprise value; however, a substandard opening becomes difficult to han- dle as you come up against stronger opponents. Of course, any assessment depends upon what you expect to get out of the opening. I often hear advocates of irregular openings for White bragging about how their opening 'hasn't been refuted'. That's not a very good criterion! After all, it takes some pretty poor play for White to actually come out of the opening with a disad- vantage, and when White goes through contor- tions merely to reach equality, we shouldn't be impressed. To the extent that the opening is harmless, easy to play, and leaves White with the ability to pose as many problems as Black, that's 'good enough'. But if, in practice, the opening is more difficult for White to play than Black and also doesn't yield any advantage, it qualifies as 'substandard' . When it's Black who is playing an irregular opening, my assessments are naturally more forgiving. If Black can achieve a normal (i.e. very slight) disadvantage with perfect play, that's probably 'good enough'. An exception might be when the resulting position, although theoretically only moderately worse, requires a sophisticated handling that is out of the range of the average player. For example, Black may come out of the opening with quasi-permanent weaknesses or horrible-looking doubled pawns. A top player might know how to play around them, find a complex way to liquidate them, or even use them productively. However, if that in- volves extremely refined moves and/or extraor- dinary accuracy, then the opening isn't really satisfactory in practical terms and I'd call it 'substandard'. You can see that my evaluation isn't perfectly objective, and it is skewed to- wards the 'average' player, which in this case covers the broad range from developing players to experienced ones who are nevertheless be- low master level. It turns out that everything has a name, and usually multiple names. For example, according to irregular openings aficionado Eric Schiller, the "greatest living exponent" of the move 1 h4 is the Hungarian master Kadas, after whom he names the opening, but he points out that it is also known as the 'Desprez Opening' and the 'Reagan Attack'. This reflects the fact that chess-players crave immortality; it also con- firms the old saw that 'bad publicity is better than no pUblicity' . Curious, I went to my large combined database and found 354 non-trivial games with 1 h4, including 23 games by a fel- low named Ats, which swamped the number by his countryman Kadas or anyone else. A num- ber of masters have used 1 h4, among their ranks even a couple of 2400+ players. It some- how didn't surprise me that the overall success rate of 1 h4 was only moderately lower than White gets in chess overall. In over-the-board play, versus Black's replies 1...d5 and 1...lbf6, White has a typical edge over Black in raw score and performance rating, but he does quite

256 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

poorly in both respects versus 1...e5. In corre- spondence play, White does reasonably well ex- cept when playing against 1...d5, which scores exceptionally well for Black. Remarkably, look- ing through the games themselves, I didn't find any in which h4 made a significant contribution to an opening advantage for White! I suppose that should be no surprise either: on a lower or even average level of play, I h4 can be used without disastrous consequences, because both sides' more serious mistakes later will easily outweigh the disadvantages of the first move. Nevertheless, I believe most leading grand- masters would assess White's game after I h4 as already inferior. If nothing else, it's a major concession when you forfeit the possibility of castling kingside in a large majority of posi- tions. In addition, the g4-square will often be occupied by an active black piece that will be hard to get rid of, because the move f3 would create further weaknesses. If we had a large sample of games between master players, I'm convinced that I h4 would score considerably below 50%, and trail significantly in perfor- mance rating. In my judgement, then, I h4 is simply 'bad'. To get a feel for the consequences of the choice of first move (and have some fun), let's run through every initial move for White, and a selected group of them for Black. First of all, the 'regular' first moves I e4, I d4 and I c4 all occupy and/or control central squares without exposing the king or creating weaknesses. Ilbf3 controls two central squares and develops in a way that is compatible with a wide range of good systems for White. These four moves are indisputably good ones. Continuing with moves for White, both first- move fianchettoes I g3 and I b3 are logical and safe. Having studied 1. .. g6, we can infer that 1 g3 must be satisfactory. Most of the time, it transposes to openings such as the English Opening and Reti, or to any number of d-pawn openings featuring a fianchetto by White. But 1 g3 has also been played in many games which haven't transposed into other variations; for ex- ample, it often becomes a reversed Pirc De- fence such as I g3 d5 2 i.g2 e5 3 d3 c6 (or 3 ... lbc6) 4 lbf3. The same comparison holds for I b3 (which we looked at in Chapter 4), since it is an 'improved' 1...b6. Both 1 g3 and 1 b3 are a bit too passive to produce an advantage against solid play, but that's a different issue. Similarly, the Bird Opening (1 f4) was exam- ined in Chapter 6. It has a longer history of master play and is clearly sound. That leaves what I consider truly irregular first moves, divided by colour. We begin with White. Most of White's irregular first moves are 'good enough', even though some of them are passive and fail to challenge Black at all. The only reason that some of those survive 'substandard' status is that they are not partic- ularly difficult to play. A few irregular first moves have positive qualities, and are suffi- ciently attractive to recommend for the occa- sional experiment, and I'll start with those: Sokolsky/Polish: 1 b4 As discussed above, this is the most popular and respectable of the irregular first moves. To the untrained eye, it may seem a bit bizarre. Yet several books, including two very recent ones, are solely devoted to 1 b4, which is called, vari- ously, the Sokolsky Opening, the Polish Open- ing, the Orang-Utan, and probably a few other things. 1 b4 is obviously good enough; it will probably never break through on the grandmas- ter level, but it can lend a lively flavour to the game and deserves special attention. With that in mind, here are two games in very critical variations, with notes to indicate a few other di- rections.

1 b4 (D)

Schiffler - Skirl corr. 1950 What's the idea behind this move? First and foremost, White wants to fianchetto his bishop, as he does when he plays I b3. In addition, he takes some queenside space and discourages the move ... c5. In some cases, White will play b5, and the mere possibility of that move can dissuade Black from playing ... lbc6. As we have seen following I b3 and 2 i.b2, White can develop in a variety of ways. Most frequently, he plays e3, lbf3 and c4, but a double fianchetto by g3 and i.g2 is also possible. Sometimes

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 257

White will play f4 before developing his knight to f3, in order to strengthen his control of the long diagonal. Black is also flexibly situated. First, there's a decent chance that ... eS or : .. e6, attacking the b-pawn, will gain a whole tempo without a meaningful concession. Since White isn't plac- ing a pawn in the centre, Black frequently takes the opportunity to do so himself by ... dS and/or ... eS. He also faces no serious threats, so he can pick from a number of set-ups and develop quickly.

1...e5

I'm going to focus on this thematic move, which attacks the pawn on b4, since it is by far the most frequently played, as well as the best chance to 'refute' I b4, in the sense of giving Black the better game by force. That mayor may not happen with best play, but White has to be careful in many lines. Here, extremely briefly, are two of the main alternatives: a) l...tLlf6 2 ..Bb2 and then: al) 2 ... g6 is a safe line, with a typical con- tinuation being 3 e3 (3 c4 ..Bg7 4 tLlf3 O-O S g3 was used by Reti; 3 ..Bxf6 exf6 isn't so effective when White doesn't gain a knight outpost to offset the bishops; compare I b3 cS 2 ..Bb2 tLlf6

3 c4 g6?! 4 ..Bxf6 exf6 S tLlc3, controlling dS)

3 ... ..Bg7 4 c4 d6 S tLlf3 0-06 d4 tLlbd7 (or 6 ... cS) 7 ..Be2 eS 8 O-O (8 dxeS dxeS 9 tLlxeS? tLle4), and Black has a broad choice; for example, 8 ... exd4, 8. .. 'iie7, 8 ... tLle4 and 8 ... e4 9 tLlfd2 l:te8. a2) 2 ... e6 3 a3 is playable, of course, but 3 bS is more challenging, planning to maintain the pawn there as long as possible and cramp Black's game a bit. This position has occurred in many games, without dramatic results for ei- ther side. b) I ... dS 2 ..Bb2 (D) also gives Black numer- ous options, among them:

bI) 2 ... tLlf6 3 e3 ..ifS 4 tLlf3 (4 f4 e6 S a3 as 6 bS tLlbd7 7 tLlf3 ..Bd6 and Black's rapid devel- opment ensures a good game) 4 ... e6 S a3 (S bS!?) S ... ..Be7 6 c4 c6 with a standard London System formation and equality. b2) 2 ... fid6!? has the dual ideas of ... 'iVxb4 and ... eS; for example, 3 a3 (after 3 bS, 3 ... 'iib4 wins a pawn, even if 4 .i.c3 'iixbS S e4 offers White some compensation; Lapshun and Con- ticello prefer simply 3 ... eS) 3 ... eS 4 e3 (4 tLlf3 f6!? S d4!? e4 6 tLlfd2 fS 7 c4 c6 is unclear; White has a sort of reversed French Defence with extra tempi, but Black hasn't had to play the obstructive ... tLld7; compare I e4 e6 2 d4 dS 3 tLld2 tLlf6 4 eS tLlfd7) 4 ... tLlf6 S tLlf3 tLlbd7 6 c4 c6 7 tLlc3! with the idea of cxdS, and exert- ing some central pressure. b3) 2 ... .i.g4 makes sense, interfering with White's kingside development and planning to set up with, for example, 3 ... c6, 4 ... tLld7, and ei- ther ... eS or ... e6. The play can go almost any di- rection; for example, 3 c4, 3 tLlf3, 3 h3 ..ihS 4 c4 (4 g3) or the odd-looking but logical 3 'iVc1, preparing 4 e3. 2 ..Bb2 (D) White sometimes plays 2 a3, although this isn't challenging and uses valuable time. Black gets time to construct and successfully defend an ideal centre: 2 ... dS 3 ..tb2 ..Bd6 4 e3 (4 f4 exf4 S ..Bxg7 'iih4+ 6 g3 fxg3 7 ..Bg2 'iVf4! {or 7 ... gxh2+! 8 ~f1 tLlf6!} 8 tLlf3 ..Bh3!! doesn't essentially differ from the I e4 b6 2 d4 ..Bb7 3

258 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.Bd3 f5 4 exf5, etc., of Chapter 4) 4 ... lLlf6 5 c4 c6 6lLlf3 "VJiIe7, with a sort of reversed 1 e4 b6 line in which Black stands at least satisfactorily.

2 ... f6 The intent here is not only to protect e5, but to set up a barricade against White's bishop on b2. In the next game we'll see 2 ... .Bxb4. Natu- rally, a solid move such as 2 ... d6, although not ambitious, can't be bad. And oddly enough, 2 ... e4 is an established answer, as it is after 1 b3 e5 2.Bb2. 3e4!? This is a speculative gambit by means of which White gains dangerous chances. Objec- tively, 3 b5 d5 4 e3 is a safer way to maintain equality while reaching an interesting position. Then 4 ... .Be6 prevents c4 and prepares to de- velop naturally. 3  .Bxb4 4 .Bc4 (D)

White has prevented Black from castling, and will aim to play f4 in most cases. 4  "VJiIe7 Black seeks to discourage 5 f4, which gives White a King's Gambit-style attack. a) 4 ... lLlc6 is a sound alternative. Then 5 f4 exf4 6lLlh3 has been played, but 6 ... "VJiIe7! has the idea ... "VJiIxe4+, and prevents 7 O-O?? be- cause of 7 ... "VJiIc5+. b) A game involving Bobby Fischer him- self, Fischer-Gloger, Cleveland (simul) 1964, went 4 ... lLle7 5 'iWh5+ (Tartakower-Reti, Vi- enna 1919 is a classic example with 5 f4: 5 ... d5 6 exd5 .Bd6 7 fxe5 fxe5 8 "VJiIh5+ lLlg6 9 lLlf3 lLld7 10 O-O O-O 11 lLlc3 :tf4!? 12 d3 lLlf6 13 "VJiIg5 h6 14 'iWg3 with an unclear position) 5 ... lLlg6 (5 ... g6 6 "VJiIh4lLlec6 7 f4 is complex) 6 f4 (6 lLlf3 is suggested by Konikowski and Sosynski, and approved by the computer - the ideas are d4 or lLlh4/f4; for example, 6 ... lLlc6 7 lLlh4lLlce7 8 a3 .Ba5 9 f4! d5! 10 exd5 exf4 11 O-O and White controls the e-file with attack- ing chances, although this is double-edged) 6 ... exf4 7lLlf3 lLlc6 SlLlc3 (Lapshun and Con- ticello contribute 8 lLlh4 lLlce7 9 a3, when Black should counterattack by 9 ... d5! 10 .Bxd5 .Bd6) 8 ... .Bxc3 9 .Bxc3 d6 10 lLlh4lLle7 (D). 11 lLlf5 (11 O-O 'it'd7!? 12lLlxg6 {12lLlf5!?} and now 12 ... hxg6?! 13 "VJiIg4+ f5? 14 exf5 'it'c6 15 'iWf3+ d5 16 .l:lfel led to a quick victory for White in Trokenheim-Kusmerik, COIT. 1994, but 12 ... lLlxg6 is better) 11 ... 'it'f8?! (ll...d5! is given by several analysts; Black may even stand a touch better) 12 O-O?! (12 .Bxf6! is strong, in view of 12 ... gxf6? 13 "VJiIh6+ 'it'e8 14 lLlg7+ 'it'd7 15 'iVh3+ 'it'c6 16 .Bd5+!, with a decisive king-hunt) 12 ... "VJiIe8? (12 ... "VJiId7!) 13 .Bxf6 .Bxf5 (13. .. gxf6?? 14 "VJiIh6#) 14 exf5 d5? 15 fxg6

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 259

gxf6 16 'Yib6+ 'it>g8 17 g7 and White wins. This line is fun for a tactician, but you can see that it is fundamentally satisfactory for Black. 5 ttJe2 Thinking about either f4 or ttJg3. 5 ... ttJh6!? S. .. d6 is a natural alternative. 6 ttJg3 d6 7 c3 .Bc5 8 d4 Now the game looks more like a conven- tional 1 e4 eS gambit, and in particular an Ev- ans Gambit, since White's b-pawn has been captured. 8 . .Bb6 9 a4 a6 10 as .Ba7 11 ttJd2 ttJf7 12

[diagram]
w 13f4? White has the right general idea, to activate 14 ... ttJxeS IS .Bb3 .Be6 and 14 ... dxeS IS .Ba3 'iid7! 16 .Bxf8 'it>xf8, with more than am- ple compensation, are also good for Black. 15 'iVb3 exd416 'it>hl dxc3? 16 ... d3! returns one of the two pawns to damage White's pawn-structure. 17 .Bxc3 .Bd4 18 :txf7! l:txf7 19 .l:.f1 .Bf6

20.Bxf6?!

20 ttJhS! leads to a clear win according to Konikowski and Soszynski. 20  gxf6 21 ttJh5 f5? 22 exf5 ttJe5 23 'i!Vg3+ 'it>f8 24 f6 'ii'd8? 24 ... 'i!Ve8 2S .Bxf7 'i!Vxf7 26 'i!Vg7+ 'it>e8 27 ctJe4!.

25.Bxf71-0

R. Franke - A. Liiffler ICCF carr. 1986

[diagram]
This has been the bane of the Sokolosky Opening's existence, leading to all kinds of sac- rificial wins for Black, as well as positional binds. It's remarkable how many leading grand- masters have played 2 ... .ixM. Still, the best Sokolsky players manage to get their share of the play. 3 .Bxe5 ttJf6 (D) his rook and put further pressure on Black's W centre, but it's premature. 13 ttJfS and 13 'ii'b3 are better ways to proceed. 13 .. ttJc6! 14 fxe5 (D)

14 . fxe5 4e3 It's possible to play c4 at any point; for ex- ample, 4 c4 O-O S ttJf3 l:te8 and now 6 e3 dS 7 .Bb2 transposes to the game. Kosten shows the interesting line 6 a3 .iaS 7 e3 dS 8 cxdS ttJxdS 9 .Be2, when the sacrifice in the notes below, 9 ... l1xeS?!, is less convincing due to 10 ttJxeS 'ii'f6 11 ttJc4 'ii'xa1 12 ttJxaS, a consequence of

260 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

the insertion of a3 and ... i.a5; compare the simi- lar line below. Of course, Black can play 9 ... c5! with the idea ... ttJc6, when he has gained a tempo in lines where ... i.c7 follows (that is, he plays ... i.a5 unprovoked in lines below, and a3 is unproductive for White). 4 ... O-O 5 ttJf3 (D)

Here White has traded a flank pawn for a centre pawn, usually an advantage in chess (think of all the gambits in which one side sac- rifices a flank pawn in order to gain a central majority). In fact, we might compare White's strategy with the Sicilian Defence, in which Black willingly falls behind in development in order to secure the extra central pawn. How- ever, there are a couple of flaws in this compari- son. First, after Black wins a tempo on the bishop on e5 with ... ~e8 and/or ... ttJc6, he owns the dangerous e-file, which aims through the thickets at White's king. That is significant be- cause White is so far away from castling (a con- sequence of spending time on the moves b4, .ltb2, .ltxe5 and .ltb2). Furthermore, there are idiosyncratic qualities to this variation, in which the particulars often trump general consider- ations. For one, White's d-pawn is pinned, which makes d3 impossible for the moment and, as we shall see, creates some awkward de- fensive problems on e3. Furthermore, White's bishop is committed to the long diagonal and can get shut out of play by ... d5-d4. In what fol- lows, you'll see many examples of the attack- ing chances these factors produce. 5  J':!.e8 This presages some tactical ideas. Naturally, Black has other options: a) Sometimes he attacks with 5 ... ttJc6, which is reasonable, but it's nice to retain the option of ... c5; for example, if White doesn't play c4, then Black can set up with ... d5 and ... c5, as in 'b'. b) 5 ... d5 6 .lte2 c5 7 O-O ttJc6 8 i.b2 (D) is a well-known position.

Play can go: bI) 8 ... ne8 9 d3!? (here 9 d4?! c4! cannot be recommended to White) can be answered by 9 ... .lta5 (compare line 'b4'). Instead, Pomme- rel-Mrkvicka, email 1990 saw 9 ... i.g4 10 ttJbd2 d4 11 a3 i.xd2!? 12 ~xd2 fIle7 13 e4, when 13 ... i.xf3 14 i.xf3 .l:tac8 has the idea of ... c4 and is dynamically balanced. b2) Naturally, 8 ... i.f5 is a sound alternative. b3) The advance 8 ... d4 produced a curious and unbalanced position following 9 c3! d3! 10 .ltxd3 ~xd3 11 cxb4 ttJxb4 12 i.xf6 gxf6 13 ttJel ~g6 14 ttJc3 .l:td8 in E.Pedersen-T.Chris- tensen, Danish Team Ch 1998/9. b4) 8 ... i.a5! is a slightly strange move used by many experts in this line; it is relatively non- committal, and has the idea of ... i.c7, taking aim at White's kingside if the opportunity arises. For example, 9 c4!? (upon 9 d3, Black plays 9 ... d4! with the idea ... ttJd5; 9 i.a3 has been suggested, but 9 ... b6 10 d4 ttJe4 makes this look like a waste of time) 9 ... d4 10 exd4 cxd4 11 d3 (Benoni-like; however, White's bishops aren't as well located as in that opening) Il..J:te8 12 ttJbd2 fIle7!? (12 ... i.c3!?; 12 ... i.g4) 13 .l:tel i.g4 14 'iVc2 (Kocandrle-Bertel, IECG email 2004) and here 14 ... i.xf3 15 i.xf3 fIlxel+ 16 .l:txel .l:txel+ 17 ttJn ~ae8 looks correct. 6c4

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 261

White could also have played this last move. The safer 6 .te2 dS 7 O-O cS 8 i.b2 ttJc6 trans- poses to the previous note. w 6 ... d5 (D) 7 cxd5 Or: a) Palliser mentions 7 i.b2 (D). Then Black has several possibilities:

a1) 7 ... cS 8 cxdS ttJxdS 9 i.e2 ttJc6 is solid. I think that White should play 10 'iWc2, prevent- ing ... i.fS, rather than 10 O-O i.fS!. a2) 7 ... i.fS threatens ... dxc4 and ... i.d3. a3) 7 ... ttJc6 8 cxdS 'iWxdS!? has been a fairly popular set-up for Black, since 9 i.xf6 is the fourth move by White's bishop and leaves d3 vulnerable to attack by ... i.fS and ... l:tad8. b) 7 i.e2 is arguably White's safest way to proceed, but it allows simplification by 7 ... ttJc6 8 i.b2 dxc4 9 i.xc4 i.e6, securing light-square influence in White's camp, although this time there are no tactics. 7 .. ttJxd5 (D) 7 .. :tIVxdS 8 i.b2 ttJc6 is line 'a3' of the previ- ous note. w Si.b2 Black has won several games with tactical tricks on the e3-square; for example: a) 8 i.e2? l:txeS! 9 ttJxeS ~f6 (now both the knight and d-pawn are pinned) 10 f4 ttJxe3 and now: a1) 11 ~a4 bS!? (11...i.d7 12 ttJxd7 'iixa1 13 ~f2 ttJdS is also strong) 12 ~xbS c6 13 ~d3 ttJxg2+ 14 ~d1 ttJxf4 IS ~e3 ttJxe2 16 ~xe2 i.a6+ left Black the exchange down but with a winning attack in lasku1ski-Zehm, COIT. 1985. a2) 11 'tIVb3 ttJxg2+ 12 ~d1 ttJxf4 13 ttJxf7!? (there is no remotely satisfactory move for White) 13 ... 'iWxf7 (or 13 ... i.e6) 14 i.c4 i.e61S i.xe6 ttJxe6 16 l:te1 and 16 ... ttJc6 was good in Lindqvist-Sorenfors, COIT. 1975, but 16 ... ttJd4! 17 ~xb4 ttJbc6 threatens moves such as .. :iVg6, ... 'iihS+ and ... l:td8, and wins for Black straight- away. b) 8 i.c4 i.g4 9 i.b2 ttJxe3! (or 9 ... ttJc6) 10 fxe3 l:txe3+ 11 ~f2 .l:i.xf3+ (1l...l:te4!?) 12 gxf3 ~h4+ 13 ~gl! i.h3 14 i.f1 and now 14 .. :iVgs+ IS ~f2 'iWh4+ 16 ~e2 ~e7+ is per- petual check, but 14 ... ttJc6!? has been played as well, trying to win. S. ttJc6 White might prefer another move-order (such as delaying cxdS), since here 8 ... ttJf4! (D) poses problems. White has to avoid all kinds of dan- gerous tactics; for example: a) 9 ttJeS 'ii'gS! 10 exf4 (not 10 g3? l:.xeS! 11 gxf4 l:txe3+! 12 fxe3 'iWh4+ 13 ~e2 i.g4+)

262 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w 1O .. :~xf4 11 .i.e2 lheS 12 .i.xeS ~xe5 13 lLlc3.i.xc3 14 dxc3 ~xc3+ 15 wfllLlc6, Bill- ing-Bogert, COIT. 1993. This has all been forced, and Black has two pawns for the exchange with a much better position. b) Palliser analyses what is probably the best move, 9 a3!: 9 ... .i.d6! (9 ... .i.aS?? 10 'iWa4!) 10 ~c2 .i.g4 I1lLlc3lLlc6 12 O-O-O!? lLlg6 with complications. c) 9 iVb3lLlc6 is depressing for White. Pal- liser continues 10 .i.c4?! lLlxg2 + 11 Wfl? .i.h3 12 .i.xf7+ Rh8 13 .i.xe8 'iWxe8 with the idea 14 lLlgS lLld4!! IslLlf7+ (or IS .i.xd4 ~bS+) IS ... 'iYxf7 16 ~xf7 lLlf4+ 17 ~el lLld3+ 18 Wdl lLlxb2+ 19 Wcl lLld3+ 20 Wdl .i.g4+ 21 f3 .i.xf3+ and Black wins.

9.i.e2

After 9 .i.bS, 9 ... .i.f5!? and 9 ... a6 10 .i.xc6 bxc6 give Black active play; in both cases, he will try to put pressure on White's light squares, in particular d3. 9 ... .l:txe3! A bold and wonderful shot, giving up a rook for a handful of pawns and an attack. Actually, Black's position is flexible, and he can get a perfectly good game by 9 ... .i.fS 10 O-O .i.f8 (or 1O ... ~e7) 11 a3 a6 12 d4 h6 13lLlbd2lLlb6 14 1Ic1 ~d7 with equality, Baranov-Yudasin, St Petersburg 1998. 10 fxe3lLlxe3 11 'iYb3 Two other playable, if not thrilling, courses are 11 'ilia4lLlxg2+ 12Wdl and 11 ~c1lLlxg2+

12 Rf2 i.h3 13 .l:.gl ~e7 14 d4 l::te8 IS i.d3

(Dziel-Zarebski, COIT. 1993) when Is .. :iWf6! is best. 11 .. lLlxg2+ (D)

12 Rf2!?

w In spite of appearances, things don't always go badly for White; for example, 12 Wdl i.e6 13 'iWd3 'ilie7? (13 ... ~xd3! 14 i.xd3 i.g4 15 .i.e2 lLlf4 16 .l:.fl lLlxe2 17 Rxe2 i.c5 18 Rd3 .l:i.d8+ and with three pawns and an attack for the rook, Black has adequate compensation, Dziel-Szimmat, COIT. 1997) 14 lLld4 lLlf4 IS lLlxc6 bxc6 16 ~d4 i.b3+ 17 axb3 ~xe2+ 18 Rc2 1-0 Lapshun-Sinn, Philadelphia 2003. 12  .i.h3! 13 d4?! Konikowski and Soszynski improve by 13 :rcl! ~e7 14 i.bS .i.cS+ IS .l:.xcs ~xcS+ 16 d4, which remains quite unclear following 16 ... 'iYfS or 16 ... ~d6. 13  :~e714lLlbd2?? (D) A blunder. Black still has an attack after 14 .l:i.gl .l:.e8 IS i.c4!? lLlaS! (it's not clear who stands better after IS ... lLlf4) 16 i.xf7+ Rh8 17 iVxb4 'iVxb4 18 i.c3 'iYe7 19 .i.xe8 ~xe8 20 .l::txg2 i.xg2 21 Rxg2 'ii'g6+, when Black's su- perior activity gives him an obvious advantage.

14. .l:i.e8?

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 263

This doesn't ruin everything, but 14 ... iLxd2! wins outright, in view of IS lZ'lxd2 lZ'lxd4 16 ~xh3 (16 iLxd4 li'h4+) 16 ... li'xe2+ 17 ~g3 and now 17 .. .fS or 17 ... lZ'lf4. 15 %:I.hellZ'lxel16 ':xellZ'lxd4! 17lZ'lxd4 17 iLxd4? fails to 17 ... iLxd2 with the idea 18 lZ'lxd2li'h4+ 19li'g3li'xd4+. 17. iLxd218 ':dl?? But the much better 18 li'xh3 iLxel+ 19 'itxel cS! 20 li'g4 cxd4 21 iLxd4 fS! 22 ~f3 li'b4+ 23 li'c3 li'xc3+ 24 iLxc3 ~f7 still leaves Black with enough pawns to win, in spite of White's bishop-pair.

18. . iLe3+ 19 ~g3li'g5+ 20 ~xh3 ':e4 21

lZ'lf5li'xf5+ 22 ~g2 ':g4+ 23 iLxg4 'iixg4+ 24 'itfl 'iif3+ 25 ~elli'f2# (0-1) Linkspringer: 1 ttJc3 The immediate development of the queen's knight is called by an assortment of names, in- cluding the Mestrovi6 Opening, Van Geet's Opening, the Sleipner, the Dunst, and Link- springer (roughly, 'knight on the left side'). Al- though the move hasn't ever inspired a tidal wave of interest, it has a solid reputation and a number of strong adherents, with periodic use by grandmasters. Even the chess stars Moroze- vich and Ivanchuk have given it a whirl. In fact, whole books with extensive analysis have been devoted to the intricacies of llZ'lc3. I shall only present one game including a general outline of early moves, but you will see how ex- traordinarily rich a set of ideas can spring from the knight development. Of the irregular first moves presented in this chapter, it might well be the most fruitful to play and study. For one thing, the pawn-structures that result are often related to those in mainstream openings. A. van den Berg - Liubarsky European Seniors Ch, Arvier 2004 llZ'lc3 (D) White's basic notion is that llZ'lc3 is a flexi- ble centralizing move that looks out at e4 and dS, just as 1lZ'lf3 controls d4 and eS. Depending upon Black's reply, White can either transpose to more conventional openings or find a forma- tion in which the knight on c3 serves a useful

function. This is best explained by example, as are Black's counter-strategies. 1 .. e5 1 lZ'lc3 can lead to an outrageous number of potential transpositions and original paths, which makes it rather attractive if you want to try something new on the first move. I'll just present a tree-structure overview with a limited selection of starting points. Keep in mind that a good deal of theory is attached to some of the following variations: a) 1...dS (D) is the main alternative to 1...eS, and introduces the idea of ... d4. w Now 2 lZ'lf3 can lead in various directions; for example, 2 ... d4 3 lZ'le4lZ'lf6 4 d3!? A funny reversed line would be 2 ... cS 3 d4 cxd4 4 li'xd4, which is a Queen's Gambit Declined, Chigorin Defence, with the extra tempo lZ'lf3; there might follow 4 ... lZ'lf6 S e4!? lZ'lc6 6 iLbS iLd7 7 iLxc6 iLxc6 8 exdS lZ'lxdS 9 O-O. The solid 2 d4 is an invitation to the Veresov Opening following 2 ... lZ'lf6 3 iLgS, or White

264 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

can play 3ltJf3, to be followed by 4 .i.f4, 4 .i.gS or even 4 g3. But by far the most important move is 2 e4 B

White attacks Black's pawn on dS directly, and challenges him to exchange, advance, or transpose into a conventional opening. Here are some possibilities: a1) 2 ... e6 is a French Defence. White can transpose to main lines by 3 d4, or play the less popular variation with 3 ltJf3. Moves such as 3 g3 and 3 f4 are playable, but unimpressive. a2) Similarly, 2 ... c6 3 d4 is a main-line Caro-Kann. White has the option of a Two Knights Variation by 3 ltJf3, and a number of unusual tries such as 3 'iff3 d44 .i.c4!? ltJf6! S eSltJbd7!? 6 exf6ltJeS 7 .i.xf7+, when neither recapture is particularly clear. a3) 2 ... ltJf6 is a line of the Alekhine De- fence by transposition: 1 e4 ltJf6 2 ltJc3 dS. This is looked upon as relatively harmless after 3 exdS ltJxdS or 3 eS ltJfd7. Sometimes Black meets 3 eS with 3 ... ltJe4!?, when the most criti- cal move is 4 ltJce2, by which White prepares, with d3, to drive Black's knight away with tempo; or he can play d4 and threaten to win the knight on e4 by f3. All of this can be found in theoretical works and databases. a4) 2 ... dxe4 3ltJxe4 (D) is commonly seen, with the usual wide choice for Black: a41) Strangely, 3 ... 'iVdS 4ltJc3!? is the same position that arises from 1 e4 dS 2 exdS 'iVxdS 3 ltJc3, a Scandinavian Defence! a42) 3 ... .i.fS and now 4 'iVf3!? has the idea, hardly forced, of 4 ... 'iVdS SltJd6+ 'iVxd6 6 'iixfS. Alternatively, 4 ltJg3 Bg6 S h4 h6 6 ltJf3 ltJd7 is possible, when play can continue 7 .i.c4 e6 8 d3 !?, while after 7 d4 e6 8 hS .i.h7 9 .i.d3 .i.xd3 10 'ii'xd3 ltJgf6, Black hopes to play ... cS and save a tempo over similar lines in the Caro- Kann Defence. a43) Another common continuation is 3 ... eS 4 .i.c4, when 4 ... ltJc6 (not the common blunder 4 ... .i.e7??, which loses to S 'ii'hS) S d3 .i.e7 6 ltJf3 ltJf6 7 O-O O-O is a fair position from which to begin a game. a44) 3 ... ltJc6 is one of Black's soundest moves; for example, 4 ltJf3 .i.fS! S ltJg3 .i.g6, which is based upon 6 d4? ltJb4!. Instead, 6 .i.c4ltJf67 O-O e6 8 d4 or 8 d3 keeps all the play on the board. a4S) A natural continuation is 3 ... ltJd7 4 .i.c4!? (or 4 d4ltJgf6) 4 ... e6 (4 ... ltJgf6 S .i.xf7+ ~xf7 6 ltJgS+ ~g8 7 ltJe6 is risky, for both sides!) S ltJf3 ltJgf6 6 d3!? (this is Keilhack's favoured move, frequently used in the games of 1ltJc3 advocates) 6 ... .i.e7 7 'ii'e2 O-O (7 ... a6, in- tending ... bS, is a common idea) 8 .i.d2!? cS!?

9 O-O b6 10 l:lfe1 with easy play for White,

Schlenker-Klovans, Forchtenberg 1996. The point is that all of these lines give plenty of scope for individual interpretation. as) 2 ... d43 ltJce2 eS (D) (3 ... cS can be an- swered by 4ltJf3 or 4 f4, but the most common idea is 4ltJg3, intending .i.c4 or .i.bS followed by d3, and ideally White plays f4 at some point - these ideas resemble the ones that follow 3 ... eS; of course, Black has other 3rd moves, in- cluding 3 ... ltJc6, but these two are the most common). The position after 3 ... eS has been contested quite often between strong players. White nor- mally proceeds with one of two strategies, First,

IRREGUlAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 265

w he can set up with d3, g3, ii.g2, ttJf3 and O-O, re- versing a King's Indian position; or better yet, he can get f4 in before ttJf3. The latter requires accuracy to implement; for example, the imme- diate 4 f4!? (rather than the normal 4 d3) can run into 4 ... ttJc6 5 ttJf3 ii.g4!, when instead of 6 d3? ii.xf3 7 gxf3 "iVh4+ 8 ..t>d2 exf4 9 c3 O-O-O, as in Ardaman-Yermolinsky, Philadelphia 2002, White should consider 6 ttJxe5. Somewhat risk- ier but more interesting is 6 fxe5 ii.xf3 7 gxf3; for example, 7 ... ttJxe5 8 ttJg3 "iVh4 9 d3 ttJg6!? (9 ... ii.M+! 1O..t>f2 ttJe7) 10 ~d2! ii.d6 11 ~g5, as in Sydor-Kapengut, Lublin 1973. White has the bishop-pair and mobile kingside pawns to compensate for his lack of space and poorly- placed pieces. White's second main idea is get his bishop out to c4 or b5 in front of the pawn-chain (that is, before closing it in with d3); for example, 4 ttJg3 ii.e6! (versus ii.c4; naturally there are many other moves) 5 ttJf3 (5 c3 c5 6 ii.b5+ gets the bishop out safely, but Black has nothing to complain about following 6 ... ttJd7 7 ttJf3 f6) 5 .. .f6 6 ii.b5+! c6 (or 6 ... ttJd7) 7 ii.a4 (D). 7 ... ttJa6 (7 ... ttJd7 8 ii.b3 is similar, although Black lacks the option of ... ttJM; one line is 8 ... ii.xb3 9 axb3 d3 10 c3 a5 11 O-O ttJc5 12 ttJel, which is not easy to assess; another tempt- ing move is 7 .. :ia5, when 8 c3! prepares 9 ii.b3) 8 ii.b3 (or 8 O-O ttJc5 9 ii.b3 ttJxb3 10 axb3 d3) 8 ... ii.xb3 9 axb3 d3 10 O-O ttJb4 11 cxd3 (11 c3!? ttJc2 12 lla2 ii.c5 13 ttJel is dou- ble-edged) l1...ttJxd3 12 ttJel ttJh6 13 "ii'c2 ttJxc1 14 llxcl "ii'c7 15 ttJf3 nd8, Lammens- Ehlvest, Vlissingen 1996, and now 16 d4! exd4 17 nfdl secures some advantage, with ideas of ttJxd4, "ii'c4 and ttJh5.

You can see by all this that 1...d5 is certainly an acceptable way for Black to play, and gives both players opportunities to unbalance the po- sition. b) 1...c5 (D) is likely to be the Sicilian player's choice. Then w bl) Indeed, 2 e4 transposes to a Closed Si- cilian. b2) 2 d4 cxd4 3 "iVxd4 ttJc6 (3 ... e6) 4 "iVh4 is quite interesting, and occurred in no less elevated a game than Morozevich-Kasparov, Frankfurt rapid 2000, which continued 4 ... ttJf6 (4 ... d5 is the most frequent choice) 5 ttJf3 (White could transpose to a Trompowsky Attack by 5 ii.g5, that is, 1 d4 ttJf6 2 ii.g5 c5 3 ttJc3 cxd4 4 ~xd4 ttJc6 5 "ii'h4) 5 ... d5 6 ii.g5 ~a5 7 O-O-O ii.e6!. Then, apart from the game's 8 ii.d2, 8 ttJd4 ttJxd4 9 nxd4! is inviting. b3) White usually plays 2 ttJf3, when Black can play almost any move, and 2 ... e6, 2 ... d6, 2 ... a6, 2 ... b6 and 2 ... ttJf6 can all go their own way. 2 ... d5 3 d4 is mentioned under 1...d5 2

266 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

tbf3 above, while 2 ... g6 allows 3 d4 cxd4 4 1i'xd4 tbf6, when perhaps 5 "iWh4 with the idea i.h6 is the most attractive choice. The richest line may be 2 ... tbc6 3 d4 cxd4 4 tbxd4 tbf6 (D) (4 ... d5 is usually answered by 5 i.f4!? or 5 e4; after 4 ... g6, 5 e4 i.g7 6 i.e3 is a Sicilian Accel- erated Dragon, while 5 g3 and 5 i.e3 are unique options; in reply to 4 ... e6, 5 i.f4 is attractive, since 5 ... a6 6 tbxc6 bxc6 7 i.d6 should yield some edge). w This has close parallels with standard open- ings, but needn't actually transpose: b31) 5 e4 is a standard Sicilian. b32) 5 g3!? d5 (Black can also play the safe 5 ... g6) 6 i.g2 e5 7 tbxc6 bxc6 is a reversed Ex- change Griinfeld with White having the extra tbc3, a mixed blessing; his plan would be O-O, tba4 and c4. b33) 5 i.g5!? and now 5 ... e5?! 6 tbdb5 is not a Sveshnikov Sicilian, as can be seen by 6 ... d6? 7 tbd5, etc. The calm 5 ... d6 is sound enough; if he wants unique play, White might try 6 'ifd2 with the idea O-O-O. Black can also play 5 .. :iVb6; for example, 6 tbb3 e6 7 e4 i.b4 8 i.d3; or 5 ... 'iia5 6 i.xf6 gxf6, when 7 e3 e6 8 'iid2 .ltb4 9 i.e2 leaves the whole game ahead. The most natural reply is perhaps 5 ... e6 6 'ifd2!? (intending O-O-O; instead, C.Beyer rec- ommends 6 'iid3, while 6 i.xf6 'iixf6 7 tbdb5 doesn't do much after 7 .. :ilYe5!) 6 ... i.b4 7 a3 ~a5!? (Keilhack suggests that after 7 ... i.e7, the move a3 may even constitute a weakness) 8 tbb3 i.xc3 9 tbxa5 i.xd2+ 10 i.xd2 tbe4?! (1O ... tbxa5 11 i.xa5 tbe4 with the idea ... b6 is better-timed) 11 tbxc6 tbxd2?! (Keilhack indi- cates both 11...bxc6 and 11...dxc6 as superior, even if White's bishop-pair ensures a modest edge) 12 tbxa7! tbxfl 13 tbb5! l:ta5 14 tbd6+ <l;e7 15 O-O-O with a comfortable advantage for White, C.Beyer-Ortmann, Stuttgart 1999. c) l...tbf6 (D) and now: w cl) After 2 e4, 2 ... e5 is a Vienna Game and 2 ... d5 is the Alekhine Defence line 1 e4 tbf6 2 tbc3 d5 discussed above via 1 tbc3 d5 2 e4 tbf6. c2) 2 d4 (equivalent to 1 d4 tbf6 2 tbc3) al- lows Black to play a Pirc Defence following 2 ... g6 3 e4 d6, or he can choose 2 ... d5, when 3 i.g5 is the Veresov Attack, well worth knowing for both colours. c3) 2 tbf3 is the most independent move. Then 2 ... d5 (naturally, there are alternatives) 3 d3!? tbc6 (3 ... i.f5 and 3 ... c5 are other ideas) 4 g3 (4 i.f4 d4100ks fine for Black) 4 ... e5 5 iLg2 is a sort of reversed Pirc Defence with White having the extra move tbc3. That might not be an unqualified advantage if Black can play an effective ... d4; for example, 5 ... d4 6 tbe4 tbxe4 7 dxe4 i.b4+ 8 .ltd2 i.xd2+ 9 ~xd2 ~d6 with quite respectable play. Instead, Keilhack gives 5 ... i.e7 6 i.g5 i.e6 7 O-O tbg8!?, although 8 e4! looks to be a challenging reply. d) The most natural response to 1. .. e6 is 2 e4, when 2 ... d5 is a French Defence and 2 ... c5 is a Closed Sicilian. e) Likewise, after l...c6, 2 e4 d5 3 d4 and 3 tbf3 are normal Caro-Kann Variations. This time, 2 d4 d5 3 tbf3 is of some interest, with i.f4 to follow, just to get out of the books. Let's return at long last to the main game with l...e5 (D): 2tbf3

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 267

2 e4 is a Vienna Game. In that regard, you

will find many such transpositions after 1 tDc3 that are theoretically harmless; still, White may be able to move his opponent into unfamiliar territory by employing them. A refreshing alternative is 2 d4!? exd4 3 'iVxd4, which is a reversed Scandinavian De- fence with an extra tDc3. This leads to distinc- tive positions; for example, 3 ... tDc6 (3 ... tDf6 4 g4!? is a bizarre idea from C.Horvath-Lukacs, Budapest 1994: 4 ... tDc6 S "iVe3+ i.e7 6 gS tDg4 7 'iVe4 tDb4 8 tDdS tDxdS 9 'iVxdS, and now 9 .. .f6 is best, since in the game 9 ... d6? 10 f4! deprived the knight of squares) and now: a) 4 ~d3 tDf6, as in the 3 .. :iVd6 Scandina- vian, is of course playable, but not so impres- sive with a knight on c3, preventing the move c3. The popular idea of a3 and b4 doesn't go that well with tDc3, which blocks off White's long al-h8 diagonal. Nevertheless, an extra tempo is an extra tempo, and White might want to investigate independent ideas such as S tDf3 i.b4 6 i.gS h6 7 i.h4 O-O 8 O-O-O. b) 4 ~a4 tDf6 (4 ... dS S tDf3 has the idea S. .. tDf66 i.gS i.b4 7 O-O-O! i.xc3 8 bxc3 h6 9 'iVh4) S tDf3 i.cs 6 i.gS h6 7 i.h4 gS 8 i.g3 d6

9 O-O-O i.d7 10 e4 with a complex battle.

2 . tDc6 After 2 ... d6 3 d4 (3 e4 and now 3 ... tDf6 4 d4 is a Philidor Defence; instead 3 ... i.g4 4 d4 tLlc6!? appears to favour White after S i.bS or even S dS tDd4 6 i.e3) 3 ... exd4 (3 ... tDd7 4 e4 tDgf6 is another Philidor Defence) 4 tDxd4, and here 4 ... tDf6 S e4 (S g3!?) is yet another Philidor Defence, while 4 ... dS!? S e4!? has the idea S. .. cS 6 tDdbS!? a6 7 i.f4 axbS 8 i.xbS+ i.d7 9 tDxdS.

3 d4 exd4 4 tDxd4 (D)

4  tDf6 4 ... i.b4 S tDxc6 i.xc3+ 6 bxc3 bxc6 7 ~d4 is unclear, with themes resembling those in the game. 4 ... i.cS can be met by S tDfS!? or S i.e3!?, both giving the playa unique flavour. 4 ... dS is also playable, but White's position looks preferable after S i.f4. White has great fun after 4 ... g6? S tDdS! (threatening 6 tDbS) S ... a6 (S ... tDb4 6 tDbS tDxdS 7 "iixdS with the ideas of 'iVeS+ and 7 ... i.g7? 8 "iicS!) 6 i.gS! f6 (6 .. :~xgS 7 tDxc7+ <Jo>d8?? 8 tDde6+) 7 i.h4 i.g7 8 e4 tDh6 9 i.c4 and White can be very happy with his position. In fact, Van Geet-V.Sokolov, Wijk aan Zee 1970 continued 9 ... tDaS? 10 eS! with a winning game for White. 5 i.g5 (D) S e4 is a Scotch Four Knights Game. It doesn't hurt for either side to be familiar with a lot of different openings and structures when 1 tDc3 is involved!

5 ... i.b4!

268 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

It's hard to argue with the logic of pinning White's knight once the c1-bishop has travelled to the kingside. 5 ... ..Iic5 is also perfectly accept- able, when, for example, 6 e3 O-O 7 ..Iid3 can follow. But Black should avoid these natural moves: a) 5 ... h6?! 6 ..Iixf6 'ii'xf6 7 ttJdb5 ~e5! (7 ... ~dS? S ttJxc7!; 7 ... 'ii'dS S ttJd5 ..Iib4+ 9 ttJxb4 ttJxb4 10 ~d2 ttJc6 11 ~e3+ ~fS 12 O-O-O and Black's king position is a problem) S ttJd5! (S 'iVd5 is a solid option) S. . JlbS! 9 ttJbxc7+ ~dS 10 ttJb5 (Keilhack isn't happy with this move, but it suffices, and 10 c3 a6! 11 e3 with the idea 11.....Iid6 12 ttJaS! l::txaS 13 ttJb6, threatening ttJc4, still isn't clear follow- ing 13 ... ..Iic5 14 ttJxaS b5) 1O ... 'iVxb2 11 lIbl ~e5 (11...'Yfixa2 12 e4 a6 13 ttJbc3 'iVa5 14 ..Itd3) 12 e3 with a comfortable advantage for White, H.Steiner-Morris, corr. 1995. b) 5 ... ..Iie7? results in a clear superiority for White after 6 ttJf5 O-O 7 ttJxe7+ 'ii'xe7 S ttJd5 'iVe5 9 ..Iixf6 gxf6 10 c3. Keilhack indicates that this position has occurred 'incredibly of- ten' ! w We now return to 5 ... ..Iib4 (D): 6 ttJxc6 (D) Or: a) Ivanchuk's flirtation with 1 ttJc3 versus Anand in blindfold chess in Monte Carlo 1995 ended badly after the slow 6 e3 O-O 7 ..Iie2!? h6 S ..Iixf6 (S ..Iih4 is natural) S. .. ..Iixc3+!? (or S. . :iVxf6 9 O-O ttJxd4 10 exd4 c6) 9 bxc3 'Yfixf6

10 O-O d5 11 l:tbl !IdS 12 ttJxc6!? ~xc6 13

~d4 ..Iie6 14 ..lin b6 15 c4? (Kostakiev sug- gests 15 !Ifd 1 ! with the idea z:!.d2, .l:tbd 1 and c4 ) 15 .. J~abS (or 15 ... lId6!) 16 l:tb4 'YfieS 17 c5 'iVe7 IS c6 .l:!.d6 19 'it'c3 ~eS and White's pawn falls. b) 6 'ii'd3 seems roughly equal; the play might go 6 ... O-O 7 a3 (7 O-O-O ..Iixc3! has the idea S 'it'xc3 ttJe4, so Suba-Korneev, Zaragoza 1999 continued S bxc3 h6 9 ..Iih4 d5 10 ttJxc6 bxc6 11 'it'd4 g5 12 ..Iig3 'it'e7 13 f3 .l:!.eS with active pieces) 7 ... ..Iic5 (7 ... ..Iia5!?) S e3 h6 9 ..Iixf6 ~xf6 10 ttJe4 ~e7 11 ttJxc5. 6 . bxc6 6 ... ..Iixc3+ 7 bxc3 dxc6 (7 ... bxc6 S 'it'd4 seems slightly to favour White) S 'it'xdS+ 'iitxdS gives White a kind of abstract advantage with his bishop-pair and kingside majority (Black's queenside majority isn't likely to produce a passed pawn). Then instead of Keilhack's 9 O-O-O+, 9 n seems to be the most accurate move, since neither the king's nor the rook's best squares are apparent as yet. 7 'Yfid4 (D)

7 ... 'Yfie7?!

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 269

7 ... i..e7! is solid and equal, although still in- teresting; for example, 8 O-O-O O-O 9 e4 d6 (af- ter 9 ... c5!, Keilhack prefers 10 ~d3 to 10 ~d2 d6 11 f4?! h6 with the idea of 12 i..h4? tbxe4!; Pell-R.Bellin, Montecatini Terme 1995 contin- ued 12 i..xf6 i..xf6 and Black was for choice) 10 i..c4 tbd7 11 i..xe7 "fixe7 12 f4 a5 13l:the1 tbb6 14 e5!? i..g4?! (l4. .. d5 15 i..d3 .l::i.b8) 15 exd6 ~xd6, Kie1czewski-E.Romanov, Warsaw rapid 2005, and now 16 ~xd6 cxd6 17 i..e2 keeps a positional edge. 8 i..xf6 gxf6 9 e3 d510 O-O-O i..c5?! 11 'iVh4 i..e6 (D) w 12g3 Black's structure is shot. Easier ways to stay on top were 12 i..d3 and 12 tbe2! (with the idea 12 ... :'b8 13 tbd4). 12 . :'b8 13 a3?! To prevent ... :'b4, apparently, although that wouldn't accomplish much. 13 . i..f5?! 13 ... i..d6! threatens ... i..e5, to grab the long diagonal and threaten the knight on c3. Then 14 "fia4 i..d7 15 ~xa7 O-O gives Black at least enough counterplay for the pawn. 14 i..d3! i..g6? 14 ... i..d7 15 :'he1 ~e5. 15 i..xg6 fxg616 "fia4 "fid7 17 e4! i..xf218 exd50-0 White is winning now. If 18 ... cxd5, 19 ~f4! hits f2 and f6, when 19 ... ~f5 20 "fixf5 gxf5 21 tbxd5 results in White having an extra pawn and Black a horrendous structure. 19 dxc6 "fie6 20 "fie4!? 20 ~b1! with the idea :'d7 would lead to a quicker win. 20 . J::tfe8 21 ~f3 i..e3+ 22 ~bl i..c5? 23 tbd5! ~e5 24 b4 f5 25 :'hel ~xel 26 :'xe1 :'xel+ 27 'ot>a2 i..d6 28 ~f2 :'h129 "fixa7 :'f8 30 'iHf21-0 The Strange Ones Now let's tum to some truly eccentric first moves for White, beginning with the 'good enough' category: a) 1 a3 can't be too bad (it creates no weak- nesses), although it is difficult to recommend. In fact, the move a3 can be useful in the 1 e4 e5 openings and the Sicilian Defence; there's even a whole book on 1 e4 c5 2 a3, as mentioned ear- lier in the chapter. However, if played on the first move, there are too many lines in which it is hardly relevant. For example, the 'irregular- move killer' 1...g6 makes you wonder why any- one would trade a3 for ... g6. White could argue that after 2 c4, there are many lines in which a3 will eventually prove useful, but that's a little lame. More ambitiously, Neil McDonald tried to solve this problem by means of 1 a3 g6 2 f4!? i..g7 (2 ... e5!? would be a strange spin-off of the From Gambit) 3 tbf3 d5 4 g3, a reversed Le- ningrad Dutch Defence with an additional a3, which is interesting but no more than equal. Of course, a properly-handled 1...d5 can also ren- der 1 a3 harmless. b) 1 e3 has little going for it in a positive sense, but it's trouble-free, since 2 d4 can always follow, and 2 f4 with a Bird Opening is often possible. After 1...e5, French Defence players might like 2 d4, and English Opening players 2 c4; also, 2 b3 would be an Owen Defence reversed with the normal move e3 included. Against 1...d5, 2 d4 will probably become a Colle Opening or Queen's Gambit Semi-Tar- rasch, whereas others might like 2 f4 or 2 b3. And so forth; the point is that, while 1 e3 is a thoroughly uninspired move, and I'm not rec- ommending it, it isn't 'substandard' or 'bad'. c) 1 d3 is slightly more conventional in spirit, because White can slip into default Pirc De- fencelKing's Indian Attack mode by 2 tbf3, 3 g3, 4 i..g2 and 50-0. Otherwise, the cornme~ts about 1 e3 apply here too. d) 1 c3, sometimes called the Saragossa Opening, commits White rather early on. This

270 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

rather pathetic-looking move has been associ- ated with the truly abysmal 'iVc2, but if White keeps wasting time in that manner, Black really will stand better. So 2 d4 should probably fol- low. As applies to 1 e3, Black can play almost anything, but 1...e5 2 d4 exd4 3 cxd4 d5 is a form of the Exchange QGD that is harmless to Black, and 1...d5 suggests itself, because then 2 d4 is equivalent to the anaemic 1 d4 d5 2 c3, 2 lLIf3 lLIf6 doesn't inspire, and otherwise Black has nothing to fear. The following two fIrst moves may in some theoretical sense be adequate, but will be diffi- cult to handle and are somewhere between good enough and substandard: e) I a4 strikes me as playable, much more so than 1 h4, although I can't particularly rec- ommend it. You can generally pick conserva- tive openings in which a4 tends to be useful, or is at least not harmful. Let's see how this might go. My own sense is that King's Indian AttaclF set-ups are compatible with a4; for example, 1 a4 d5 2lL1f3 c5 3 g3 lLIc6 4 i.g2 e5 5 d3 (the equivalent of I a4 e5 2 d3 d5 3 g3 c5 4 ~g2 lLIc6 5lL1f3) is a King's Indian in which, regard- less of whether Black plays for ... f6, ... lLIf6, ... i.e7 and ... i.g4 or otherwise, White's move e4 will at some point (perhaps after lLIa3 or lLIbd2) secure the use of c4. There are any number of move-orders for both sides, of course and Black by no means has to commit to either ... c5 or ... e5 when he plays 1 ... d5, nor White to lLIf3. But I think there are clever ways for White to squeeze at least some utility out of the inclusion of a4. Versus 1...e5, White can play in similar fash- ion with a reversed Pirc Defence (2 d3, 3lL1f3, 4 g3, etc.), or even a Philidor-style formation, get- ting a playable game in which a4 can help his cause somewhat. There are more provocative ways to set up. After I a4 e5, for example, it seems to me that 2lL1f3, a reversed Alekhine De- fence, is a legitimate try; many variations of the Alekhine utilize the move ... a5, as you can verify by going through the main lines, although natu- rally Black can benefIt too (versus lines with lLIc3, for example, ... ~b4 might be useful). Don't get me wrong: I a4 is basically only a waiting move and you have little positive rea- son to play it. It allows instant equality, which White shouldn't really concede to Black on the first move. For Black, the possibility of coming to an actual disadvantage is reduced dramati- cally, almost regardless of what his first move is; in that sense, I a4 isn't really to be played except as a matter of fancy. I should also note that against I a4, 1 ... g6 is a sound and useful re- ply. That will apply to many other irregular first, second and third moves as well. I made the same point in Volume 3, when talking about irregular moves in the English Opening. f) 1 lLIa3 is defInitely ugly, but not so bad. I actually played many games with it as a 2100+ player. Against l...e5, I liked to try 2 lLIf3!?, when 2 ... i.xa3 3 bxa3 is a double-edged deci- sion, since White gains the bishop-pair and b- fIle and, as noted elsewhere, doubled a-pawns tend not to be much of a problem until the end- game. Moreover, the move lLIa3 sometimes proves useful in the reversed Alekhine Defence positions after 2 ... e4 3 lLId4, because the move c4 can justify some otherwise marginal forma- tions. Versus 1 ... d5, White can pI ay 2lL1f3 (2 c4 is safe but less flexible); for example, 2 ... c5 3 c4 or 2 ... lLIf6 3 b3 (or 3 c4). IlLIa3 c5 2 e4 is a Zviagintsev Sicilian, which turns out to be per- fectly respectable; White can also play 2 lLIf3 . Finally, as always, 1 ... g6 is quite satisfactory. The rationale given by some books for IlLIa3 is that the knight will be re-routed to c2 after White plays c3; that is rather sad-looking, however. A more interesting course for White against 1 ... g6 is to set up with e4, d4 and c3 and await the chance for a profItable lLIc4. I won't go into more details about this eccentric knight devel- opment, but you can probably put together enough ideas to elevate it to the 'good enough' category. Finally, we have some moves that I'll assess as simply 'bad': g) The unpalatable 1 lLIh3 simply puts the knight on a bad square from which it will soon have to move again. In contrast to IlLIa3, White cannot normally permit his h-pawns to be dou- bled after ... i.xh3. If he prevents that with g3, the knight is still subject to attack by ... h5-h4 or the queen and bishop along the h3-c8 diagonal. Normally one might be able to use this knight productively to support the move f4, but here that will dangerously weaken White's kingside. It's hard to argue with 1...e5 as a response, but

1...d5 2 g3 e5 is the obvious course, when 3

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 271

.itg2lZ'lc64 O-O? h5! is not what White wants! Another logical set-up is 3 ... lZ'lf6 4 d3 c6. h) I h4 is described above. It has no redeem- ing value that I've found. i) I h3, Basman's Opening, moves a rook's pawn for no reason, except perhaps to play 2 g4, with a transposition to I g4 below. True, I h3 doesn't create as serious a weakness as I h4. On the kingside, however, every situation tends to be more delicate; after I a3, for example, an early c4 is often desirable. After I h3, by con- trast, White would court disaster by playing the mirror-image move f4. A more serious problem for White is that I h3 wastes a tempo and essen- tially hands the advantage of the first move to Black. That's because, unlike most slow first moves by White, it doesn't go with or support many (if any) logical piece deployments. That is, if Black plays l...d5 or l...e5, it's unlikely that White will be able to arrive at a position in which h3 is useful without making concessions elsewhere. j) I f3 is sometimes used to set up strange formations with, for example, 'it>f2, g3 and e3, and sometimes White plays g3 and lZ'lh3-f2. Unfortunately, I f3 does more than forfeit the advantages of the first move. It hurts White's future chances for occupying the centre with pawns (for example, e4 exposes White along the a7-g1 diagonal), and it is highly inflexible (weakening the king's protection and taking a good square from White's king's knight). Grob: 1 g4 I g4 (D) This is called Grob's Attack, or 'The Spike'. It has a serious following, and has stimulated considerable analysis in articles, chapters of books, and even small books by strong players. Indeed, calling I g4 'bad' is bound to offend some fans of the opening. But at best, with proper play for both sides, White squanders any . chance at a first-move advantage, and usually finds himself the one who has to find the more difficult moves in order to reach equality. That in itself is at least a substandard situation. But I'd go further and say that White can't even equalize against best play. It would be interest- ing to see if most grandmasters agree with that,

or merely find it difficult and impractical to play. At any rate, because of the cultish status of I g4, here's a serious look at some of the most critical lines. I g4 8a5man - Kudrin Manchester 1981 White has the same basic goals as in the Sokolsky/Polish with I b4. He will fianchetto quickly and at the same time grab some king- side territory; this is obviously more ambitious than I g3. It also has terrible drawbacks: by not covering h4 and encouraging a timely ... h5, White reduces his chance of castling kingside. If he plays for e4, as he might in the King's In- dian Attack (which includes g3), he creates an- other hole on f4. In addition, the move g5 is often forced and can expose his position fur- ther. By contrast, in the Sokolsky, the move b5 can serve to cramp Black's game.

1. . dS (D)

I'm going to concentrate upon this reply for the same reasons as I focused on 1.. .e5 versus I b4: it is the most popular move, directly at- tacks g4, and can be played with the hope of a forced advantage for Black. Of course, Black can go for the same goal with the naturall ... e5. I won't go into the details, but one very attrac- tive approach for him after 2 .itg2 (2 d3, per- haps best, is usually answered by 2 ... d5, but 2 h3?! h5! is already awkward for White) is 2 ... h5! 3 gxh5 (3 d4 hxg4 4 dxe5lZ'lc6 has fared no better) 3 .. :i*'g5. Then 4 .itf3 'iVh4! 5lZ'lc3 (5 d3) 5 ... lZ'lf6 is already in Black's favour, and 6 e4? (6 d3 c6) 6 ... .itc5 7 d4!? .itxd4 8 'iVe2

272 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

.ll.xc3+ 9 bxc3 tbxhS made things worse in Skembris-Mariotti, Budva 1981. w 21Lg2 This is the traditional move, introducing a sort of gambit in which White hopes to put pressure on Black's d-pawn via c4; he usually regains the pawn soon. If this fianchetto, con- sistent with the purported aggressiveness of 1 g4, doesn't work, that's a very bad sign for the Grob. The passive alternative 2 h3 will transpose into our main game if Black chooses 2 ... eS 3 .ll.g2 c6. He can also play 3 ... tbc6, which has a good record. Then Basman-Miles, Manchester 1981 tested the consistent move 4 c4!?, but Black gained the advantage after 4 ... dxc4 S ~a4 tbe7 6 tbf3!? (6 'ii'xc4 .ll.e6 is very awk- ward; for example, 7 'YWa4 'ii'd4! 8 'iVdl 'YWd7 9 tbc3 hS 10 gS O-O-O) 6 ... tbg6 7 tbc31Le6 8 h4?! (but White is already a pawn down with the in- ferior position) and here, instead of Miles's (perfectly good) move 8 ... .ll.b4, 8 ... tbf4! 91Ln 'iYd7 would be extremely strong. Perhaps White should resign himself to the passive 4 d3, but then it's difficult to justify 1 g4 with its atten- dant weaknesses. 2 .. c6 Black simply blocks the long diagonal and maintains the threat of ... 1Lxg4; White will find it hard to justify the move g4 in the result- ing structures. Nevertheless, in my opinion, 2 ... .ll.xg4! provides a good reason for con- demning White's move-order. There follows 3 c4 c6 (D) (3 ... d4!? is called the Romford Gam- bit; given the excellent alternatives, this spec- ulative exchange sacrifice isn't recommended, but leads to a fun position following 4 .ll.xb7 tbd7 S .ll.xa8 ~xa8, when White must go in for

6 f3 eS, since after 6 tbf3?? d3 he loses a piece!;

alternatively, 4 ~3 tbd7 S "i!Vxb7 .:tb8 6 "i!Vxa7 eS gives Black plenty of compensation). w White is a pawn down and his options are not enviable: a) 4 'YWb3 has several good replies: al) 4 ... ~b6 S cxdS ~xb3 6 axb3 cxdS 7 .ll.xdS tbc6 is more comfortable for Black, al- though White can almost equalize by 8 .ll.xc6+ bxc6; for example, 9 .:ta6 .ll.c8 10 .:ta4 eS and in place of 11 tba3.ll.e6 12 tbc4 e4!, as in O.Vovk- Kernazhitsky, Kiev 2000, White should accept the mild discomfort that follows 11 tbf3 f6 12 d3 tbe7. a2) 4 ... e6! is a more advantageous approach: S h3 (or S ~xb7 tbd7 6 cxdS cxdS) S. .. .ll.hS 6 ~xb7 tbd7 (D). w Now 7 'iVxc6?! is well met by 7 ... .l:.c8 8 ~a6 l:!.xc4 9 tbc3 'iYc7. Instead, 7 tbf3 tbe7! leaves

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 273

Black with the better development and a struc- tural advantage following, for example, 8 d4 ~8!' a3) 4 ... lbf6! is also very effective: 5 ~xb7 (5 cxd5 transposes to line 'bl ') 5 ... lbbd7 6 cxd5 cxd5 7 h3 i..h5 (7 .. . lbc5 !?) 8 lbc3 e6 9 lbb5 l:.c8!, Lambiris-Martidis, Athens 1987. Com- pare the position after 4 cxd5 cxd5 5 ~b3 lbf6 6lbc3 e6 7 'ifxb7 below; the insertion ofh3 and ... i..h5 doesn't matter. b) 4 cxd5 and now: bl) 4 ... lbf6! is a promising option, when Kosten gives 5 'ifb3 'ifd7 (for 5 ... cxd5, see 'b2') 6 lbc3 cxd5 7 lbxd5 lbc6 "with free de- velopment"; after 8 lbxf6+ exf6 9 lbf3, either 9 ... i..c5 or 9 ... O-O-O 10 O-O i..d6 with the idea ... l:!he8 might follow, which looks rather de- pressing for White. 8 lbe3 can be answered in various ways, such as 8 ... i..e6 9 'iVa4 g6 10 lbf3 i..g7 11 0-00-0 12 d3l:.ac8. b2) 4 ... cxd5 5 'ifb3 (5 lbc3 lbf6 6 'ilVb3 transposes to line 'b22') 5 ... lbf6 (D) and now: w b21) 6 'iVxb7 and now 6 ... lbbd7 is fine, but simply 6 .. :Yi'c8 7 'iVxc8+ i..xc8 gives Black slightly more central control. In addition, his half-open b-file is more important than White's g-file; for example, 8lbc3 e6 9 d3lbc6 10 lbf3 l:!b8, etc. b22) 6 lbc3 e6 (6 ... lbc6!? has the ideas 7 'iVxb7l:.c8! or 7lbxd5 'ifd7, transposing to line 'bl'; 6 ... 'iVd7 is an immediate transposition to that same line) 7 'ifxb7 lbbd7 8 lbb5 l:.c8, Polliotto-Figeac, Montpellier 1998. Black has a lead in development, and if White grabs a pawn by 9 'ifxa7 (9lbxa7? l:.b8 10 'ifa6l:.b6 11 'ifa4 'iVa8!), that lead expands; for example, 9 ... i..c5 10 ~a4 O-O 11 d4 i..e7 12 i..d2 lbb6 13 ~3 lbc4 with great pressure. I suspect that 2 ... i..xg4! constitutes a virtual refutation of 1 g4 d5 2 i..g2. It doesn't bode well for White that Black has so many options which appear to give him the advantage. The game's 2 ... c6 (D) remains relevant, how- ever, since it can transpose to 2 h3 e5 3 i..g2 c6, and in any case it produces standard pawn- structures whose understanding is relevant to several mainstream openings. w 3h3 Surprisingly, White is at a loss for realistic alternatives: a) 3 c4? loses a pawn to 3 ... dxc4. b) Sometimes 3 e4? is suggested, but the re- ply 3. .. lbf6! is already very good for Black: 4 exd5 (4 e5 lbxg4 5 d4 g6) 4 ... i..xg4 5 dxc6 lbxc6 and he dominates the centre, in addition to having better development and a superior pawn-structure. c) 3 g5?! is awfully loosening, and one good answer is 3 ... h6! 4 h4 hxg5 5 hxg5 .l::i.xhl 6 i..xh 1 'ifc7, which threatens ... ~h2 and intends 7 lbf3 e5 with ... e4 in store. Of course, Black can also play 3 ... e5. 3. e5 (D) As if this position weren't difficult enough for White, he also has to be ready for 3 ... h5!? 4 g5 e5, when 5 d4 is probably best, as in the main line. 4d4 This provocative move tries to justify g4 by luring Black's pawns forward. 4 d3 doesn't challenge the centre and compels White to at- tend to his kingside weaknesses; for example,

274 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w 4 ... tbe7 (contemplating ... tbg6-h4; 4 ... hS is also good when, in order to avoid split pawns, S gS is probably best, but the resulting position after S. .. i.d6 or S. .. i.e6 can't be attractive) S tbf3 tbg6 6 tbc3 hS 7 gxhS (7 gS lets Black play ... i.e6 without worrying about tbgS) 7 ... tbh4 8 tbxh4 ~xh4 9 e4 d4 10 tbe2 'iVxhS with the better pawn-structure. 4 ... e4 This is played most often, although with White's weaknesses, it should come as no sur- prise that more restrained moves also do well. For example, 4 ... exd4!? S ~xd4 tbd7 has an ex- cellent practical score. 4 ... tbd7 is also convincing: S c4!? (White gambits a pawn; otherwise, how does he gain any activity for his pieces? S dxeS tbxeS leaves him with a serious disadvantage in the centre) S. .. dxc4 (D). w 6 tbc3 (after 6 dxeS Kosten gives 6 .. :~WaS+! 7 tbc3 tbxeS) 6 ... i.d6 (or 6 .. :iVb6!) 7 tbf3 and now 7 ... tbe7 8 tbe4 gave Black an edge in Basman-Strauss, British Ch, Brighton 1984, but 7 ... hS! is even better; for example, 8 gS tbe7 9 tbe4 i.c7 10 dxeS tbxeS 11 'ii'xd8+ ~xd8 12 i.e3 tbxf3+ 13 i.xf3 i.eS 14 O-O-O+ ~c7 with the idea ... tbfS or ... tbg6. Lines like these illustrate a general disadvantage for White that goes beyond any particular move-order. Sc4 Otherwise Black develops casually and plays on the kingside by ... fS.

... i.d6 This is the most ambitious move; neverthe- less, S. .. hS, S. .. fS, S. .. tba6 and S. .. i.b4+!? have all functioned satisfactorily. 6 tbc3 tbe7 (D) w 7 i.gS!? White's idea is to provoke ... f6 and thereby open the a2-g8 diagonal; then 'ii'b3 will have more effect. Two alternatives are particularly revealing: a) 7 gS i.e6 8 h4 tbfS! 9 i.h3 (9 e3? tbxh4! 10 ':xh4 ~xgS). Now in Basman-Keene, Man- chester 1981, Black won a fine game after 9 ... O-O 10 cxdS cxdS 11 tbxdS? (II i.xfS is better) 11...tbg3!, but more convincing is sim- ply 9 ... dxc4!, which nets a substantial advan- tage after 10 ~c2 0-011 'ii'xe4 g6! or 10 tbxe4 O-O (or here 1O ... tbxd4 11 i.xe6 fxe6 12 e3 tbfS). b) 7 ~b3 can be met in several ways (for ex- ample, 7 ... tba6). The most important response is 7 ... O-O! 8 i.gS (after 8 i.d2, the simplest way to a better game is 8 ... dxc4 9 ~xc4 i.e6 10 ~a4 fS) 8 ... f6 9 cxdS cxdS 10 tbxdS?! (10 i.d2!? 'It>h8! transposes to the note on 10 cxdS below) 1O ... ii.e6 11 tbxe7+ 'iixe7 12 dS i.f7! 13 i.e3

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 275

tLla6 and Black will win back the d-pawn with much the better position. 7  f6 8 .i.d2 O-O! Precisely the move that White was hoping for, since after 9 'iiVb3 he can try to use a pin on dS to amplify his pressure. Nevertheless, it turns out that Black can easily defend against any threats. 8 ... tLla6 is also acceptable; for ex- ample, 9 'iiVb3 'iiVb6! 10 cxdS 'iiVxb3 11 axb3 cxdS. 9 'iiVb3 ~h8! (D) w 10nc1 Biicker likes Black after 10 O-O-O as 11 cS .i.c7 with the idea .. .fS. The most critical line is 10 cxdS cxdS, and now: a) II e3 tLlbc6 120-O-O (walking into an at- tack, but 12 tLlge2 fS! and 12 tLlxdS? .i.e6 13 .i.xe4 .i.c7! are no fun either) 12 ... tLlaS 13 'fUc2 .i.e6 with a promising queenside attack for Black, Querataro-Golmon, CompuServe 1994. b) 11 tLlxdS .i.e6 12 .i.xe4 tLlbc6! 13 tLlf3 (13 'iiVxb7? nb8 14 ~a6 .i.xdS! IS .i.xdS tLlb4) 13 ... nb8! 14 .i.c3 .i.c7, and White is reduced to IS tLlxe7 .i.xb3 16 tLlxc6 'iiVe8! 17 tLlxb8 ~xe4 18 axb3 .i.xb8, which is hardly desirable. 10  tLla6!? 1O ... fS! looks better still. These positions all favour Black; almost as importantly, they are difficult for White to play. 11 e3 11 cxdS cxdS has the idea 12 tLlxdS? (12 e3 fS) 12 ... .i.e6 13 'iiVxb7 .i.xdS 14 'iiVxa6 e3!. 11  f5! White's kingside is weaker than Black's queenside. 12 tLlge2 tLlb4?! (D) 12 ... tLlg6!, threatening ... tLlh4, is both better and strong. w 13 tLlxe4 tLlxa2 14 tLlxd6?! An interesting try, but White will come up short of compensation for the exchange. 14 'iVxa2 fxe4 IS O-O is unclear. 14  tLlxc115 tLlxc1 'fUxd6 16 .i.b4 At this point, instead of 16 ... 'fUc7 17 cxdS cxdS, when 18 'iVc3! followed by tLld3-f4 would initiate some counterp1ay on the dark squares, Black had the clearer 16 ... ~f6!, forcing 17 i..xe7 'Wixe7, which neutralizes White's initia- tive and produces a clear advantage. Even if you're satisfied with the game's main line, which is hardly likely, Black's many early alternatives should prove discouraging. As far as I can tell, 1 g4 is competitive with 1 h4 for the honour of being White's worst first move . Against an informed or skilled opponent, it is simply masochistic. Universal First Moves for Black Since the quality of Black's first move depends upon White's, we shall have to talk about indi- vidual cases. But some first moves have a 'uni- versal' character, in that they can be played against any first move by White. For example,

1...g6, while thought of as eccentric and/or in-

ferior in the past, is now an approved way to an- swer 1 e4, 1 d4 and 1 c4 (see Chapter 3). The acceptance of 1...b6 has taken longer, and it is

276 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

still viewed askance in some quarters, although that mainly applies to the I e4 b6 lines (see Chapter 4). Probably l...b6 can be given the as- sessment of 'good enough', but it's a bit more marginal than 1.. .g6. 1\vo other irregular opening moves, 1.. .d6 and l...ttJc6, can be played as universal systems. They aren't seen a great deal at top levels, but are effective enough to have grandmaster adherents. In part, that's because Black can pick and choose against which of White's first moves to play in- dependently, and against which to transpose into conventional openings. I should mention that playing these systems will repeatedly expose you to ideas and manoeuvres that crop up in mainstream openings, and of course mainstream opening ideas inform the use of all four universal systems that I've mentioned. Black Plays 1 ... d6

1. .. d6 has long been used as a transpositional

device but has grown into an independent weapon against 1 d4. Recently, strong players have used l...d6 with increasing frequency and promoted it in books and DVDs. Let me outline some possibilities: 1 d4 a) 1 e4 d6 is the Pirc Defence, a mainstream opening. Some players like to use the Pirc move-order to get to Philidor Defence-related systems, via 1 e4 d6 2 d4 ttJf6 3 ttJc3 e5, when 4 dxe5 dxe5 5 'iYxdS+ <;2;>xdS has thus far proven of little value for White, with 6 .tc4 adequately answered by 6 ... <;2;>eS or 6 ... .te6. b) 1 c4 d6 can lead to any number of varia- tions from Volume 3. In whatever order White plays ttJc3, g3 and/or ttJf3, Black can enter ei- ther a Reversed Closed Sicilian with ... e5 or a Symmetrical English with ... c5. He can also playa King's Indian set-up with ... ttJf6, ... g6 and ... .tg7. 1.. .d6 provides a particular type of flexibility in ... e5 systems; that is, if he is not committed to ... ttJf6, he can still play .. .f5. See, for example, the Volume 3 discussion of 1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 d6 with 3 ttJf3 f5 and 3 g3 f5. c) 1 ttJf3 d6 is likewise very flexible and will often transpose to an English Opening af- ter White's c4. If White plays for a King's In- dian Attack by 2 g3, Black can play, among other set-ups, ... e5 & ... f5, ... c5 & ... e5, "'ttJf6 & ... g6, or simply ... g6 & ... Ji..g7 with Modem Defence themes. Finally, 2 d4 Ji..g4 transposes to 1 d4 d6 2 ttJf3 Ji..g4. w

1. .. d6 (D)

2 ttJf3 Or: a) 2 g3 e5 3 dxe5 (3 .tg2 f5) 3 ... dxe5 4 'iYxdS+ <;2;>xdS is regarded as perfectly safe for Black. A bishop on g2 can be opposed by ... c6. b) 2 c4 e5 (some players prefer 2 ... ttJf6 3 ttJc3 e5; 2 ... g6 will usually transpose into a Modem Defence or King's Indian Defence af- ter 3 e4 or 3 ttJc3) 3 ttJf3 (again, 3 dxe5 dxe5 4 'iUxdS+ <;2;>xdS is considered equal; 3 ttJc3 is a transposition to the English Opening - see Vol- ume 3 under the move-order 1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 d6 3 d4) 3 ... e4 (there are options like 3"'ttJd7, but this is the most attractive move) 4 ttJg5 f5 5 ttJc3. This is covered in Volume 3 via the move- order 1 c4 e5 2 ttJc3 d6 3 ttJf3 f5 4 d4 e4 5 ttJg5. According to theory, Black stands reasonably well. 2 ... Ji..g4 Black announces his willingness to part with the bishop-pair in the interest of central control. Alexander Finkel has championed 2 ... g6 3 c4 Ji..g7 4 ttJc3 .tg4 5 e3 c5, with pressure down the al-hS diagonal, including ideas of ... cxd4 and ... ttJh6-f5. Perhaps that's objectively the best non-transpositional system, and it's also a good practical choice because Black's strategy is easy to implement.

3 c4 (D)

3"'ttJd7 Black is preparing to defend his queens ide against 'iYb3. Furthermore, once he gives up his

IRREGUlAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 277

g4-bishop, Black wants to be assured of getting ... e5 or ... c5 in. The alternative 3 ... ~xf3 looks premature, but is playable; for example, 4 gxf3 (4 exf3 g6 5 lbc3 ~g7 6 ~e3 lbf6 7 ~e2 c6 has been played in many grandmaster games; Black counts upon White's relatively immobile pawn-structure to compensate for the bishop- pair) 4 ... g6 (or 4 ... c6, having in mind ... e6 and ... d5 in some cases) 5lbc3 ~g7 6 f4!? lbc6 and White has usually chosen 7 e3, but there is also 7 d5. Probably White has the better prospects in all of these ... ~xf3 lines, but the positions are unbalanced and reward good play. 4lbc3 Upon 4 g3 ~xf3 5 exf3, one route is 5 ... g6 (or 5 ... e6 6lbc3lbgf6) 6 ~g2 ~g7 7 O-O lbh6 with the idea ... lbf5. Compare what follows, where Black's bishop is more passively placed on e7. White can prevent doubled pawns by 4 'ib3 (protecting f3 while attacking b7); then 4 ... l:i.b8 5 h3 ~xf3 6 1i'xf3 g6 and ... ~g7 again gives Black active play. His usual plan is ... c5, trying to extend the range of his dark-squared bishop. 4 ... e5 (D) Some grandmasters play 4 ... ~xf3 here. Ver- sus either recapture, 5 ... g6 and 6 ... ~g7 is a good way to contest the central dark squares. White will generally control more space, how- ever, and can claim a small advantage in most lines. 5 g3 White agrees to take on doubled pawns in re- turn for the bishop-pair and easy development.

5 e3 lbgf6 6 ~e2 is less ambitious, although it

can lead to complex strategic struggles. Black's most popular method of play is then 6 ... ~e7 7 w O-O O-O; for example, 8 b3 !1e8 9 .Bb2 .ifS (or 9 ... c6; in either case, Black would like to play ... e4 and possibly ... d5) and now: a) White can play h3 at several junctures, when Black has to consider whether ... ~h5 is worth it, allowing White to play g4 and after ... ~g6, lbh4 to win the bishop-pair at the cost of kingside weaknesses. After 10 h3 in this po- sition, most players will prefer 1O ... ~xf3 11 .Bxf3 and now 11...c6 or 11...e4 12 ~e2 c6, with well-placed pieces and the prospects of territorial gain to offset his opponent's bishops. b) 10 "iVc2 c6 11 dxe5 dxe5 12 l:i.adl 'fic7 with equal prospects, Pfleger-Lobron, Bundes- liga 1993/4. 5 ... ~xf3 6 exf3 exd4?! Here Black has a variety of moves such as 6 ... lbgf6, 6 ... lbe7 and 6 ... g6; in general, White should have a very modest edge, but with plenty of ideas for both sides. Although the text-move has been played in many games, Black gives up the centre and comes up short of space. 7 'ii'xd4lbgf6 8 ~g2 ~e7 9 O-O O-O Now White undoubtedly has some advan- tage with 10 f4 or 10 b3l:i.e8 11 ~b2, because his bishop-pair outweighs other factors. Be- cause of this, Black might want to look into his 6th-move alternatives. Earlier, I would recom- mend the plan with 2 ... g6 as a good way to ob- tain a solid position with a clear-cut strategy. Black Plays 1. .. 4:Jc6 The fact that l...lbc6 is playable is perhaps sur- prising, in that the reversed move 1 lbc3 leads to so many delicate positions. This suggests that for Black to play 1. .. lbc6, he has to proceed

278 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

more conservatively than White usually does when he embarks upon 1 ttJc3. Let's see a game with notes which outline the possibilities. 1 e4 Campora - Wockenfuss Amsterdam 1985

1 d4 ttJc6!? is daring, and usually consid-

ered slightly inferior because of 2 dS. In view of that, Wisnewski, who champions 1...ttJc6 against other moves, prefers to play 1 ... dS and then ... ttJc6 next, regardless of White's second move. That is somewhat less than a 'universal' system, but it's in a similar spirit. Anyway, let's look at I d4 ttJc6: a) 2 e4 transposes to our main line I e4 ttJc6 2d4. b) 2 ttJf3 can be met by 2 ... dS, with a type of Chigorin Defence, and it can transpose to that defence upon 3 c4. Most books on that opening cover moves such as 3 i..f4 and 3 g3. Instead, 2 ... d6 3 e4 is mentioned below, via the move- order I e4 ttJc6 2 ttJf3 d6 3 d4. c) 2 dS ttJeS (D). w Black is playing a mirror-image Alekhine Defence. As in that opening, he hopes to lure White's pawns forward and then decimate his centre. Most of what follows depends more upon specifics than principles, but a general difference consists in Black's ability to play ... cS in many Alekhine lines, whereas in the variation before us, ... fS could only be played at some risk to Black's king and kingside. Having said that, Black has the resources to make a real game out of it: c1) 3 f4 is a reasonable move, and after 3 ... ttJg6, Black's knight is immobilized and lacks immediate prospects. Still, the move f4 is itself weakening, and White has to be careful about overextending his centre. After the natu- ral 4 e4, Black has 4 ... eS!, preparing ... i..cs, when White must avoid S fS? (simply a mis- take) S ... 'i!Vh4+ 6 'iitd2 ttJf6! (this is better than 6 ... 'i!Vxe47 fxg6 'i!VxdS+ 8 'iitel 'i!Vxdl + 9 'iitxdl hxg6, as given in some sources, which may be only slightly in Black's favour) 7 'i!Vf3 (the knight on g6 can't be taken due to 7 ... ttJxe4+, but there's also no good way to defend the e- pawn; for example, 7 ttJc3 i..b4 or 7 i..d3 ttJxe4+ 8 i..xe4 'i!Vxe4 9 fxg6 'i!Vxg2+ 10 ttJe2 'i!VxdS+ and Black ends up with four pawns and a strong attack for the piece) 7 ... ttJxe4+ 8 'iite2 ttJf4+ (8 ... ttJf6 9 fxg6 hxg6, with an ongoing at- tack, is also promising) 9 i..xf4 'i!Vxf4 10 'i!Vxf4 exf4 11 'iitf3 ttJf6 and Black is clearly better; for example, 12 c4?! d6 13 'iitxf4? gS+! 14 fxg6 i..h6+ IS 'iitf3 fxg6 and ... O-O, which is simply awful for White. Instead, S dxe6! is best, when S. .. fxe6 6 h4!? might be better than it looks, with the initial point 6 ... ttJxh4? 7 'i!Vg4! ttJg6 8 Itxh7. Another line is 6 ... i..cS!? 7 hS ttJ6e7 8 h6 g6 9 ttJf3 dS 10 ttJc3, intending 1O ... ttJf6 11 ttJgS!. There is a lot to explore here. c2) 3 e4 (D) is White's most common and natural move:

3 ... e6!? (presumably 3 ... c6 is playable, with the idea that the natural response 4 ttJc3 blocks a later c4; then 4 ... d6 S ttJf3 ttJxf3+ 6 'iVxf3 ttJf6 with the idea of ... g6, either before or after ... cxdS, looks fairly normal; for some reason, 3 ... c6 is represented by only one game in my

IRREGUlAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 279

databases, and that with a spectacularly weak 4th move by Black - maybe I'm missing some- thing) 4 dxe6! (this simple solution is a prob- lem for Black; if White continues in a type of reversed Alekhine Four Pawns Attack by 4 f4 lbg65 c4, then either 5 ... i.c5 or 5 ... lbf6 is sat- isfactory - the latter is a variation from the Knight's Tango, which goes 1 d4 lbf6 2 c4 lbc6, and is one of the most respectable irregu- lar openings) and now we have: c2l) 4 .. .fxe6 5 lbc3! waits for Black to com- mit: 5 ... b6!? (5 ... i.c5?? 6 iKh5+ picks up a piece; 5 ... a6 6 f4 lbf7 7 lbf3 b5 is worth a shot) 6 f4! (after 6 lbf3, 6 ... lbf7!? 7 i.f4 i.c5 8 i.e2 lbe7 doesn't look too bad; instead 6 ... lbxf3+ 7 'iVxf3 i.b7 was cleverly answered by 8 ~h5+! g6 9 iKe5 lbf6 10 i.b5!, threatening 'ii'xe6+, in Volkov-B.Savchenko, Moscow 2006; 6 i.f4 lbg6 7 i.g3 should also give White an edge) 6 ... lbf7 (6 ... lbg6) 7 lbf3, and Black's develop- ment is awkward; he might try 7 ... i.c5!? 8 lba4 i.e7 9 i.d3 i.b7 10 O-O a6 with the idea ... b5 and ... lbf6. c22) 4 ... dxe6 5 'iVxd8+ 'it>xd8 and now 6 f4!? lbg6 may slightly favour White, but is a bit loose; instead, 6 i.f4 seems to yield an edge: 6 ... lbg6 (6 ... i.d6!? 7 i.g3 'it>e7 may be better) 7 i.e3 lbf6 8 lbc3?! (8 f3! with a modest cen- tral advantage) 8 ... lbg4, and Black equalizes after 9 .i:td 1+ i.d7 10 i.c 1 i.c5 11 lbh3 'it>e 7 12 i.e2 lbf6. w Let's return to the game:

1. .. lbc6 (D)

This is the long-debated Nimzowitsch De- fence, one of the best of the irregular openings versus 1 e4. Black will usually attack the centre by ... d5 or ... e5, but he hasn't committed yet. Again, over the years, several books and many theoretical articles have been produced about

1...lbc6, mainly by the move's advocates, but it

still isn't used at the elite level. I'll outline se- lected variations, trying to concentrate upon critical lines. 2d4 2 lbf3 is the main alternative, and a popular way to side-step Black's speciality lines. Then Black can switch to a main-line double e-pawn opening by 2 ... e5, or enter a somewhat shaky form of the Scandinavian Defence by 2 ... d5 3 exd5 ~xd5 (the development of the knight to c6 is usually deferred or skipped altogether). Another reasonable line that has been played by numerous grandmasters is 2 ... d6 3 d4 lbf6 4 lbc3 i.g4, with the main line going 5 i.e3 e6 6 h3 .Bh5; it is theoretically somewhat in White's favour. Even the absurd-looking con- tinuation 2 ... f5!? has had serious analysis de- voted to it. But the most intriguing independent reply to 2 lbf3 is 2 ... lbf6, when after 3 lbc3, 3 ... e5 is a Four Knights Game, interesting but not usually feared by Black. Or Black can enter less charted waters with 3 ... d5; for example, 4 e5 can be an- swered by 4 ... d4!? or by 4 ... lbd7 5 d4 lbb6, af- ter which Black's bishop will get to g4 or f5 with approximate equality. So the main line after 2 lbf3 lbf6 is 3 e5! lbg4 (3 ... lbd5 will transpose to a line of the Alekhine Defence that is considered a little risky, but is nevertheless quite respectable; note that Black's move-order has avoided the Four Pawns Attack of that opening) 4 d4 d6 5 h3 lbh6 (D). w

280 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Black has a pretty ugly position that neverthe- less has some merits. His decentralized knight is an undoubted disadvantage, but he has prospects of chipping away at White's centre, after which that piece might be reintroduced by ... tLlf5. Of course, White can hardly complain about his prospects, but he shouldn't expect too much from the capture .i.xh6, which gives up the bishop-pair. 5 ... tLlh6 introduces a wide range of eccentric possibilities that are typical of irregu- lar openings; for example: a) 6 e6!? fxe6 7 .i.xh6 gxh6 8 tLlh4?! (8 .i.c4 .i.g7 9 0-00-0 is comfortably equal; Wisnewski gives the cute line 10 ':'el ~h8 11 .i.xe6? .i.xe6 12 ':'xe6 ':'xf3 13 gxf3 .i.xd4!, threatening both ... 'ikg8+ and ... .i.xb2) 8 ... 'ikd7! 9 'ikh5+ ~d8 10 c3 'ike8 11 .i.e2 and now 1l....i.g7 was fine in Trias-JRamirez, Catania 1990, but 11.. :~xh5 12 .i.xh5 e5 would definitely favour Black. b) 6 exd6 iVxd6 7 tLlc3 a6 looks strangely similar to a Scandinavian Defence with 3 ... 'ikd6. c) 6.i.b5 a6 7 .i.xc6+ bxc6 8 O-O g6 is 0 K. d) 6 tLlc3 (D).

Now 6 ... a6!? intends 7 exd61lVxd6 8 d5 tLle5. This favours White somewhat, but seems better than Narciso Dublan's 6 ... dxe5?! 7 d5 tLld4 8 tLlxe5 tLlhf5, when many moves have been tried and analysed, but not the simple 9 .i.e3!. e) 6 .i.xh6 gxh6 7 .i.b5 a6 8 .i.xc6+ bxc6 9 'ike2 l:tg8!, Sprenger-Keilhack, COIT. 1996. Now if 10 g3 llb8 11 b3, Wisnewski recommends ll...iVd7 12 tLlc3 c5, although 13 O-O-O or 13 d5 looks better than his 13 dxc5 dxe5 14.l::!.dl ~c6. In general, White seems to keep the advan- tage in the lines after 5 ... tLlh6, but Black's posi- tion is within playable boundaries. 2. d5 2 ... e5 3 d5 (3 dxe5 tLlxe5 is another story; without going into the details, it seems that 4 tLlf3, 4 tLlc3 and 4 .i.f4 all achieve a modest ad- vantage, which is perhaps enough to discourage Black from 2 ... e5; on the other hand, my data- base shows over 1000 games after 3 ... tLlxe5, so not everyone feels this way) 3 ... tLlce7 (D). w This is the reverse of 1 tLlc3 d5 2 e4 d4 3 tLlce2 e5, as discussed earlier. As in that line, Black's goal is to play ... tLlf6, ... tLlg6, and bring his bishop to c5 or b4. Now White has many possible moves, of which I'll note just a few: a) In keeping with the reversed variation, 4 f3 has the idea 4 ... tLlg6 5 .i.e3 ! (compare 1 tLlc3 d5 2 e4 d4 3 tLlce2 e5 4 tLlg3 .i.e6!). But since White's queen is cut off from h5, Black might try 4 .. .f5!?, to which White could reply 5 .i.g5!? h6 6 .i.e3 or 5 tLlc3 tLlf6 6 .i.g5. For any plan in which Black plays ... g6 and ... .i.g7, White can claim the normal advantage that he gets in the Samisch Variation of the King's Indian follow- ing c4, tLlc3, .i.e3, f3, 'ilVd2 and O-O-O, because Black's knight really doesn't belong on e7 in that case. Also, h4-h5 might gain in force. b) With the above in mind, it seems to me that 4 .i.d3 also deserves a closer look, with the same ideas. c) Another interesting idea is 4 h4, with the idea of advancing the h-pawn in the case of ei- ther ... tLlg6 or ... g6. d) The usual version of the h-pawn advance has gone 4 tLlf3 tLlg6 5 h4, when A.lvanov- Benjamin, USA Ch, Parsippany 1996 contin- ued 5 ... h5 6 .i.g5 tLlf6 7 tLlc3!? (7 .i.d3 .i.c5 8 tLlbd2) 7 ... .i.c5 (Ivanov analyses 7 ... .i.b4 8

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 281

'iVd3!? i.xc3+ 9 'iVxc3 tL'lxe4 10 i.xd8 tL'lxc3 11 i.xc7 tL'lxdS 12 ..ixeS with an edge for White, in view of Black's inferior pawn-struc- ture) 8 tL'la4?! (8 'iVd2 O-O 9 O-O-O is better) 8 ... ..Bb4+! 9 c3 ..Be7 10 ..Bxf6 ..Bxf6 with ap- proximate equality, or perhaps a very slight edge to White because of his superiority in space after 11 g3. 3 tL'lc3 White attacks the centre directly, but this isn't his only move: a) 3 eS (D) bears some resemblance to the French and Caro-Kann Advance Variations.

It's true that Black's knight on c6 prevents him from attacking the d4-pawn by ... cS, but in modem openings Black attacks the front on the pawn-chain (in this case, eS) as often as the 'base' (d4); after the move ... f6, that attack is assisted by his knight on c6. In terms of devel- opment, Black gets the best of both openings: in contrast to the French Defence, he can get his queen's bishop out to fS or g4, and in contrast to the Caro-Kann Defence, he can put his queen's knight on c6! White's main advantage is his firm command of territory and the cramping in- fluence of his eS-pawn. For example, in both the French and Caro-Kann, he finds it difficult to shore up his pawn-chain with f4; here it's easy. Unfortunately, he creates some light-square weaknesses by so doing. Let's see how this plays out; Black has two main moves: al) 3 ... ..ifS isn't approved by most theoreti- cians, but it is sufficient to establish a meaning- ful stake in the position. all) An entertaining example went 4 tL'le2 e6 S tL'lg3 ..Bg6 6 h4 hS (6 .. .f6 7 hS ..Bf7 8 f4 'iVd7 is probably a better approach) 7 tL'le2!? (a little outrageous; White neglects his develop- ment, but threatens tL'lf4) 7 ... ..ifS!? (the third bishop move) 8 tL'lf4 (and the fourth by this knight!) 8 ... g6 9 c3 'iVd7 10 tL'ld2 (10 b4!) 1O .. .f6! 11 exf6 eS!? 12 dxeS tL'lxeS, Roman- ishin-Mariotti, Leningrad 1977, and here 13 tL'lf3 is dynamically balanced. a12) Instead, 4 tL'lf3 can be met by 4 ... 'iVd7, 4 ... f6 or 4 ... e6. In the last case, S ..Be2 tL'lb4!? 6 tL'la3 cS 7 c3 tL'lc6 8 O-O with the idea tL'lc2-e3 is a possible continuation; compare the Short Variation of the Caro-Kann Defence. a13) White's most important move may well be the ultra-flexible 4 c3. The play can go in a great many directions at this point. 4 ... f6 S f4 tL'lh6 resembles 'a2' and 4 .. .'t,wd7 is often played with the idea of an early ... O-O-O. The obvious 4 ... e6 defines the light-squared pawn-chain with Black's bishop outside it. After S f4, Black should consider restraining White's kingside first with ... tL'lh6 or ... hS and ... tL'lh6 before un- dertaking action elsewhere. Compare line 'a2'. a2) 3 ... f6 has several possible replies. Per- haps the most significant is 4 f4 (4 ..Bd3 can be met by 4 ... tL'lxd4!? or4. .. g6; 4 ..ibS ..Bd7 has the idea S. .. tL'lxeS, familiar from the French De- fence, so S tL'lc3 fxeS 6 dxeS e6 7 tL'lf3 ..Bb4 might follow, with perhaps a slight edge for White after 8 ..Bxc6) 4 ... tL'lh6 (trying to take over light squares; fS, g4 and e4 are all poten- tially vulnerable; simply 4 ... ..ifS S tL'le2 'it'd7 6 tL'lg3 tL'lh6 is also playable) S tL'lf3 ..ifS (or S. .. ..Bg4, which White could have avoided by S c3 first; with the text-move, Black has in mind some combination of the moves ... e6, ... ..Be4, ... tL'lfS and ... fxeS) 6 c3 e6 (D). w

282 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

[diagram]
10 O-O tbf7, Bengsch-R.Becker, Kassel 1998 -

Black will play for ... gS by ... h6, ... ~e7 and ... l:tg8, and White has no equally productive plan; 7 ~bS doesn't achieve much after 7 ... ~d7 80-0 a6) 7 ... ~e7 8 0-00-09 tba3 ~e4! 10tbc2 ~e8! 11 tbe3 fxeSI2fxeS ~g613 ~d2l:tf714 'it>hl l:taf8 with play on the light squares and kingside pressure to counterbalance White's spatial advantage, EGomez-Castro Rojas, Med- ellin 1977. In general, 3 ... f6 seems satisfactory for Black. b) 3 exdS ~xdS (D) is equivalent to 1 e4 dS 2 exdS ~xdS 3 d4 tbc6. w Black intends to play ... eS and bring his pieces out quickly (as in the Chigorin Defence to the Queen's Gambit). Since this is critical for the fate of 2 ... dS, we need to be careful about details: 4 tbf3 (4 ~e3 eS! has scored very well for Black after S tbc3 ~b4 6 a3 ~xc3+ 7 bxc3 tbf6, the most frequently seen line, as well as after S tbf3 ~g4 and S c4 'iVaS+) and now: b 1) 4 ... eS has to be taken into account. After S tbc3 ~b4 6 ~d2 ~xc3 7 ~xc3 e4 8 tbeS tbxeS 9 dxeS, if Black tries 9 ... tbe7, then 10 'ii'e2! is probably the best try to extract some- thing from the position, and indeed, 10 ... ~e6 probably won't equalize after 11 g3! e3 12 f3, as in T.Schmid-Vitouch, Bundesliga 2008/9, while White's bishop-pair gained life after iO ... ~fS IIl:tdl ~c6 12 g4! e3 13 l:tgl exf2+ 14 'it>xf2 with the idea ~bS in Arribas-Bruzon, Havana 1997. Probably 9 ... ~e6 is more accu- rate, when 10 ~e2 can be met by 10 ... O-O-O. b2) 4 ... ~g4 (the most ambitious move) S ~e2 (S tbc3!? 'iVhS {or S. .. liaS} 6 ~e2 O-O-O is wild and unclear: 7 O-O tbf6 8 h3 tbxd4! 9 tbxd4 ~xe2 10 tbcxe2 eS or 7 dS ~xf3 8 i.xf3 ~eS+ 9 ~e3 e6 10 O-O tbf6) S. .. O-O-O (D). w We've reached a curious juncture. Now 6 tbc3 ~aS is a major line of the Scandinavian Defence, and 6 ... ~hS is also played. White has two other important moves: b21) 6 ~e3 eS (after 6 ... tbf6 7 O-O both 7 ... e6 and 7 ... ~fS have been satisfactory for Black) 7 c4 ~aS+ 8 ~d2 ~b4 9 dS ~xf3 10 ~xf3 tbd4! (even better than iO ... ~xd2+ 11 tbxd2 tbd4 12 O-O ~ 13l:tel, C.Koch-Rahde, corr. 200S, when 13 ... tbf6! is correct) 11 tbc3 ~a6 12 ~e2 tbf6 13 a3 l:the8! 14 ~d3?! e4 IS ~f1 e3! 16 fxe3 ~xc3 17 bxc3 tbfS with a win- ning game for Black, Draeger-Bellmann, corr. 1999. b22) 6 c4 ~fS (6 ... ~aS+ 7 ~d2 ~fS {not the only move} 8 ~e3 transposes to 6 ... ~fS without allowing 7 O-O, and other 8th moves have not been effective; if nothing else, 8 ~c3 ~xf3 9 ~xf3 tbxd4 transposes to the 7 ~e3 main line) and now 7 ~e3 (after 7 O-O, Black has equalized with both 7 ... tbxd4 8 tbxd4 ~xe2 9 ~xe2 l:txd4, which requires some care, and 7 ... tbf6 8 ~e3 eS; by using 6 ... ~aS+, Black by- passes the issue entirely) induces Black to com- bine by 7 ... ~xf3 8 ~xf3 tbxd4! 9 ~xd4 (9 ~g4 tbc2+ 10 ~xc2 ~xg4) 9 ... ~e6+! 10 ~e2

Now: b221) Curiously, iO ... cS hasn't been played much, but my engines approve, and White hasn't won any of the games I've found. Keilhack and Schlenker suggest 11 ~a4 cxd4 12 ~xa7, but instead of their 12 ... d3 13 tbc3, either 12 ... ~eS

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 283

or 12 ... ttJf6 13 ttJa3 ~a6 should favour Black. My guess is that this would be an easy way for Black to play the position, with the proviso that it is relatively untested. b222) 10 ... ~e4 11 O-O ~xd4 (even 11....l:txd4 12 ttJd2 ~e6 13 ~a4!, previously thought to give White good chances, only draws after the forcing 13 ... .l:txd2! 14 .l:tad1 .l:txd1 15 .l:txd1 ttJf6 16 ~xa7 ~a6 17 ~d4 ~d6 18 flia7 Wia6, etc., D.Boskovic-Savic, Vrnjacka Banja 2009) 12 ~a4 e6 13 ttJc3 .Bd6! (after 13 ... ttJf6, White has succeeded with 14 ttJb5 ~b6 15 b4 c6 16 c5, but it is probably unsound, whereas 14 J::tfd1 ~b6 15 .l:txd8+ 'it>xd8 16 b4 a5 or 16 ... c5 only very slightly favours White) 14 .l:tfd1 (14 ttJb5 flie5 15 ttJxd6+ cxd6 16.iB 'it>b8leaves White with compensation, but no more than that) 14 ... ~e5 15 g3 'it>b8 16 ttJb5 a6 17 ttJxd6 cxd6 18 .iB ttJf6 19 .l:td3, Michna-Prie, San Sebas- tian 2009, and here 19 ... ttJe4 is most accurate, again leaving White with compensation for the pawn, but only just so. The line with 6 c4 ~f5 7 .Be3 has been part of White's claim to advantage after 3 exd5, but it now appears harmless for more than one rea- son. We now return to 3 ttJc3 (D): 3 ... dxe4 This is the main move, but White apparently comes away with some advantage, so Black's alternatives are noteworthy: a) 3 ... e6 transposes into a line of the French Defence, 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 ttJc3 ttJc6, that has been played regularly and accumulated a great deal of theory over the last decade. I'll leave it to the reader to research the details, but its current reputation is good, and, for example,

1...ttJc6 specialist Wisnewski builds his reper-

toire around 3 ... e6. b) 3 ... e5!? (D) is a bold attempt to clear out the centre. w White's best reply seems to be 4 dxe5 (4 exd5 ttJxd4 and 4 .Bb5 dxe4 5 d5 a6 6 .Ba4 b5 7 ttJxb5 axb5 8 .Bxb5 ttJe7 are not serious threats to Black's position) 4 ... d4 and then: b1) After 5 ttJce2!?, 5 ... f6 is recommended by Keilhack and Schlenker, perhaps not so convincingly after 6 exf6 ttJxf6 7 ttJf3. In- stead, 5 ... .Bc5 could be considered, with the idea 6 c3 .Bg4 7 f3 dxc3!, which is lively, if hardly forced. Black threatens ... .Bf2+, and af- ter 8 ~xd8+?! .l:txd8 9 fxg4? ttJb4 he wins ma- terial. b2) 5 ttJd5! and now Keilhack and Schlen- ker put loads of engrossing analysis into the amazing 5 ... f5 (5 ... ttJge7 6 .Bg5 .Be6 might be objectively superior), which has been played surprisingly often (perhaps as a consequence). 6 exf6 ttJxf6 (D) and now:

284 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

w b21) One of the nicest lines goes 7 .i.c4 .i.e6 8 .i.g5 (8lLlxc7+ 'ilixc7 9 .i.xe6 "fiIe7 turns out to be quite unclear) 8 ... lLlxd5!! 9 .i.xd8 (9 'iVh5+ g6 10 exd5 gxh5 11 .i.xd8 .i.b4+ 12 ~f1 .i.xd5 13 .i.xd5 l:txd8 14 .i.xc6+ bxc6 can probably be held by Black) 9 ... .i.b4+ 10 ~e2 (10 ~f1? lLle3+ 11 fxe3.i.xc4+ 12lLle2 ':xd8! with a winning attack) 1O ... lLlc3+ (l0 ... lLlf4+ 11 'it>f3 .i.xc4 12 .i.xc7lLle6 is also unclear) 11 bxc3 .i.xc4+ 12 'it>f3 O-O+ 13 'it>g4 .i.e6+ with an ongoing attack. b22) Speaking objectively, however, the whole line beginning with 4 dxe5 must favour White. For one thing, 7 ..tg5 poses Black serious problems. Ifhe tries to transpose by 7 ... ..te6?!, 8 ..txf6 gxf6 9 .i.c4! is strong. And here 7 ... lLlxd5? 8 ..txd8 ..tb4+ doesn't work, if only because the simple 9 'ilid2 ..txd2+ 10 'it>xd2 'it>xd8 11 exd5 leaves White a clear pawn ahead. So Black apparently has to be satisfied with 7 ... .i.e7 8 i.xf6 i.xf6, which is rather depressing after 9 .i.c4 or 9lLlf3. c) 3 ... lLlf6 combines French Defence and Alekhine Defence themes after 4 e5: c1) 4 ... lLld7 works out tolerably well in the popular lines 5 f4lLlb6 6lLlf3 i.f5, 5 lLlf3 lLlb6

[diagram]
e6 fxe6 6 i.d3 (or 6lLlf3 g6) 6 ... g6 7 h4?! e5 8 h5 exd4 9 hxg6lLlf6!' Unfortunately, the simple 5 lLlxd5! lLldb8, which used to be considered equal, favours White whether the knight re- treats to c3 or e3; for example, 6lLlc3! 'ii'xd4 7 i.e3!, with the idea 7 .. :iixe5 8lLlf3 ~d6 9 'ii'e2 or 7 ... 'iVxdl + 8 .l:!.xdl lLlb4?! 9 .l:!.d2 i.f5 10 lLlb5! lLl8a6 11 lLld4 i.d7 12 e6! fxe6 13 lLlgf3 O-O-O?! 14 lLle5 i.e8 15 a3 1-0 Soln-Haas, Faakersee 200l. c2) 4 ... lLle4!? 5 lLlce2 (threatening to trap the e4-knight with 6 f3; 5 lLlxe4 dxe4 6 c3 has also enjoyed success because Black's e-pawn is vulnerable) 5 ... f6 6 f3 lLlg5 7 .i.xg5! fxg5 8 ~d2 e6 (8 ... i.f5 9 lLlg3 i.g6 looks a better try for Black) 9lLlh3! i.e7 10 f4 and White has the initiative.

4 d5 (D)

4 . lLle5 4 ... lLlb8 is also played, but it is quite slow and requires precise defence in many varia- tions, including the main line 5 i.c4 (or 5 i.f4 lLlf6 6 .i.c4) 5 ... lLlf6 6 i.f4. Black should be well-prepared ifhe wants to take up such an un- developed position, which is not to say that it is objectively bad. 5 'iid4 White gains a small but safe edge with this move. 5 i.f4lLlg6 6 i.g3 (D) is more active and critical.

Then Black has two serious tries:

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 285

a) 6 .. .fS 7 lLlh3! (with the idea lLlbS) 7 ... eS (7 ... a6 8 f3! lLlf6! 9 fxe4lLlxe4 10 lLlxe4 fxe4 11 lLlgS! and White recovers the pawn with a posi- tional advantage) 8 dxe6 and now: al) 8 ... c6 9 ~xd8+ ~xd8 10 lLlgS lLlh6 (10 ... ~e8 could be answered by 11 h4! i...e7 12 lLlf7) 11 O-O-O+ ~e8, Apicella-Vaisman, French Ch, Angers 1990, and now 12 h4! is very strong. a2) 8 ... i...xe6! 9lLlbS! i...d6! 10 i...xd6 cxd6 11 ~d4 (or 11 ~xd6, when 11... ~f7? fails to 12 ~c7+!, while 11 ... ~xd6 12lLlxd6+ ~e7 13 lLlxb7 :c8! 140-O-O lLlf6 IS lLlaS gives Black some but not full compensation for the pawn) 11 ... lLlf6, Rogers-Dunne, Philadelphia 1986, and here White can keep an edge with 12 lLlxd6+ ~e7 13 O-O-O ~b6! 14 lLlxb7! h6 IS ~cS+ ~xcS 16lLlxcs. b) 6 ... a67 i...c4 (7 h4!? has the idea 7 ... hS 8 i..c4!? bS 9 i...b3lLlf6 10 ~e2 e3 11 O-O-O! exf2 12 lLlf3 and Black is under great pressure, but 7 ... eS 8 dxe6 i...xe6 improves, when 9 lLlxe4 ~e7! threatens 1O ... i...fS as well as 1O ... ~b4+, so 10 i...d3 O-O-O 11 ~e2 i...dS might follow, with equality) 7 ... lLlf6 (7 ... fS 8lLlh3 bS 9 i...b3 lLlf6 and in place of 10 O-O hS, White can try 10 ~e2 b4 11 lLla4 lLlxdS 12 O-O-O with some compensation; for example, 12 ... e6 13 f3 exf3 14 gxf3 ~f7 IS :hel with the idea of i...xc7) 8 ~e2 i...g4 9 f3 exf3 10 lLlxf3 lLlhS 11 O-O-O lLlxg3 12 hxg3 ~c8 13 :he1 with open lines and a dangerous attack, J.Peters-T.Taylor, Los Angeles 2004. S. .. lLlg6 (D) w 6 i..bS+ 6 ~xe4 is also somewhat better for White: 6 ... lLlf6 (6 ... a6 7 ~a4+! i...d7 8 ~b3 forces an awkward defence of b7) 7 ~a4+ i...d7 8 i...bS (or 8 ~3 'iVc8 9 i...e3) 8 ... a6 9 i...xd7+ 'iYxd7 10 'iYxd7+ lLlxd7 11lLlf3 ':d8 12 i...e3lLldeS 13 lLlxeSlLlxeS 140-O-O and White's quick devel- opment combines with his cramping d-pawn, Bade-Knaak, Pula 1975. 6 . i...d7 7 lLlge2 lLlf6 8 i...gS Or 8 i...xd7+ ~xd7 9 i...gS with some advan- tage. 8  i...xbS 9 lLlxbS a6 (D) 9 ... c6 10 dxc6! bxc6 11 lLlbc3 ~xd4 12 lLlxd4 eS 13 lLlfS!. 10 lLlbc3 h6?! 10 ... eS! almost equalizes after 11 dxe6 'iYxd4 12lLlxd4 i...b4 13 i...xf6 gxf6 140-O-O i...xc3 IS bxc3. 11 i...xf6 exf612lLlxe4 i...e713 O-O-O 0-014 lLl2g3 'iVd7 IslLlhS ~h8 16 h3 .l:.fd8 17 g4 with a bind on Black's position. Specialized Black Debuts Apart from these universal first moves, Black has other irregular first moves designed for use against specific White debuts:

1 e4 a6, usually called the St George De-

fence, was famously employed by Tony Miles to beat Karpov in Skara 1980. Were it not for the fact that Black has kept his disadvantage down to manageable proportions in practice (as indicated by White's lead of only 100 points or so in performance rating), I'd call1...a6 outright 'bad'. It is at least substandard, and very risky, as indicated by this game fragment and notes:

286 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

Volovik - Kozlov

USSR 1987

1 e4 a6 2 d4 bS

This is a reversed version of the Sokol- sky/Polish variation I M eS 2 a3 dS. 3ltJf3 i.b7 4 i.d3 (D)

4 . ltJf6?! An important juncture. Although it has been played in many games, this move-order has grave drawbacks. 4 ... e6 would transpose after S Vie2, but White is more likely to play S O-O or, still better, S a4!, which leaves Black with noth- ing but undesirable options. S ... M may be best, but then 6 c4! is strong, among others. I think that this simple and neglected point puts 1. .. a6, already marginal, into serious doubt. S'iYe2 There are two good alternatives to commit- ting the queen: a) After S ltJbd2 e6 6 O-O, several games have continued 6 ... cS (everything else is de- pressing) 7 dxcS! i.xcS 8 eS ltJdS 9 ltJe4 (or 9 a4 first) 9 ... i.e7 10 a4 M, and 11 c4 bxc3 12 bxc3 with the idea i.a3 is good, while 11ltJfd2 with the idea ltJc4 yields a large advantage. But the most fun line is 11 i.gS f6 12 exf6ltJxf6 13 ltJeS!!, with the idea 13 ... O-O 14ltJxf6+ i.xf6 IS VihS g6 16 i.xg6 hxg6 17 'iYxg6+ 'it>h8, and after the remarkably slow 18 .:tadl! (intending .l:td3-h3#) 18 ... i.xgS 19 .l:td3 i.M 20 .l::.h3, White will mop up. b) S eS!, though seldom played, also casts 4 ... ltJf6 into doubt: S. .. ltJdS 6 a4! b4?! (but the alternatives are miserable), and now 7 c4 bxc3 8 bxc3 is certainly difficult for Black, but 7 ltJgS! is much more fun: 7 ... g6? (the cutest line after 7 ... h6? is 8ltJxf7! 'it>xf7 9 'iihS+ 'it>g8 10 i.g6! .l:th7 11 VifS!, although of course 8 'iihS hxgS 9 Vixh8 is also winning; the best defence is 7 ... e6, but 8 'iif3 fS 9 g4! i.e7 10 h4! keeps the pressure on) 8 'iif3 fS 9 i.xfS! 'iic8 10 i.e4 1-0 Ochoa de Echagiien-Gomez, Seville 1994. S e6 6 a4 cS 7 dxcS i.xcS SltJbd2 b4 9 eS ltJdS 10 ltJe4 i.e7 11 i.gS! Up to here the game has followed Karpov- Miles, European Team Ch, Skara 1980. In that famous game White played 11 O-O, which isn't as incisive. 11 . O-O 12ltJd6! (D)

12  i.c6 13 h4?! The best way to proceed is 13 i.xe7! 'iixe7 (13 ... ltJxe7? loses to 14 i.xh7+! 'it>xh7 ISltJgS+ 'it>g6 16 Vig4) 14 Vie4 fS IS 'iid4 with a beauti- ful outpost on d6 and control of the position. 13. f614 exf6?! (D) White still stands better after 14 'iie4! fS IS 'iYd4 h6 16 i.xe7 ltJxe7 17 i.e2.

IRREGULAR OPENINGS AND INITIAL MOVES 287

14 ... gxf6? 14 ... ltJxf6! is unclear. After 14 ... gxf6?, White played the inspired IS ltJeS?! and won, but that would only have drawn if Black had defended correctly. The right move was IS 'iVe4! fS 16 ~eS with domi- nation of the dark squares. lltJf3 b5 has a decent reputation (the related I d4 bS gives White extra options; for example,

[diagram]
(2 ... a6 3 d4 i.b7 4 i.d3 takes us back to the St George) 3 i.xbS! i.xe4 4 O-O is a full tempo down for Black compared to the Sokolsky/Pol- ish main line 1 b4 eS 2 i.b2 i.xb4 3 i.xeS ltJf6. Even the reversed 1 b4 eS version is difficult for White to negotiate, and adding a tempo here makes Black's task much harder. 2 ... h6 is slow, and White can pick a comfort- able route to advantage via most common-sense moves; for example, 3 h4 (or 3 ltJc3 i.g7 4 h4 with the idea 4 ... cS S e3 or 4 ... g4 S e4, transpos- ing) 3 ... g4 4 e4 i.g7 SltJc3 d6 (S ... cS 6 i.e3!) 6 ltJge2 and now 6 ... ltJf6 7 i.e3 or 6 ... ltJc6 7 i.e3 eS 8 dSltJce7 9ltJg3!. A 'theoretical' line goes 3 e4 i.g7 4ltJc3 cS, and now SltJge2 is a good al- ternative to S dxcS i.xc3+ 6 bxc3 'iYaS 7 ltJe2 ltJf6 (7 .. :~xcS s 'iVd4!), when at least Black has something to play for. 3ltJc3 Or: a) 3 i.xgS cS (D) is Black's point, although if White gives the pawn back he should emerge with the advantage.

1...gS is a horrible choice versus 1 e4 (when 2 W

d4 is a tempo-up version of 1 g4) and even worse against 1 d4 (2 i.xgS !), but it makes some sense versus 1 c4, and 1 c4 g5 (D) has actually been played in over 400 games in my database. w The idea is that White can no longer defend his long al-h8 diagonal by c3, as he did with ... c6 versus I g4. Nevertheless, Black's kingside is weakened, and pawns can't move backwards. I'll settle for 'substandard' here, because the su- perior positions that White gets aren't devastat- ing ones. Here's an example: Mednis - Hodgson New York 1990

[diagram]
For example, 4ltJf3! (after 4 e3, rather than 4 ... 'iYb6 S ltJc3! 'iVxb2 6 'iYc1! 'iYxc1 + 7 I:i.xc1 cxd4 S ltJbS, Black should play 4 ... 'iVaS+! S 'iYd2 'iYxd2+ 6ltJxd2 cxd4 7 O-O-O dxe3 S i.xe3 ltJc6 9 ltJgf3 ltJh6! 10 h3 ltJfS 11 i.f4 ltJfd4 with approximate equality), and now: al) 4 ... 'iYb6 S ltJc3! 'iixb2 leads to posi- tional disaster following 6 ltJa4 'iib4+ 7 i.d2 ~a3 sltJxcs i.xd4 9ltJxd4 'ili'xcs 10 i.c3 ltJf6 llltJbS. a2) 4 ... cxd4 S ltJxd4 'iVb6 6 ltJbS also fa- vours White; e.g., 6 ... a6 7 i.e3 'iiaS+ S ltJSc3. a3) 4 ... ltJc6 S dS i.xb2 6 ltJbd2 with the idea 6 ... i.xal?! 7 'ii'xal ltJd4 S ltJxd4 cxd4 9 ~xd4 f6 10 i.f4, when White has way more than enough for a pawn. 6 ... ltJd4 is better, but still unsatisfactory following 7l!bl i.c3 SltJxd4 cxd4 9 e3. b) 3 e4 cS 4 dS is a standard position, but with Black's pawn on gS instead of g6. It's hard

288 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

to believe that improves anything, and White obviously stands better after 4 ... d6 (4 ... Yf'a5+ 5 ..td2! ~6 6 ttJc3) 5 ttJe2 h6 6 ttJbc3 with h4 to W follow. Nevertheless, it's a game and with care, Black shouldn't get into immediate trouble. We now return to 3 ttJc3 (D):

[diagram]
(D)

9 ttJcl We have arrived at precisely a line of the Samisch King's Indian, but with ... g5 and ... h6 substituted for ... g6 and ... O-O. White's knight retreat is customary in that line, to get out of the way of the fl-bishop (and so incidentally pre- venting ... b5) and strengthen the queenside. An even better use of the 'extra' move might be 9 h4 g4 10 O-O-O, since 1O ... b5 11 cxb5 axb5 12 d5 ttJe5 13 ttJd4 b4 14 ttJcb5 isn't attractive for Black. 9 ... ..td7 10 ttJb3 e6 Awfully passive. 1O ... e5 is a better practical try, even if it gives White targets; for example,

11 O-O-O (or 11 d5 ttJe7 12 h4) l1...exd4 12

ttJxd4 ttJe5 13 'ito>bl b5?! 14 cxb5 axb5 15 h4! b4 16 ttJcb5 gxh4 17 :cl.

11 O-O-O b6 12 'ito>bl ttJh5 13 g3 e5 14 ..te2

as 15 dxe5 dxe5 16 c5! a4 Black is paralysed and pitches a pawn for ac- tivity, but it doesn't help. 17 ttJxa4 ttJd4 18 ttJc3! bxc5 19 ttJxc5 O-O?! 20 ttJb3? 20 f4! has multiple threats and wins straight- away: 20 ... gxf4 21 gxf4 ttJxf4 22 ..txf4 exf4 23 .u.hgl, etc. 20  c5 21 ttJxc5 ..tc6 22 ttJb3 .l:txb3!? 23 axb3 'iVa8 24 ..txd4 exd4 25 ttJb5 !Bd8 26 ..tc4 g4 27 ttJc7 'ilia7 28 ttJd5 gxf3 29 'iVd3 'ito>h8 30 ~xf3 and White is winning. I'm afraid that L.g5 is just too much to ask of Black. Hopefully it's been both enlightening and fun to examine these irregular openings and tackle the most difficult ones. Remember that they are an authentic part of opening theory, not merely an afterthought, and should be studied in order to round out your general knowledge of the game.

9 Choosing and Preparing Openings

Every student eventually comes up against the issue of how to select and prepare openings. As it turns out, the problem never completely goes away, not even for the strongest players in the world. Teachers and writers express various opinions about how to choose openings, but they disagree firmly with each other and haven't even begun to arrive at a consensus. Some fun- damental questions arise: whether to specialize in one opening, whether to pick extremely the- matic or open-ended openings, how to match openings with your style and predilections, and how much time to devote to opening study. On a concrete level, we have questions about how to organize and record a specific repertoire, how to learn it, how to get practice with your chosen openings, how to improve your play in a certain opening, and so forth. In my opinion, some of the most common answers to these questions fall short in that they don't distinguish students by their level of strength and experience. In reviewing the liter- ature, I find that most of the books are written from the standpoint of grandmaster needs and circumstances; for their examples they use the experiences of some titled player or other and explain how they prepared their openings or solved their opening problems. Of course, what the near-beginner needs out of his chess open- ings is quite a different matter from what the average club player requires, or the casual Internet Chess Club aficionado, or the profes- sional tournament player. In what follows, I'll try to draw upon my experience as a teacher to accommodate that factor. How Important is Opening Study? We hear it again and again: players spend too much time studying the openings. Variations upon this theme abound, and the issue takes on particular significance because of the limited number of hours the average person has for chess. In lieu of so much attention to openings, would our time be better spent on, e.g., middle- games, endgames or tactics? Naturally these are all interrelated areas and, in varying de- grees, essential for improvement. Still, I think you'll find that the much-maligned emphasis on opening study isn't such a bad thing after all. In fact, it's probably no coincidence that in the real world, most experienced players from lower master level all the way up to World Champion spend/ar more of their time studying openings than all the aforementioned options put to- gether! I don't think that we can write this off as a mass delusion among players (and their coaches), or as something that is fundamentally against their best interests. For one thing, open- ing study provides a disciplined entrance into the broader area of middlegame study. It's also interesting to see what other areas of the game our top players study away from the board. After years of being around masters and professional players, I would say that review- ing, studying and writing about their own games consumes the second largest amount of time af- ter opening preparation. As far as I know, every top-level teacher recommends self-critical anal- ysis of your games, and it should be given high priority for anyone seeking to improve. But even that process includes in-depth consider- ation of the openings in those games and the typical positions arising from them. Actually, my own teaching priorities in this respect are somewhat different where the average player is concerned. Apart from openings, I think that exercise with tactical problems is the other most valuable use of study time, especially right be- fore a tournament. Incidentally, tactics can be usefully connected with openings that typically generate them, and I try to construct exercises that do that. What about other areas of the game? Let's look at some of the alternatives to investigating

290 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

openings. One is to study the middlegame. But in modern chess, as has been pointed out by many writers, the middlegame is very often subsumed within the opening. That is, when players study the opening, they are in part studying what we used to call the middlegame, and in some cases beyond that. The most useful kind of middlegame know ledge, and the easiest to retain, has to do with frequently-arising, the- matic structures. It's difficult enough to know where your pieces should go and what their fu- ture might be, the more so when you haven't seen the structure before, or something similar. This knowledge can be picked up by investiga- tion of particular openings, and enhanced by playing over exemplary games (preferably an- notated), comparing different interpretations and absorbing specific theory. Important tacti- cal devices and attacking schemes will recur, very often also applying to tactics that arise in unrelated situations. Naturally, the study of a finite set of openings can't cover the broad di- versity of possible middlegames, and it's help- ful to read books which talk about strategies in the abstract. However, middlegame theory that is too general tends to be of little use in over- the-board situations. Apart from openings and middlegames, the student is commonly advised to study the end- game, sometimes with an admonition to stay away from serious opening preparation until an unspecified 'later'. When I was beginning to play chess four decades ago, this advice was ubiquitous, accompanied by the 'fact' that all the Soviet children learned endings in depth be- fore they were allowed to play any games. That turned out to be an utter myth, but there's no doubt that learning a limited set of basic end- ings is absolutely essential for your develop- ment as a player. What's less certain is how many endings this involves, at what stage you need to learn them, and how many of them you will absorb by experience, just as you do with openings. Students to whom I assign endgame study constantly point out that they seldom get as far as the ending, at least not to one that doesn't already have a clear result; and when they do, it is usually decided by tactical means. Part of this has to do with the level of play, but grandmasters say the same thing, attributing it to the complex and often sharp openings played at their level. For the majority of us, the dearth of challenging endings may also come from the short time-controls that are now customary. Taken as a whole, I think that there's much wis- dom in most players' intuitive feeling that openings and middlegames can take priority without damaging their long-term prospects. Fortunately, the majority of ending types, apart from a set of standard and recurring elementary ones that everyone should know (and periodi- cally refresh their knowledge of), are those that you will commonly get from the openings you play. In most mainstream openings, there are characteristic endgames that arise repeatedly from the structure of that opening. If you think about your own favourite openings, you'll prob- ably recognize connections to representative endings. In fact, speciality books upon particu- lar openings will very often include an explicit discussion of the typically-occurring endings. So a serious study of complete games in your opening will go a long way towards improving your practical endgame results, as well as de- veloping your ability to think about endgames in general, which is the most important skill in the long run. Let's face it: it would be ideal to have time to study middlegames, endings and openings, along with the great games of masters; and it's also hard to argue with doing tactical exercises and problems, annotating your own games, and playing as much as possible. To the extent that you can do so, explore all of these options. In the context of this book, however, I would ar- gue that the tremendous amount of time spent upon the openings by leading players young and old reflects the importance of such study. While other types of knowledge are necessary if you are to become a complete player, opening study is the single most practical and efficient means of improving your mastery of the game as a whole. Openings Selection Before moving on to suggest methods of study and preparation, I'll make a stab at the most dif- ficult question to answer with any kind of spec- ificity: what openings should I play? Once a player decides upon an actual set of openings to

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 291

play, however provisionally, the subsequent sections about how to study and prepare them will take on a concrete significance. Of course, there are myriad openings with countless varia- tions, and any suggestions that I make will be fundamentally arbitrary. Nevertheless, I'd like to give some concrete examples so as to make a general point: your choice of openings should be based upon your level of playing strength. With that in mind, I'll separate advice into broad sections, distinguishing choices and ob- jectives that apply to players of various strengths who wish to improve their opening preparation. Within each general section, I shall break down the material on the basis of playing level. Of course, given sufficient knowledge, a player can succeed with any conventional chess opening. Nevertheless, you can improve your play more quickly and less painfully by tailoring your openings to the development of needed skills. With that in mind, I'll talk on a broader level for the less experienced player, whereas for more advanced players, discuss mainly the prac- tical implications of opening choices. In gen- eral, I suggest learning a wide variety of posi- tion-types in order to become a stronger player. Assessing your own level and degree of so- phistication in handling opening situations is difficult. Rather than get too picky, I've divided players into four very broadly defined skill cat- egories, from the lowest, D, through to the highest, A (these are chosen to minimize confu- sion with the many other standard divisions of chess strength by letter). Naturally, these are approximations and my advice will significantly overlap between them, so your precise category isn't crucial: Category D: beginners, near-beginners and relatively inexperienced players (e.g., the latter might have three years or fewer of playing reg- ularly, and not necessarily devotedly). Category C: players with a moderate level of experience and some opening competence. This broad group might include club players, inter- mittent tournament players and consistent on- line players. People in this category probably lack sufficient free time for intensive study and play, or they may be stuck in a rut, have bad habits, etc. Category B: players of considerable strength (say, 1700 Elo and above) who already have a fairly stable repertoire and have looked into at least some of their openings in depth. But the general level of their openings is clearly below someone rated a few hundred points above them, and that is demonstrated by the inferior posi- tions they often fall into. Category A: Players above 2000 Elo up to about 2300 Elo with the typical problems that arise in finding openings that combine the am- bition for opening advantage with some degree of safety. I won't presume to give professionals, who exceed this level, advice about their open- ing choices, so this section applies to advanced amateurs who are, for example, regular tourna- ment players, rapidly-improving juniors, and/or devoted online activists. The advice and potential repertoire choices that I'll suggest next are necessarily broad, if only because they don't take into account the distinctive traits of individuals. For fine tuning, or to decide which pieces of advice given below apply, you may want to consult a chess teacher. Alternatively, a disciplined, self-aware student can make those decisions based upon an analy- sis of his own games and some study. I'd be a little careful about plunging into complicated opening variations that just happen to present themselves to you because of, for example, a recent grandmaster game or a friend's enthusi- asm. Study of any sort can only help one im- prove, of course, but this might not be the most efficient use of your time. Regardless of your category, the most basic goals will be obvious: to survive the opening without serious disadvantage; and to gain an advantage sufficient to discomfit your oppo- nent. Beyond that, always pay attention to the typical middlegames and endgames that your opening produces. Finally, remember that I am only indicating some personal thoughts on how to make prog- ress with openings. You should follow your in- stincts, especially if you find a method that works for and motivates you.

1. Choose openings corresponding to your

skill level and available study time This is fairly obvious, but some teachers will entice you into playing their own, sometimes too sophisticated, openings. It's important to

292 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

stick within your capabilities, and at the same time master traditional concepts before taking on exotic piece and pawn deployments. Let me explain this by means of specific examples. I won't build a complete repertoire for you, of course, but I'll try to indicate what would be in- volved in doing so. Category D Openings For players with very limited experience, I rec- ommend using openings in which the play can be clarified at an early stage, often with a de- gree of simplification. To accomplish this safely will take a little study, because you will have to get used to playing with open lines for both sides' pieces, but you can't eliminate risk en- tirely in the opening anyway. If that approach doesn't appeal to you, you should at least try to occupy the centre and bring your pieces out quickly, aiming them at central squares if possi- ble. I think that it's best to avoid manoeuvring games in which most of the pieces remain on the board for a long time and don't come into contact with each other. At this level, you should be studying tactics independently, and it's good practice to play openings of at least a partially tactical nature. There's nothing new about this advice. For example, teachers all over the world suggest that inexperienced players begin with 1 e4. Ad- vancing your e-pawn may be unoriginal, but it allows you to control the direction of the game to a greater degree than other first moves. You will undoubtedly see the reply 1 ... e5 most often when playing at or near a beginner's level, when I recommend using some system with an early d4 to at least partially clear out the centre and give your pieces room. In that context, the most common move 2 lbf3 is a good one. For example, if Black plays 2 ... d6, you can get practice playing with extra space by 3 d4. Black may not often answer 2 lbf3 with 2 ... lbf6 (the Petroff) at this level, but again, 3 d4 is a straight- forward answer for the inexperienced player, intending 3 ... exd4 4 e5 (and if Black plays 4 ... lbe4 or 4 ... lbd5, 5 "iYxd4) or 3 ... lbxe4 4 iLd3, to get developed quickly. Another choice is 2 lbf3 lbf6 3 lbc3, and if 3 ... lbc6 (the Four Knights Game), 4 iLb5 or 4 d4. One advantage of this latter choice is that you can also play 2 lbf3 lbc6 3 lbc3, when 3 ... lbf6 will transpose. The Four Knights is a sensible opening choice as you start out. After 2 lbf3, 2 ... lbc6 will occur in the bulk of your games. Then the Scotch Game, 3 d4 (in- tending 3 ... exd4 4 lbxd4) is a possible first opening, but I recommend taking up the classi- cal and instructive move 3 iLc4 at an early stage. Then, against 3 ... iLc5, it's thematic to try to establish the ideal centre by 4 c3 and 5 d4; af- ter that, things can get complicated enough that you need to take a look at some theory and learn the basics; for example, you could use Chapter 5 of Volume 1 (or any standard source). Versus

3. .. lbf6, you might pick 4 d3 as a solid begin-

ning point, and be sure to get castled and bring your pieces out quickly. Both 4 d4 and 4 lbg5 are more adventurous, but they absolutely re- quire serious hours of study, as you will see by glancing at Volume 1, Chapter 6. The Sicilian Defence, 1 e4 c5, is the most popular grandmaster opening, but when lower players use it, they usually do so with some memorized systems in mind. I recommend play- ing simple, principled moves against it; for ex- ample, 2 c3 makes sense, intending to capture the centre with 3 d4, which is what you should do versus most slow moves anyway. A typical line is 2 ... lbf6 3 e5 lbd5 4 d4, when after 4 ... cxd4, 5 "iYxd4 is a handy first system with open lines and quick development. You can fol- low with lbf3, iLd3/c4 and O-O, moving your queen to e4 if attacked by ... lbc6. If Black plays 2 ... d5 in response to 2 c3, then 3 exd5 ~xd5 4 d4 will also open up lines; generally lbf3, .te2 and O-O follow, with iLe3 if necessary. A slightly more advanced possibility against the Sicilian Defence would be to clear out the centre with the Morra Gambit: 2 d4 cxd4 3 c3 dxc3 4 lbxc3, as described in Chapter 5 of this volume; begin- ners should delay taking this up, however, as it's important to learn the value of material be- fore experimenting with openings that sacrifice it for other gains. Against the French Defence and Caro-Kann Defence, the easiest way to stick to the open- lines policy is to avoid e5 and develop quickly. In the French, for example, a possibility is 1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5 3 exd5 exd5 4 iLd3, followed by lbf3 (or lbe2) and O-O. Or you can do something similar starting with 3 lbc3, playing 3 ... iLb4 4

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 293

exd5 or 3 ... ttJf6 4 exd5 (in the latter case, expe- rienced players may wince at allowing theoreti- cal equality so early on, but at a lower level such moves can be recommended as both sound and instructive). Versus the Caro-Kann, the exchanging pol- icy of 1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5 3 exd5 cxd5 4 iLd3, again intending ttJf3 and O-O, is a good starting point, with the same philosophy that we applied to the French Defence. You won't see the Alekhine Defence, 1 e4 ttJf6, very often. But if you do, you might want to play 2 e5 ttJd5 3 d4 d6 4 ttJf3, usually followed by iLe2 and O-O. Most other moves, such as 1...g6, 1...d6 or 1...b6, can nor- mally be met by 2 d4, 3 ttJc3 and 4 ttJf3, fol- lowed by a move by the fl-bishop and O-O. Of course, you can also play 1 d4, the other central move, but then you probably want to keep the position fairly quiet, because it takes a longer time to castle to safety than it does with 1 e4. A solid and more-or-less universal set-up is 2 ttJf3 and 3 iLf4, followed in most cases by 4 e3, 5 iLe2 and 6 O-O. I'd rather see my students fight their way through open positions instead; however, if you're not getting out of the open- ing alive after 1 e4, this method of playing 1 d4 deserves consideration. A word of advice: notice that a commonly suggested 'easy' repertoire for White with 1 ttJf3 and the King's Indian Attack (that is 2 g3, 3 iLg2, 4 O-O and 5 d3, with ttJbd2 and e4 to fol- low) doesn't lead to an open game, or one with a clear plan for White. Furthermore, it encour- ages mechanical play. Similarly, teachers some- times recommend the Colle System (with I d4, 2 ttJf3, 3 e3 and usually iLd3, O-O, c3 and ttJbd2), which can also be played too automati- cally, and usually doesn't lead to an open posi- tion. For true beginners, the King's Indian Attack and Colle System have the benefit of of- fering a safe position that nearly guarantees passage to some kind of playable middlegame; they may be a reasonable alternative if other openings are too intimidating. But having gained even a small amount of experience, you really should switch to more open and less au- tomatic play. As Black, I think that a Category D player would do well to proceed classically. That means playing 1. .. e5 versus I e4 and 1. .. d5 ver- sus 1 d4. In this, again, I am repeating the advice of teachers since time immemorial. The idea is similar to that behind White's 1 e4: you are guaranteed a strong presence in the centre and relatively quick development. When start- ing out, it's useful to play positions in which you control space. After I e4, 1...e5 serves that purpose. By contrast, the Sicilian Defence (1 e4 c5) normally leaves you with little room to ma- noeuvre and is best left until your positional skills develop. If you don't take to 1...e5, you can also consider answering I e4 with the Caro-Kann Defence (1 e4 c6 2 d4 d5) or the French Defence (1 e4 e6 2 d4 d5), both of which put the d-pawn on the 4th rank and stake a claim on the centre. They have the advantage of being slightly less expected at this level, but they have the drawback of allowing your oppo- nent to create fairly closed positions if they choose to play e5. Versus 1 d4, 1...d5 achieves similar results in terms of central control. It's true that 1... ttJf6 also stops 2 e4 and introduces a number of established defences. The latter tend to require some sophistication, however, and it's easy for the inexperienced player to end up facing a large and dangerous white centre. In more specific terms, let's assume that you've decided upon 1 e4 e5. It will involve a fair amount of preparation even on a low level. In chess, playing Black tends to require more study, since you are at more risk of serious dis- advantage when moving second. I'm not going to go into detail, but you'll need answers to var- ious less common but perfectly legitimate open- ings such as 2 f4 (the King's Gambit), 2 d4 exd4

3 c3 (the Danish Gambit), as well as 2 ttJc3 (the

Vienna Game) and 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 ttJc3 ttJf6 (the Four Knights Game). This is easier than it sounds, because there are fairly simple ways to proceed against them. In Volume I of this se- ries, for example, I examined some fairly easy responses to the King's Gambit, and in this vol- ume you'll find suggestions against the Danish Gambit and Four Knights Game. If you don't see something that appeals to you or I haven't mentioned something, you can look for master games in a database or use an opening ency- clopaedia. Just be aware that all of these moves are perfectly playable for White and you can't force your way to an advantage against them. Assuming that you narrow your difficulties down to 2 ttJf3, one option is to conserve your

294 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

study time, and play something relatively sim- ple like the Philidor Defence (2 ... d6). It's a le- gitimate choice, but gives you a cramped game, so as early as possible you should take the plunge with 2 ... lbc6. Doing so requires more work, but it will teach you more. By now you may be familiar with 3 i.c4, and you'll have a good idea what to do about it. Again, refer to Volume 1 of this series and/or outside sources. White's most respected line is 3 i.b5 (the Ruy Lopez), when it's a lot easier to avoid the com- plications of 3 ... a6 and play 3 ... lbf6. Then after

4 O-O, you can opt for a move with familiar

themes like 4 ... i..c5. You won't be seeing 1 d4 too often from in- experienced players. As mentioned, 1...d5 gives you a flrm central presence, and you can bring your pieces out relatively quickly to establish some central control. If White plays the most important move, 2 c4, inexperienced players might want to begin classically with 2 ... e6 fol- lowed by ... lbf6 and ... i.e7 (see Volume 2, Chapter 2). Slower moves such as 2lbf3 or 2 e3 are less challenging. It's logical and safe to start out with 2 ... lbf6 and 3 ... e6 (although if you can play ... i.f5 before ... e6, it makes your develop- ment even easier). Then you can set up a forma- tion with ... c5, ... lbc6, ... i.e7 and ... O-O. If you feel confldent about your handling of open po- sitions, you can play ... c5 on your 3rd or 4th move and create some open lines. Finally, it's important to use the 'What if?' procedure that I recommend below. That is, as you study openings, ask yourself why moves other than the ones listed aren't played. In do- ing so, watch for basic captures and tactics. At this level, it doesn't help you to win games if you memorize certain moves and then drop a pawn or piece the minute the opponent plays something different. On the other hand, that will inevitably happen - it has happened to all of us - so don't become discouraged. You'll be surprised how studying chess in any form will improve your visualization and reduce errors. Category C Openings At this level, the beneflts derived from playing with space and open lines still take priority, but it's also a good point to begin including varia- tions which can yield other types of positions. For most players, 1 e4 will probably still be the most attractive move, especially if you have al- ready played it while at a Category D level. On the other hand, there are practical beneflts to taking up 1 d4 - namely, your opponents will have seen it less and you will expand your bank of familiar positions. The English Opening with

1 c4 is a different matter. It tends to put oppo-

nents of equal strength on their own, which is good, but requires sophisticated positional han- dling, and unless you are conversant with spe- cifics, it may not yield enough open positions to provide the valuable training such positions offer. Similar considerations apply to 1 lbf3. Nevertheless, these openings are acceptable as long as you determinedly look for active play with parts of your repertoire. There's always time to emphasize slow positional systems as you improve. You can play solidly at this level, of course, but you might also begin to incorporate the ideas of setting initiative off against material. As White, along with some main lines. you might want to incorporate a gambit line, or even two. As a 1 e4 player facing 1. .. e5 (which is still the most likely response at this level), 2 d4 exd4

3 c3 dxc3 4 lbxc3 is a type of Danish Gambit

that will often transpose via 4 ... lbc6 5 lbf3 to the Goring Gambit. One advantage of playing this way (with the 2 d4 move-order) is that you bypass Black's second-move alternatives that follow 2lbf3 (such as 2 ... lbf6 and 2 ... d6). This is described in Chapter 5. The Goring Gambit is a good practical attacking system, in that Black's position can easily come under flre, while White retains a lead in development in any case. If nothing else, you can have it as a surprise weapon to supplement something less adventurous. Understandably, giving up material may not appeal to everyone, and you should try to bal- ance that activist tendency with learning classic variations as well. Unless you have a lot of study time and motivation, it's best to do so without being laden with too many double- edged and/or heavily analysed positions. After

1 e4 e5 2 lbf3 lbc6, 3 i.c4 is a conventional

choice - you can utilize and expand upon the knowledge that you gained if you played this move as a Category D player. Or you might pre- fer to play 3 i.b5 (the Ruy Lopez), but stick to

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 295

lines which steer clear of the heaviest theory; for example, 3 ... a6 4 i.xc6 (the Exchange Vari- ation), or 3 ... ttJf6 4 'ife2. Versus the Sicilian Defence, which you will be seeing increasingly often, you might also consider playing a gambit. Specifically, 1 e4 cS

2 d4 cxd4 3 c3 (the Morra Gambit) offers a

pawn for initiative. Following 3 ... dxc3 4 ttJxc3, White's most common attacking set-up is ttJf3, i.c4, O-O and 'ife2, with the idea of bringing a bishop to e3, f4 or gS, and a rook to the open d- file. This sort of thing can be fun, and has no simple solution that negates your chances. See Chapter S on gambits. Assuming that you don't want to playa gam- bit (or want to have options), you could explore your first fianchetto system with 2 ttJc3, 3 g3 and 4 i.g2 (the Closed Sicilian). Alternatively, you can construct a repertoire around 2 ttJf3, picking and choosing which main lines, if any, are worth embarking upon. Some strong grand- masters, for example, have made a lifelong liv- ing off moves such as 1 e4 cS 2 ttJf3 d6 3 i.bS+ and 2 ttJf3 ttJc6 3 i.bS, which are relatively safe systems. For the most part, however, 1 e4 players eventually seem to settle upon the lines involving 2 ttJf3 and 3 d4 (the Open Sicilian). If that's your inclination, you still needn't commit yourself to heavy theoretical study. For exam- ple, versus the move 2 ... d6 (most common at this level, because your opponents will want to get to the Dragon Variation or the NajdorfVari- ation), 3 d4 cxd4 4 'ifxd4 is a perfectly respect- able line (the idea is 4 ... ttJc6 S i.bS, when White maintains a lead in development). Or, af- ter 3 d4 cxd4 4 ttJxd4 ttJf6 S ttJc3, you can play slightly less critical variations. For instance, versus S ... a6, the ever-popular Najdorf Varia- tion, you can begin by playing classically with 6 i.e2 and O-O, when understanding will be more important than memorization; see Vol- ume 1. There are also a number of sound but slightly offbeat lines such as 6 h3, 6 g3 and 6 'iff3. The same classical approach can be em- ployed against the Dragon Sicilian: S ... g6 6 i.e2. Then, slowly but surely, you can build a repertoire which includes more critical, tacti- cally-oriented variations. At this stage, you will begin to see openings such as the French Defence and Caro-Kann De- fence more often. It's still reasonable to play the Exchange Variations mentioned above, but at some point you'll probably want to try to cre- ate more problems for your opponent. With some study, 1 e4 e6 2 d4 dS 3 eS can be a nice weapon, and has the additional benefit of intro- ducing you to the theory of pawn-chains. Ver- sus the Caro-Kann, you can begin to build a classical repertoire with 3 ttJc3 (or 3 tiJd2) 3 ... dxe4 4 ttJxe4, but it's even easier to learn some basic lines after 3 eS; for example, 3 ... i.fS 4 ttJf3 followed by i.e2 and O-O, with the pawn- chain move c3 in most cases. As Black, 1. .. eS is still a good answer to 1 e4, of course, but this time you should seriously consider other defences such as 1...c6 and 1.. .e6, which allow for both open and closed positions. They also involve some recurring structures which will serve the student throughout his playing days. I'm still not excited about my students playing the Sicilian Defence at this stage, because it almost always means playing with less space and development, and in some cases with exotic and not particularly instruc- tive pawn-structures. The Pirc (1...d6), Modem (l...g6) and Alekhine (l...ttJf6) Defences are perfectly logical and sound openings, but I think they have practical drawbacks for the player be- low 1600, in that they concede space and don't generally yield as free piece-play. But if you have a strong affinity for any of them, that could outweigh other factors. Personal enjoy- ment should definitely be a consideration when you're deciding what to play. Versus 1 d4, you can always stick with

1...dS, as above. If you haven't already commit-

ted to too many gambit lines, the Albin Coun- ter-Gambit, 1 d4 dS 2 c4 eS (with the idea of 3 dxeS d4) has a decent reputation, and is a good alternative to the more conservative play with 2 ... e6 above. Another respectable gambit is the Budapest, which goes 1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 eS 3 dxeS ttJg4 (or the more speculative 3 ... ttJe4); you'll usually recover the pawn on eS. For those who follow grandmaster fashion, I should add that the currently popular Slav Defence, 1 d4 dS 2 c4 c6, is sound and effective. However, it can lead to rather slow development, and my feel- ing is that it's better suited at the higher levels. Finally, you can try a quick-developing 1...ttJf6 system; for example, the Nimzo-Indian, which goes 1 d4 ttJf6 2 c4 e6 3 ttJc3 i.b4 often

296 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

followed by ... O-O, gets your pieces out rapidly, and the Bogo-Indian, 3 lDf3 i.b4+, does the same. Category B Openings At this point you should be ready to tackle posi- tions of most types, so the number of appropri- ate opening choices increases dramatically. Still, players with limited time for competition and study have to consider the practical drawbacks of using too many variations which entail a large initial time investment, and then require continual updating of theory to avoid unpleas- ant surprises. It's valuable to playa couple of theoretical 'main lines', even if you need to use your understanding and instincts as well as your memory to tackle them; you might even essay upon one highly tactical variation that is at the height of fashion. However, you will want to mix any such complex lines with systems that require less study and offer reasonably clear strategies versus normal play. The latter will often be positional or slightly slower open- ings, but can also include attacking and gambit lines, particularly if the main attacking meth- ods are thematic, and a new discovery by your opponent won't be of fatal consequence. This is also a good point to include some 'irregu- lar' /experimental variations into your play. They can be great fun, and you may find that several such lines are just as sound as the conventional ones. See Chapter 8. At this level, you will be advanced enough to play any logical first move, especially since, by virtue of moving first, White runs less risk of falling into trouble. This is also the time to in- troduce some specialization, regardless of the lines you choose. Most serious 1 e4 players tend to gravitate towards 1 e4 e5 2 lDf3 lDc6 3 i.b5 at some point or other, but remember that you can make a lifetime system out of 3 Sl.c4 if you like. Al- ternatives for the slightly eccentric player in- clude the King's Gambit with 2 f4 (be careful not to get your king in trouble), and the Bishop's Opening with 1 e4 e5 2 Sl.c4, followed in most cases by d3 (rather than trying to force through the move d4). Versus the Sicilian Defence, as mentioned, most players will be using the 2 lDf3 and 3 d4 main lines at least some of the time, although it's easy to get in positional trouble doing so against top players. I'd still try to mix in some of the systems without d4 that I listed for the Category C player. Versus the French Defence, you're on solid ground with any of 3 lDc3, 3 lDd2 or 3 e5; unfortu- nately, there's no escaping some theory if you want to use pawn-chain lines involving the move e5 (which you should, if you want both to learn about the opening and to maximize your chances). The main thing about all of your choices at this stage is that you would like to keep them in your repertoire for at least a few years. With luck, you will have them for the rest of your life, at least as a second or third weapon if you find something more attractive later on. Against the Pirc and Modem De- fences, I would still recommend staying with a simple lDc3/lDf3 system, but you can also start to play aggressive lines with f4 if you're will- ing to study theory, and early moves of the queen's bishop to e3 and g5 (normally fol- lowed by ~d2) are not that hard to learn. This is a great point for White to incorporate

1 d4 or 1 c4, excellent lifetime weapons which

have the further advantage that most of your peers will have spent less time preparing to play against them than versus 1 e4. Without going into detail, I'd recommend that after 1 d4, you go into lines involving 2 c4, and pick variations with clear-cut themes. For example, 1. .. d5 2 c4 e6 3 lDc3 followed by cxd5 is one of the more instructive openings in all of classical chess, and 1. .. d5 2 c4 c6 3lDf3 can be followed by any of several systems with e3 and lDc3 in one or another order. Those are safe and yet have plenty of impact. Against the King's Indian De- fence (l d4lDf6 2 c4 g6 with ... i.g7 and ... d6), players of a positional bent might want to head for a Fianchetto Variation (3 lDf3 i.g7 4 g3), and attackers will prefer 3 lDc3 i.g7 4 e4. But systems like 3lDc3 i.g7 4 i.g5 (or 4lDf3 d65 Sl.g5) are good compromises. Similarly, versus the Griinfeld Defence, 1 d4 lDf6 2 c4 g6 3 lDc3 d5, you may want to bypass the volumes of the- ory on 4 cxd5 lDxd5 5 e4 for a while and try 4 i.g5 or 4 i.f4 (or 4 lDf3 followed by those moves), provided that you study them enough to avoid tricks and violent counterattacks. The point is that you're not obliged to take up main lines and may very well want to wait with those

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 297

until you become a little more experienced. Similarly, versus 1 d4 l2Jf6 2 c4 e6, 3 l2Jf3 is positionally less committal than 3 l2Jc3 .ltb4, and a good choice. Nevertheless, you can learn a great deal by allowing 3 l2Jc3 .ltb4 and then accepting doubled pawns in return for poten- tially strong bishops by 4 a3, or by 4 e3 and, de- pending upon Black's response, 5 .ltd3 or 5 a3. At this stage such decisions become a matter of taste, and you can hardly go wrong in investi- gating all of these types of positions. 1 c4, the English Opening, is a first move that you can use for any occasion and indeed, some grandmasters play nothing else. A simple way to get started is to play 2 g3 against all of Black's normal moves 1...e5, 1...c5 and 1...l2Jf6. Later you'll almost certainly want to add in variations beginning with 2 l2Jc3 (or 2 l2Jf3), and be able to switch into some 1 d4 openings (for example, 1 c4 e6 2 d4 d5, 1 c4 c6 2 d4 d5 or 1 c4l2Jf6 2l2Jc3 g6 3 d4). Just don't think that you can go on autopilot after I c4. You need to have a specific answer to every major black set-up (and there are quite a few of these, be- cause 1 c4 doesn't limit Black's structural op- tions as much as 1 e4 and 1 d4 do). On the other hand, playing I c4 will expose you to a range of positions and structures that you can use in other openings. As Black in Category B, you should defi- nitely incorporate one or more major defences into your stock of weapons; hopefully you'll stick with these and learn them in considerable detail through practice and study. Within the major openings, some variations are clearly more manageable than others, so keep your eye out for those. Obviously I can't set forth a rep- ertoire for each major opening, but you should try to work with basic structures. If you're go- ing to play the Sicilian Defence at this stage, for example, you can consistently aim for ... d6 and ... e5 in most variations, or choose lines with ... d6 and ... e6 in every variation, or play ... g6 and ... d6 whenever you can. Keep in mind that, because the Sicilian is the most popular open- ing in chess, no opening has less surprise value. You'll be running into opponents who have been playing sharp lines against it for 20 years. So if you're taking the Sicilian up at this stage, you should put in a lot of serious study time, as well as commit to playing it for a few years. One way of doing this relatively painlessly would be to start with irregular variations of the Sicilian, some of which I mentioned in Chapter 8, and move to mainstream lines later. In the French Defence, Black Can steer the major variations into similar structures involv- ing d4 and e5 by White, unless White chooses to concede equality (i.e., by choosing exd5). The French is a good lifetime opening, either as a main defence or a back-up, because Black has so many sound ways to play and can shift from system to system when necessary. That is cer- tainly true of the Sicilian Defence, but perhaps less so with other major defences to 1 e4. The Caro-Kann Defence isn't as flexible; however, it is so inherently solid that it's hard to imagine any of the basic main lines proving unplayable, or even unpleasant enough to reduce the open- ing to an outsider status. It also requires less concrete study than most major openings. The Pirc Defence is an excellent choice for players who want to be able to switch between posi- tional play and dynamically-charged lines. I think that it is underrated as a defence and ap- propriate for any strength level. However, some players will get discouraged because they often end up having to play with less territory under their command than with many other openings. All of these choices include an element of per- sonal taste. Against 1 d4, this is a good point to pick up an Indian Defence. Like so many teachers, I would recommend the 1 ... l2Jf6, 2 ... e6 complex, because it's both solid and instructive. Versus the conventional 2 c4 lines, you would use the Nimzo-Indian (l d4l2Jf6 2 c4 e6 3l2Jc3 .ltb4), and either the Queen's Indian (l d4l2Jf6 2 c4 e6 3l2Jf3 b6) or the easier-to-learn Bogo-Indian (l d4l2Jf6 2 c4 e6 3l2Jf3 .ltb4+). Those inclined to sharper and somewhat riskier struggles might choose the King's Indian Defence (l d4l2Jf6 2 c4 g6 followed by ... .ltg7 and ... d6) or the Benoni (l d4l2Jf6 2 c4 c5). Of course, any other major defence is also playable. The one thing you want to be careful about versus 1 d4 is con- ceding too much space without knowing ex- actly why you're doing so. It would be nice to have something simple to play against 1 c4 and 1 l2Jf3; unfortunately, since White hasn't fully disclosed his inten- tions with these moves, Black has to be able to

298 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

respond to multiple set-ups. One way to ap- proach I c4 is to limit the number of reasonable options for White. For example, you can begin with 1...e5, and then if 2 lbc3, play 2 ... d6 or 2 ... ..Itb4, either of which limits White's choice of moves if he's genuinely trying for an advan- tage. For example, after I c4 e5 2 lbc3 d6, White ordinarily chooses between 3 d4, leading to 3 ... exd4 4 'iVxd4 lbc6, whereas against 3 lbf3 or 3 g3, 3 .. .f5 narrows White's options and keeps surprises to a minimum. After 2 g3, the variations 2 ... c6 and 2 ... lbf6 3 ..Itg2 c6 are positionally forcing. You can see how these strategies play out by referring to Volume 3 of this series. Versus I lbf3, someone who plays the Sicilian Defence might choose 1...c5 (al- lowing 2 e4), and then learn a system versus 2 c4, a Symmetrical English in which White has committed to 2 lbf3; the latter task isn't so hard. A Queen's Gambit defender might be happy to play I lbf3 d5, since 2 d4 will nor- mally transpose to that opening. And so forth. At the risk of boring the reader, I should em- phasize again that the suggestions above are merely a small subset of reasonable variations, selected to give you a feel for how you might choose openings at various levels. They are mainly given so that you have concrete advice to go by, rather than some airy generalities. But any time that you are strongly attracted to a cer- tain opening and have fun playing and studying it, that trumps other arguments. There is no sub- stitute for enjoyment when you're trying to learn something. Category A Openings Here we arrive at a point where overly-specific advice isn't very useful. At this level of strength, you can play any respectable opening without fear, and your repertoire can carry a theoretical load that would be unwieldy for a Category B player. In large part that's because a stronger player has a better understanding of and famil- iarity with chess positions, so he can absorb opening ideas and variations more quickly. Still, you won't want to beat your head against a wall by using what you thought were the lat- est discoveries in too many critical variations and then finding out that even your lower-rated opponents have played the same variations in dozens ofInternet games. My advice would be to play only a few fashionable main lines (three at most, fewer if you're so inclined), and fill in your repertoire with variations designed to make your opponent think on his own. You should also take into account whether you are good at retaining material that you have memorized; there's nothing worse than studying a line for days and then mixing up the moves when you finally get it over the board! At this level, a couple of irregular openings can be of value to counterbalance the detailed theoretical knowledge possessed by many ad- vanced opponents. In fact, many strong grand- masters benefit by judicious use of openings that are out of the mainstream. You can even implement this on move one; for example, I b3, I f4 and I lbc3 are candidates for White. As Black, you can save some time and playa 'uni- versal' system against 1 e4, 1 d4, 1 c4 and 1 lbf3; for example, l...g6, l...d6 or l...lbc6. However, be sure to employ these as secondary weapons for now. Using such moves exclu- sively can limit your general chess understand- ing; I have seen players damage their chess skills, and their long-term results, by never varying from 'safe' openings such as 1...g6 or, as White, the King's Indian Attack, Colle Sys- tem or 1 b3. Even a blind use of 1 c4 can be counterproductive (for example, using 2 g3 with studied avoidance of any central confron- tation). You simply have to keep the play sharp in a reasonable percentage of your openings if you want to improve. Unsound or merely 'tricky' openings are an- other problem. Since you will probably want to drop such openings from your repertoire later, they can represent a poor investment of study time now. In principle, you should never have to completely abandon the openings that you are playing at this stage, unless they are too de- manding to keep up with. That is, you should be able to employ them again from time to time. A few solid, less volatile, variations will serve you well in this respect; even if you're bored with them now, you'll inevitably find new ways to interpret them later. Many authors make the point that you should adjust your opening repertoire to your style of play. That's a tricky proposition, however, for several reasons. First, you may not have a

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 299

discernible style; most players don't have one until they become skilled at the game. Second, the openings that you use have already partially defined how you play, but that doesn't neces- sarily reveal a true 'style'. Furthermore, by studying openings of another character, you may find that you enjoy a different type of chess entirely, and that you play it well. At any rate, I don't think this advice would apply until you have reached at least master strength and have a true understanding of your strengths and weaknesses. Finally, as indicated above, it would be pre- sumptuous to give masters concrete sugges- tions about which openings to play; they have their own ideas and tastes. But in general, I be- lieve that strong players should try to have a flexible repertoire, broad enough to adjust to different opponents and different tournament situations.

2. Choose openings that will improve your play

On the face of it, this piece of advice may seem silly. Of course you want to improve your play, but can one opening really teach you more than another? I think that the answer is yes, even up to a fairly high level of player. For example, openings which lead towards 'automatic' play can retard your progress in terms of under- standing, and demand less in terms of creative thought. It's a bad sign when you find yourself going on autopilot. If you want to investigate certain structures more deeply, you might use two or more open- ings that are related. For example, you can get standard isolated d-pawn positions as White in certain lines of the Queen's Gambit, Nimzo- Indian, c3 Sicilian, and Panov Caro-Kann; and as Black in the Tarrasch Variation of the Queen's Gambit, the Tarrasch Variation of the French Defence, and other defences. Alternatively, you might want to adopt what I call the 'restraint structure', that is, ... c6/. .. e6 structures without a d-pawn (see the introductory chapters of Vol- ume 1). These can be found in a number of defences such as the Caro-Kann, the Slav and the Scandinavian. Many 1 e4 e5 openings fea- ture Black upholding a 'strong point' on e5 with a ... d6/ ... e5 structure, and the King's Indian De- fence often does the same, so it might provide a complementary defence to 1 d4. Sometimes there's a general resemblance between open- ings; for example, the moves ... e6 and ... .Bb4 are common to the Nirnzo-Indian Defence, the Ragozin Variation of the Queen's Gambit De- clined, the Winawer and McCutcheon Varia- tions of the French Defence, and a couple of variations of the English Opening (including the English Defence). You probably won't want to play all of these lines at once, but it doesn't hurt to consider similar piece placements when trying to find openings to your taste. Naturally, you should be careful not to over- indulge in this practice. After all, as I'm con- stantly saying, it's also important to learn as many structures as you can and expand your chess knowledge in the process. So, while you will do well to learn a few structures deeply, don't limit yourself by trying to force your rep- ertoire down a single path.

3. Be daring and play new openings

The legendary Viktor Korchnoi has said, bluntly, that if you want to improve your chess, you should play a new opening. I guess this is a variation on a theme that I'm starting to bore everyone with. But it's a controversial point of view, and one that not all coaches agree with. One traditional philosophy has it that you should specialize in your openings in order to under- stand them on a deep level. For one thing, by doing so, you can reasonably expect to avoid serious trouble early on. The more modem view, however, tends to be that it's important to learn about the game as a whole, and since different openings lead to distinct kinds of play, you will become a more complete player by exposing yourself to a wide range of positions. More- over, the freshness and creativity that you bring to the board will often compensate for lesser fa- miliarity, even to the extent of avoiding or set- ting early traps. Not surprisingly, a combination of these two approaches will probably serve you best, and in fact most strong players have a wide repertoire, but also a few favourite openings that they play more than the others. In any case, you shouldn't abandon any well-established opening based upon one loss. At the very least, you should re- search the opening to find out where you went

300 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

wrong (or where theory can be improved upon). And if you take up a new opening as your main weapon, play the old one from time to time, es- pecially if you can limit yourself to variations in which one new move by the opponent won't be likely to lead you into a bad position. After all, you've invested time into the first opening and it's foolish to waste it. In practice, I think that the tendency to cling to your habitual openings and be afraid to ex- periment is a greater danger than the disadvan- tages of superficially jumping around from opening to opening. Many of you will recog- nize that the more you play an opening, the more stale your thinking can become, leading to dogmatic moves and a tendency to miss un- usual ideas. Also, with the advent of databases and an explosion of resources for opening re- search, it doesn't take anywhere near as long as it did two decades ago to become quite familiar with the variations and ideas of a new opening. Granted, a panicky switch to a something new may not be a good idea against high-level oppo- nents. You should have a safe fallback opening in case of emergency. Similarly, if you know that your opponent, however strong, plays a certain variation against your favourite opening and you want to avoid it, be careful about con- cocting something too rapidly (for example, in the 10 minutes between the posting of the pair- ings and the beginning of the game!). The odds are that he is at least as familiar as you are with something that you've never played before. Furthermore, playing an opening for which you know all the themes and ideas is probably safer than trying to wing it. Naturally, if you think that your chosen variation will give you a sig- nificant disadvantage, see if you can play an- other variation within the same overall opening complex, or something as safe as you can find. Given time, adjusting to your opponent isn't a bad idea; maybe you know that you're playing him tomorrow, for example, or in a weekly tournament. Just be careful of precipitously abandoning what you're familiar with. Regardless of your circumstances, playing and studying even a limited number of games with a particular opening will probably teach you about kinds of positions that you hadn't previously encountered. That includes various positional ideas and tactics which will apply to other openings and middlegames. Furthermore, new positions are very helpful in improving your sense of timing, that is, how much you can sacrifice in one domain (for example, de- velopment) to gain in another (for example, structure). Finally, there's the obvious point that if you become disillusioned with a particu- lar opening, you may have an opportunity to play it from the other side of the board.

4. Don'tf eel constrained by the latest fashion

Just because leading grandmasters are playing something, that doesn't mean that it is 'best'; often their choice of openings is based upon practical considerations. For example, they may be intent upon causing specialized types of problems for their elite opponents, or even pro- tecting their ratings by finding drawish varia- tions for Black. It's amazing how many players tell me that they don't play some opening be- cause it's 'inferior' or 'unsound', when that opinion is based solely upon the fact that the top grandmasters aren't currently playing it, or that there was a single high-profile game in which one side got the better game and won. Keep in mind that all major openings are playable. To me, in addition, there is something slightly de- pressing about playing the same openings as elite grandmasters. Inevitably, those profes- sionals will be coming up with new ideas and working out the details faster than you could ever dream of doing yourself, so you're always in the role of a follower instead of a creator. Improving Your Opening Play After all is said and done, you want to improve your opening play. There are no magic tricks for doing that, but I'll give some advice and point to a number of training techniques for getting opening ideas to work in practice. Prep- aration and practice are obviously crucial, but the best ways to do so are not self-evident. To what extent you use computers to study and prepare, for example, is a much-debated ques- tion among chess teachers.

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 301

The most common questions from students have to do with how to go about learning open- ings. Naturally, that relates to how to play them well. First, understand that there are no magic shortcuts. If you read through chess literature or go to instructional sites on the web, you'll soon realize that no one can possibly imple- ment all of the various tips and strategies that are supposed to lead to improvement. Too much advice is probably worse than no advice at all unless you drastically narrow it down. I find it slightly irritating when authors and teachers come up with these lengthy lists of what to think about during a chess game; after their first 15 items to 'always keep in mind', they flood you with other 'common mental mistakes' and then start all over again in the next chapter or article! If you've read enough golf and tennis magazines, you'll recognize the problem: we can't play with more than a few tips in our minds at once. In fact, the most useful pieces of advice for the average chess-player to con- sciously refer to in the midst of battle are proba- bly simple reminders such as 'Pay attention to captures and checks' or 'When you're just about to make your move, take one more look at the most obvious replies'! The rest should become part of an organic thinking process. In the case of openings and early middlegames, crowding your thought-process with maxims is particu- larly ridiculous; if you want to escape the con- crete for a while, it's much better to step back from the position and consider what strategies go with the particular pawn-structure on the board, including the optimal spots for each piece. This can be done on your opponent's thinking time. Something similar applies with respect to the ubiquitous advice about opening play and study techniques: there are too many considerations for anyone to handle, and too many hypotheti- cal goals to achieve. What's more frustrating, I don't think that any such advice is universal; whether it works depends upon the individual and what chess skills they've acquired. More- over, some questions have no correct answers. For example: should you memorize openings or learn their ideas? That varies according to cir- cumstance, skill level, and inclination. In this section, I'll be setting forth a wide variety of methods for preparing and studying openings, which taken together would overwhelm their purpose. So by all means look over this ad- vice, but then pick and choose what seems useful for you, and don't try to do too much at once.

1. Committing to and recording a repertoire

Let's assume that you've chosen your major openings and top-level variations according to the guidelines described above (or not). You probably won't be sure about what to do against all or even most of the subvariations. It's even more likely that you won't know how to answer the wide variety of individual lines that your opponent can throw at you. Therefore, as you proceed, you'll need to arrive at a more detailed provisional repertoire, which will almost cer- tainly be adjusted as time passes. The process of filling out details in a reper- toire is in itself a means of learning and im- provement. To do this, you first need to see how the opening breaks down into variations and subvariations. Books are helpful in that regard; for example, an encyclopaedic openings com- pendium should make it clear what the main variations of an opening are. You might also skim through the Contents list of a book special- izing in a particular opening or set of openings, and use the Index of Variations if it has one. Still another method is to use a database to find a large set of games with the opening to see how frequently various lines occur. In fact, most da- tabases have an option of ordering games by opening, to any desired level of subvariations. Then it's time to pick the lines you wish to play. For now, choose one line versus any varia- tion that you need to have an answer for. Later you will be adding options, but at this point we'll take a linear approach. Take your time and find something compatible with your tastes, testing a few lines on the Internet or at the club. Speciality books and repertoire books will sug- gest certain variations and provide good refer- ences as you continue to play the opening. Alternatively, you may adopt a variation that a friend plays, or choose to try out some line that you saw in a game in a magazine. If you have a teacher, he can recommend openings and varia- tions; just be wary of any teacher who tries to foist most of his own repertoire on you, in

302 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

particular if it means discarding what you cur- rently play. In each case, ask if an opening is too complex or theoretical to use at your cur- rent playing strength. Some players like to look at what variations the specialists in certain openings are choosing, on the grounds that they know what they're doing. Copying a grand- master's entire repertoire isn't good, in my opinion. You'll tend to end up with too 'profes- sional' a repertoire, constructed for another player's purposes (for example, a top player may only want to draw with Black). Having decided upon a set of opening varia- tions to start out with, it is essential to docu- ment what you've chosen, including the main lines and however many provisional variations that you are willing to commit to. This abso- lutely requires that you chart out your new rep- ertoire in some handy format. There are several ways of doing so, but whatever method you use, save copies of your older repertoires even when you move on to revised ones. The first option is rather primitive, but may appeal to those who still prefer physical media such as paper over electrons. It consists of man- ually written charts, possibly in tree form, which list the chosen variations and subvariations. This corresponds with the famous 'notebooks' that the great masters of old used to carry around with them. Another common method is (was) to use index cards. On a slightly higher level of sophistication, you can enter the same information into a word-processing program on a computer. Then it can be either printed out or read on the screen. One benefit of doing it this way is that the chart can be modified and edited with a few key- strokes. The most sophisticated and best way to re- cord a repertoire is to use a chess database pro- gram such as ChessBase or Chess Assistant. Using ChessBase, for example, you can create a single game with an overall tree of the main moves of each opening you use. Then you can create 'games' containing each variation (or subvariation), doing so to whatever degree of detail you desire. Here are just a few advan- tages of this approach:

1. You can play over every move of the rep-

ertoire on the screen, going back and forth through the variations.

2. You can change the moves whenever you

want to without having to rewrite.

3. You can include verbal commentary,

cross references, and printable diagrams wher- ever you choose.

4. You can take relevant games from other

databases and merge in the ones that you think will be helpful.

5. You can tum on an analytical engine and

have it assess positions in your repertoire, as well as suggesting alternate moves.

6. You can always look at and/or print out

the repertoire in chart form, or game form if you prefer that.

7. You can catch transpositions more easily.

These days, not surprisingly, just about ev- ery serious player uses a database program to construct their repertoire. It doesn't take much computer literacy to learn how to get your moves entered, after which they are automati- cally ready to replay. The actual information that you use in your files needn't come solely from databases; in fact, opening books are still by far the best source for most players, and you will want to input analysis from them into the repertoire file in your chess program. In fact, the process of keying in moves from books is an excellent way to fix them in your mind. I rec- ommend it for everyone from beginner on up. Having recorded everything in orderly form, you can and should periodically review your repertoire to see which variations aren't work- ing well, which need more study, and which you find unpleasant to play. These can be replaced, but only after a good-faith effort to solve the problem by making minor adjustments, picking different subvariations, and looking for different ways to play the same basic positions. Of course, you can always expand the repertoire at any juncture and have two options available.

2. Strategy, tactics and memorization

After some study of an opening, and perhaps experience with it, I strongly recommend ex- plicitly writing down the typical strategies and themes that go with a variation. This includes basic goals, tactical motifs, opening traps, typi- cal piece positions, standard manoeuvres, po- tential pawn-breaks, common pawn-structures

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 303

(perhaps with a few characteristic endings), and probable middlegame plans (including po- tential weaknesses to attack). You should make up an ordered list of these ideas; it's helpful if you yourself decide how you want to organize such a list, and what should be included in it. How complete or even accurate your list is doesn't matter as much as getting it down on paper to refer to. Also, don't forget to go through this process for both White and Black! That is, you need to be aware of your oppo- nent's ideas as well as your own. This task should be done early on in your repertoire-creation process, and not put off. De- pending upon your outlook, such careful chart- ing might be slightly boring, certainly more so than playing, but in that case you can make the list fairly quickly and then come back to it later in order to add to, modify or delete items, based upon the games that you play and books that you read. I'd be sure to keep an eye out for typi- cal tricks and tactics in your openings; if you fall for one of these, everything else is irrele- vant, at least for that particular game. At the same time, don't undervalue straight- forward memorization of opening moves. Most players will find that, as they memorize open- ings, they will absorb by osmosis most of the typical themes and structures. After all, memo- rization in chess is a method of acquiring real knowledge, just as it is in the sciences, crafts, and most fields. The more that you play over opening moves, even by rote, the better they will be absorbed and some of the wisdom be- hind them will inevitably sink into your con- sciousness. Naturally, memorization isn't suf- ficient to make you a strong player; indeed, there's a kind of overdependence on it that can lead to the common mistake of playing the same move in a completely inappropriate posi- tion. So you need perspective, and becoming aware of why you're making particular moves has to be combined with blunt memorization; fortunately, these are not exclusive processes. You'll also want to start thinking about move- order issues, which I have strongly emphasized in this series. As you develop your openings, think about how you will concretely answer each order in which your opponent can play his moves, and how you might adjust your own move-order to your advantage. This can be decided upon gradually, and may even take years to pin down completely.

3. Study model games interactively

The best teachers universally recommend study- ing master games to improve your play. In the case of opening study, an obvious method is to choose games directly from an opening book, ideally finding copies of them in your database and collecting them in one place. You can also collect a series of games from a database with the desired opening variation, and then sort them according to rating, so that you see how the best players handle the positions first. If you have narrowed down the variation to a particu- lar line, you may even be able to play through every game with it. Still another useful technique for gathering samples is to use the games of a specialist in each line. This is also easy to do with a database - by examining the openings key, you will soon recognize who has played the variation for the longest time (in certain contexts, there may be a function informing you directly about who the most frequent practitioners are). The same goes for reading opening books with an eye towards the opponents in relevant games. Often a partic- ular player is closely associated with an opening variation, either as Black or White, although it makes for a more productive experience to pick at least two or more players, in order to com- pare treatments and find lines where you can implement your own ideas. Having located games, the way in which you study them will depend upon your time and en- ergy, but most teachers will recommend that you participate actively in the learning pro- cess. Rather than simply playing the moves over, try predicting (or guessing at) them your- self. Ideally you will take enough time thinking about them that you get a good grip on the rele- vant positions. The traditional way to do this is to set up a board and place a book in front of you, or use a paper copy of the game. You can generate a printed copy of games with any seri- ous database program, and include diagrams if that works for you. Cover up the moves (with, e.g., a piece of paper, ruler or index card) while analysing the position. With the right physical set-up, you will be able to uncover one move at

304 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

a time. The truly dedicated student can try to predict both sides' moves, but it's probably more realistic to analyse continuations from 'your' side of the board, and you can get through more material if you do so. Not surprisingly, you can also go through this process with a da- tabase program. ChessBase, for example, has a 'Training mode' that reveals only one move at a time as you work out the next move. Some very strong players have emphasized that it helps to periodically use a physical board to play over games (rather than the computer monitor), because that's how you will be seeing things at a tournament. You will always benefit most from analysing a position deeply, but realistically, studying opening theory involves a lot of material and you probably won't get to enough games or variations if you worry over each move in every game. As time progresses, you will be able to identify one or two positions from the opening of each game that require the most serious con- sideration. If you only have time to spend a minute or so on a move, at least this approxi- mates the time you might actually get in a real game! Some teachers recommend using a clock to discipline your time management. With respect to available study time, you have one more decision to make. For your gen- eral chess education, there's nothing better than analysing the whole game using the cover-up method. But if your goal is to study openings, you simply won't get through enough helpful material unless you cut the process short as the middlegame begins, and stop there or quickly play through the remaining moves, by hand or on a screen. Of course, it's hard to assess where the border between opening and middlegame is, so you'll have to get a feel for where to stop as you play over more games. In this respect, it's probably easier to use the games in an opening book (or DVD) than in a games collection, but you can do both. See the next section for further thoughts on how to improve this procedure. I suggest using a mix of annotated and un- annotated games. The former allow you to com- pare the thoughts of a strong player with your own. The latter force you to think more about a position, and accustom you to playing more creatively without an ever-present authority lurking in your mind.

4. Creative learning: what if ... ?

As mentioned, you can apply the active method above to opening books and articles as well as games collections. But I didn't explicitly men- tion what is perhaps the most important part of the process: asking the question 'What if he [your opponent] plays move X? What happens then?'. If you do this consistently for most of the moves that you're looking at, and answer the questions as you go along, you will improve at an accelerated rate and greatly broaden your perspective on anything you study. Further- more, you'll find that sometimes there's no clear answer to your question about a proposed move, or perhaps no good reply at all. That means that you've come up with a worthwhile new move. It turns out that there are plenty of them; every player, once he's learned the rules and played some games, can find moves that haven't been tried before (at least moves that aren't in the books or generally known). Some- times, in fact, the less you know the better. When I began to play chess, the books available to me were mostly games collections, and I was already a passably competent player before I ran into opening pamphlets and the like. So I became my own main source of ideas for the opening, taking the first moves of a game from a collection and using the 'What if. .. ?' method. After a while, it wasn't that difficult to put my own stamp on the variations I played. That still holds true today. You should be able to personalize your repertoire with a small improvement here or there, a change of move- orders, or even a new strategy entirely. If you play very sharp lines, you may find a block- buster novelty in a tactical situation; of course, that is much more likely if you stay away from the most popular lines of the day. Even if you don't introduce new moves, ask- ing the 'What if. .. ?' question can lead you to understand the subtleties of a variation, which might result in taking up some move that has previously been regarded as inferior, or aban- doning a variation that is supposed to be good for you (and doing so before you lose a game with it!). Sometimes you may decide that you'd like to incorporate the line into your repertoire, but only when you're playing with the opposite colour!

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 305

Players everywhere will tell you that finding new opening moves or charting new territory in the opening is among the most rewarding expe- riences that comes from study. For some, it is their proudest achievement in chess.

5. Practice makes perfect

Not surprisingly, it is vital to play your openings as often as possible. This can be done in casual play and tournaments, against computers, or in online playing situations. These days, most se- rious players take advantage of the latter possi- bility, and there are numerous playing sites on which to do so. In general, inexperienced play- ers can get by using a free or inexpensive site, and that may be the proper budgetary decision. But as you get more serious, the major pay sites such as Internet Chess Club or Playchess offer the strongest opposition and the chance to sit in on grandmaster games, along with many fea- tures that other sites don't offer. You should do your own investigation before deciding what fits your needs. There are other ways to make your practice more efficient and rewarding. For example, if you're trying to learn an opening as Black, practice playing it from the white side, and vice-versa. You can even set up a series of games with a partner and agree to play the same variation again and again. Such practice is ide- ally suited for online play, and this is one situa- tion in which I can recommend blitz games (in sensible, non-addictive, quantities). Otherwise, for the sake of opening practice, try to make your online games at a lO-minute or preferably IS-minute time-control (or longer, if it's possi- ble to find an opponent). In that way, you get to reflect a little about the opening and early middlegame issues before descending into a time-scramble. It's even worth sacrificing some rating points by taking an impractical amount of time to emphasize opening accuracy instead of results; after all, it doesn't take too long to get your online rating back to its natural level. Finally, many players test their openings by playing against a computer program. That's an excellent way to gain experience, and puts the learning process under your control; for exam- ple, you can pause the play and contemplate the position, look up the line in a book, jot down what's happening, or take a break to eat some- thing. One drawback to this kind of study is that it takes place in a less competitive atmosphere than online play, and might make your transi- tion to over-the-board games more difficult. In addition, you might find that you miss the so- cial element of the game; of course, that might be an improvement when you consider some online behaviour!

6. Over the board

This chapter isn't about psychological issues, but let me devote a few words to playing open- ings in real, over-the-board situations (for ex- ample, at tournaments). Right away, I believe that it's a mistake to blitz out opening moves at a rapid-fire pace. For one thing, it's rather ob- noxious, and may unnecessarily provoke more determined play from your opponent. More im- portantly (for most players, anyway), you will probably play an unintended move from time to time. This can happen even if you're familiar with an opening and wide awake. For example, you might be prepared to make a certain stan- dard move in any case, but then fail to adjust to your opponent's unexpected move. Or you play your moves in the wrong order, which is, inci- dentally, a common time-trouble slip. Probably the most frequent mistake when slamming out the opening moves is to playa customary move automatically, and then suddenly remember that you had actually decided to play something different if you ever reached the position. All these possibilities are very unlikely to happen if you take more than five seconds per move. And pressing the clock with normal force goes a long way towards establishing your maturity. Next, you have to realize and accept that you'll seldom get the exact subvariation that you're hoping for, that you'll often not get the exact variation, and sometimes, you won't even end up in the right opening! The bald fact is that there are two of you playing, and your oppo- nent has his own preparation as well as limits on his theoretical knowledge. So he may devi- ate into a sideline, use a move-order that you hadn't anticipated, or playa new move, whether intentionally or not. How should you react when you are sur- prised by an unexpected opening move, and are

306 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

unsure of whether you're facing something new? The obvious answer, one given by some books and teachers, is that you should avoid speculating about your opponent's knowledge and play the position objectively, at normal speed, just as you would any random middle- game position. After all, unexpected moves are commonplace throughout a game. But in fact, it's absolutely justified to hit the reset button and take an unusual amount of time to think. After all, your opponent hasn't studied that ran- dom middlegame position, but there's a good possibility that he has studied this particular opening and therefore a chance, although hardly a certainty, that his last move is a prepared novelty. If so, then there are more likely to be different kinds of issues in the position, and possibly tricks for you to negotiate. What's more, small mistakes are more likely to be pun- ished when your opponent has had time to re- flect about the possibilities away from the board. So additional caution is desirable. It's also pos- sible that the surprise move is an inferior one, or an outright mistake (after all, there may be a good reason why you haven't seen it before). In that case, taking extra time to check for a possi- ble flaw is also worthwhile. In either case, don't feel intimidated into making a quick re- sponse. While it may be more macho to throw down a 'You-don't-scare-me', Try-that-out- for-size' move, you really should expend some resources at this first critical juncture of the game. Finally, a time-honoured question in chess is whether to 'play the board' or 'play the oppo- nent'. My general inclination in the middle- game is to play the board, which means to make your moves without taking the tastes or foibles of your specific opponent into account. That doesn't eliminate speculation, or playing dif- ferently against different strength opponents, or even making objectively inferior moves in the hope of causing your opponents more prob- lems. Rather, it means that you make most de- cisions independent of an assessment of the id- iosyncrasies of opponents, or of their perceived tendencies to play weakly in certain types of positions and strongly in others. In choosing your openings, however, both before and during the game, I think that you have your best opportunity to 'play the opponent', that is, if you're quite sure that you're familiar with someone's style and preferences, it makes sense to guide the play away from those. For example, many wild attacking players don't like simplified positions, especially with the queens off. Other positionally-oriented players become uncomfortable in out-of-control tacti- cal positions. I think that it's too risky and diffi- cult to try to channel the direction of the play in the middlegame or endgame; for one thing, their assessments will be approximate and the final positions fuzzy. But in the opening, be- cause of previous and fixed knowledge, you can be almost sure whether a certain kind of po- sition can be forced, and what the evaluations of the resulting variations are. Therefore you'll know what, if anything, you are sacrificing in objective terms by forcing the play in a certain direction. Putting this together, I'd say that it's all right to play opening variations that take into account your opponent's style, but be care- ful not to lean too heavily upon the practice.

7. Chess information and the openings

In today's chess world, there are more sources of information and analysis about openings than can possibly be kept track of. Here's a brief guide to what's out there:

1. For starters, you can find multiple open-

ing books about every conventional opening, as well as books about most of their variations, and even some about subvariations. If you include books written in various languages, literally hundreds of opening books by master-strength players appear each year. Some of these are ap- pearing in e-book form as well. One enormous advantage of opening books is that you have a strong player (usually an expert in the line) sorting through hundreds of variations to show you the important and recommended ones. The author of an opening book also organizes the important material in an opening by filtering out the vast numbers of games with which the reader needn't be concerned in practical play. In addition, most books these days have a great many recommendations for how to improve upon current theory. Remarkably, these recom- mendations sometimes go years before they seep into top-level play and become the main moves.

CHOOSING AND PREPARING OPENINGS 307

2. The most significant longstanding periodic

publications with an emphasis on openings are the Informator series, which has annotations by strong and elite grandmasters, and the New in Chess Yearbooks, which consist of opening ar- ticles by leading experts. ChessBase Magazine, an electronic magazine on DVD, publishes nu- merous opening surveys in each issue.

3. In electronic form, DVDs about chess

openings have expanded. Be warned that these are mostly of poor quality, but there are notable exceptions, primarily in the series of high- quality DVD videos from ChessBase.

4. Many websites are loaded with informa-

tion about openings. Every year, the website ChessPublishing produces the equivalent of many books' worth of opening material, all an- notated by grandmasters, along with e-books summarizing the information. Elsewhere on the Web, innumerable teaching sites, blogs, and players' home pages have opening analysis.

5. Chess magazines not only have many

games annotated in detail by leading players, but they often contain separate opening articles. Almost every country has a national publica- tion, and many other wonderful magazines are published around the world. It wouldn't be fair for me to recommend particular ones, but you can combine the recommendations of friends and use web searches to pick out some, perhaps on a trial basis.

6. Finally, we have the amazing world of da-

tabase programs, which can organize millions of games according to opening, instantly pull up all games in a certain position, search for struc- tures, and save these in an accessible format. Increasingly, players (especially already-knowl- edgeable professionals) use database programs to research the latest games and improve their own repertoires. With their years of exposure to opening ideas and large blocks of available time, some grandmasters practically live off databases to satisfy their opening theory needs. That isn't realistic or even desirable for the non-professional, however. For the majority of us, an opening book is still the best way to un- derstand a variation's positional and tactical ideas, and to pick up intelligent suggestions. One reason for this is that it's difficult to assess the worth of the moves that you find from data- bases. When doing searches, I sometimes filter out all games below a certain rating level, and I also try to include all the annotated games that I can find; nevertheless, I'm continually sur- prised by how often this gives a wrong impres- sion about what the best lines really are. In ad- dition, with the arm's-length view that comes from a database search, it's not easy to decide which variations are practical or which move- order problems will prevent you from getting the positions that you're after. By contrast, when a titled author has reviewed, thought about, and (ideally) played an opening, he will have insights and explanations that the average player can't generate on his own. In conclusion, there's a lot to consider when choosing and preparing your openings. In this chapter I've attempted to provide a basis for do- ing so, as well as address the issue of how best to study openings. You by no means need to ap- ply everything or even most of what I've rec- ommended; in fact, it's probably best to keep your mind focused and apply only one or two things at a time! But regardless of its immediate value, I hope that this chapter provides a refer- ence when you're in doubt about how to proceed with your chess openings and your develop- ment as a player.

10 The Future of Openings

Having described the range of openings used in contemporary chess, I don't think there's much doubt about their vitality in the immediate fu- ture. These days, it's hard for us to imagine that in the 1920s, Capablanca and Lasker were fret- ting about how opening theory had progressed to such an extreme that chess had become fun- damentally limited. At the time, it was sug- gested that no one could win against a skilled master if he chose certain openings (the Caro- Kann was a particular worry, leading Reti to re- ject 1 e4 altogether, and the Queen's Gambit Declined seemed an insurmountable barrier versus 1 d4). That being the case, the percent- age of draws would increase dramatically until we reached a state called 'the death of chess'. Capablanca even proposed a change of rules to counteract this perceived problem. We occasionally hear mutterings to this ef- fect today, but I think that the current situation is similar to what it actually was in those times. Ever since this concern surfaced, the number of legitimate openings, variations, and subvariations used by grandmasters has ex- ploded without pause, and 80 years later that process is accelerating. There are more unan- swered questions in the entire set of practical openings today, and more difficulties in play- ing them, than could have been imagined by the grandmasters in the 1970s and 1980s, much less those from Capablanca's time. When it comes to computers, another source of concern, you could argue that the death of chess by endgames is more likely than its death by openings! At least the complexity of end- games, as demonstrated by the development of comprehensive endgame tablebases, is limited enough to be handled with perfect play for up to 6 pieces (4, excluding the kings). By contrast, chess programs are at their worst in the open- ing, as long as they are 'out of book'; by defini- tion, the opening is the most complicated part of the game in terms of the number of possible future continuations. Granted, it is often more manageable for us as humans than a random middle game since we have a body of accumu- lated knowledge and recognize recurring struc- tures. But the number of opening permutations is so great, and the difficulties of assessment so far beyond the grasp of the most powerful com- puter ever contemplated, that we can be confi- dent about the game's longevity in that respect. When we get to specifics, the issues are more involved, and vary sharply from group to group. Even professional players use different approaches to their choice of openings based upon their strategies regarding both competi- tion and rating. Let's begin at the very top, with World Champions and their top-ten peers. To the dismay of many fans, some elite players employ a 'win-as-White, hold-as-Black' strat- egy, a policy reflected in their opening choices. That is not a bad way to win closed tourna- ments; and equally importantly, to avoid rating disasters. Thus we see some of the top-ten play- ers resorting to similar variations over many years. Ex-World Champion Vladimir Kramnik, for example, has used a number of solid open- ings as Black versus 1 e4, such as the Petroff Defence, Sveshnikov Sicilian (which has be- come notoriously drawish at the top levels, de- spite its aggressive and dynamic nature), and famously, the Berlin Defence to the Ruy Lopez. His drawing percentage as Black is a rather hefty 56%. Supergrandmaster Peter Leko plays some of the same openings, as well as the Mar- shall Attack, an aggressive gambit which pro- duces very forcing play that often ends in a draw. His drawing percentage as Black is 60%. Anatoly Karpov, a World Champion famous for his conservative style, has used the Caro-Kann Defence and various 1 e4 e5 defences induding the Petroff. He sports a 54% drawing ratio as Black. You will find that these same opening variations are used disproportionately by several other supergrandmasters (in comparison to the practice of professional players in general). A somewhat different situation arises versus I d4.

THE FUTURE OF OPENINGS 309

The leading players exhibit more variety, al- though almost everyone includes the super-solid l...liJf6 and 2 ... e6 (the Nimzo-Indian/Queen's Indian complex) in their repertoires, sometimes exclusively, as well as a large number of games with 1...d5, the other most conservative first move. To the extent that 1 d4 play sometimes tums wild, it usually does so because White feels obliged to try to win against an inherently solid opening such as the Slav or Queen's In- dian, and is even willing to sacrifice a pawn or two in that effort. By contrast, it's worth noting how World Champions Bobby Fischer and Garry Kaspar- ov, the two most prominent players of the mod- em era, made winning as Black an integral part of their approach. Fischer drew only 37% of his games as Black and won 51 % (versus consider- ably lower average opposition, to be sure); whereas Kasparov drew only 48% of his games with Black and won 40%, far ahead of his con- temporaries. They both specialized in the dy- namic Sicilian Defence, and both initially used the double-edged King's Indian and Griinfeld Defences as Black, turning to more solid ap- proaches later in their careers. Kasparov ulti- mately went through every major system versus 1 d4, and naturally played them all well. We also find a contemporary set of top play- ers who lean in the Fischer/Kasparov direction, and take many more forays in experimental di- rections. It will surprise no one who follows their games, for example, that Veselin Topalov and Alexei Shirov, who boast of wide reper- toires filled with active openings, have had un- usually low drawing percentages with both White and Black; nor that the eccentric Alexan- der Morozevich and aggressive Judit Polgar have Fischer-like drawing percentages. So even the accelerated growth of professionalism at the top hasn't taken the life out of the game. The up-and-coming younger stars have, as a rule, very wide repertoires, which is promising, and engage willingly in complicated fights. However, it's too early to say whether that will translate into low drawing percentages as they assume the ranks of the world's best. Perhaps faster time-controls will have their effect as well. I do think that courageous play will con- tinue to be rewarded, as it has for most of chess history. At the current time, I find that the most inter- esting opening play (and games, for that mat- ter) tends to come from the next couple of tiers of players. Most professionals below a certain world rank, perhaps 15-20, don't have enough invitations to support themselves, and so they play extensively in leagues, team events, and Swiss System tournaments. Under these cir- cumstances, a higher proportion of wins is nec- essary for success, and the 'hold as Black' philosophy is much less prominent. Thus, every month, we see an amazing array of openings used by extremely strong players (including those on their way up or down in the rankings). To be more precise, every major opening dis- cussed in this series gets tested in numerous subvariations, and even very minor openings are consistently represented at the level of mas- ters, albeit somewhat less as the competition stiffens. You can explore this on your own by downloading games from a number of promi- nent websites. Is this set of players using a wider variety of openings since, at 50-100 points below supergrandmaster levels, they can count on their opponents' less precise play? That is extremely unlikely, especially since theory is spread and devoured at outrageous speed these days, and every grandmaster has his own pre- pared ideas versus every opening. Then what's the difference? For one thing, a very limited number of openings are being played consis- tently by the highest-rated players at anyone time, because in exclusive tournaments they tend to dispute the latest fashionable openings. Nevertheless, those openings are changing on a regular basis, if sluggishly, as they have in ev- ery period of modem chess history, especially post-WWII. So the idea that openings are 'infe- rior' because they aren't consistently played at supertournaments is simply misguided. Right now the French Defence (the third most popu- lar e-pawn defence by quite a margin) is only played on a frequent basis by two of the world's top ten players, but I'd be surprised if anyone, with plenty of time on their hands, could show me how to get a forced advantage versus the French. Openings such as the Pirc Defence, the Dutch Defence and the King's Indian Defence are in good theoretical shape at the moment, and who can say that, objectively, they give Black a greater disadvantage than, say, any of a

310 MASTERING THE CHESS OPENINGS

number of Closed Ruy Lopez lines? Yet right at the moment you won't see them played much until you drop below the top ten. Even the most maligned of openings may ultimately equalize; out of the blue, for example, Carlsen and others began to play the Alekhine Defence with suc- cess, and a variety of lesser 1 e4 e5 variations appear to be perfectly sound. If you look at the actual theory as well as practice, it seems as though, played accurately, almost any major e- pawn or d-pawn defence will achieve a de facto equality at a certain point of the game. This leads to two main questions: how early does that ulti- mate equality express itself and, on a related note, how hard is it to reach a level game in over-the-board play? These are practical mat- ters. It would be great if we could evaluate openings these days by including a number or designation reflecting how difficult each open- ing is to handle! That degree of difficulty trans- lates directly into how likely it is that you'll make a mistake or, if not, run into time-pressure. It's not always important in practice whether you stand equal, or slightly better, or slightly worse in theory, if on every move you're con- fronted with problems that are especially hard to solve. I could probably make a good theoretical case for the objective equality of the Modem Benoni after many accurate moves. But the dif- ficulty of finding those moves is arguably much higher than finding the right moves in the Nimzo-Indian Defence or Queen's Gambit De- clined. Clearly, that will be reflected on the play- ers' clocks. From White's viewpoint, the same consideration applies: versus accurate play by Blaek, no opening is likely to give him a forced advantage in the long run. But the mainstream ones tend to retain some edge into the early middlegame, and continue to pose nontrivial problems for Black thereafter. I discussed this in Chapter 6, where I suggested that White's pref- erence for 'mainstream' openings such as the Ruy Lopez and Queen's Gambit over the Scotch Game or London System has more to do with the first two's ability to pose lasting difficulties than to any abstract theoretical superiority. But whether a certain opening tends to equal- ize more easily than another has limited rele- vance for the average player. In general, the words 'draw' and 'drawish' have become outra- geously overused. In middlegames with two vulnerable kings and a material imbalance, even grandmasters commentating live on websites will say 'The position is drawn now' , or 'draw- ish', although a 2700+ player then manages to lose it after errors by both players have given them alternately winning positions! One diffi- culty here is the reliance on computer assess- ments: a '-0.10', even if accurate, doesn't distinguish between easily drawn king-and- pawn endings and complex positions with a high probability of a decisive result. The other problem is the egoism of annotators and com- mentators, who want to show how easy chess is for them, and act as though they're shocked when great players make minor errors (some- times given '??' for dramatic effect) which re- sult in one side being able to win a complex position with perfect play. In view of this, imag- ine how far away from a draw you must be in the opening! Barring cases of a particular varia- tion or subvariation that leads to a draw by rep- etition, that should be your last worry. To be sure, aiming for complex and/or dynamic posi- tions in at least some of your games is generally good for your chess, but not for the sake of avoiding draws. You can confirm that by exam- ining the allegedly drawish symmetrical lines that I've written about in this series; they may seem dull, but they almost always afford real- istic winning chances. So be sceptical when someone tells you that one opening or another is 'drawish'; arguably, none are. Returning to high-level play, I think that the general positional character of the opening is a major determinant of its appeal. For example, throughout the history of chess, the best players have unquestionably preferred having positions with more space (that is, with control over more territory). Arguably, all of the World Cham- pions have been partial to space, excepting pos- sibly Steinitz and Petrosian at certain times during their careers. While modem masters have incorporated quite a few more restricted positions into their repertoires (for one thing, the Sicilian Defence is currently played in 20- 25% of all games), I'd say that this preference persists, albeit in diminished form. Quite apart from the objective worth of openings in which Black controls less space, they tend to be more difficult to play, at least for the majority of play- ers. Furthermore, in master play, there seems to

THE FUTURE OF OPENINGS 311

be a practical differentiation (if not a clear one) between defences involving fianchettoes and those without. The fonner, even when sound and objectively worthwhile, seem to require greater accuracy. The Modem Defence (l...g6) and l...b6 are the most obvious examples, and some grandmasters would say the same about the Modem Benoni and the King's Indian De- fence. Still, there are prominent exceptions; for example, the Queen's Indian Defence isn't usu- ally looked upon in this fashion, nor is the Grtinfeld; and the Sicilian Dragon rolls merrily along. So there are no hard-and-fast rules. And naturally, these considerations are much less meaningful at a lower level, where games are seldom decided upon the basis of territorial control. In fact, defending territory is often harder for the lower-level player than playing with less of it! Nevertheless, along the same lines, most strong players seem to have found that, in re- sponse to I e4, l...e5, the French Defence, and the Caro-Kann Defence are easier to handle in practice than most other systems. Both l...e5 and the French Defence establish an actual stake in the centre, and the Caro-Kann, while surrendering the centre by ... dxe4 in the main lines, opens the d-file and creates room for cen- tral piece activity. The latter is missing in most variations of the Sicilian, Pirc and Alekhine Defences, and that can make them more difficult to handle in practice. Perhaps as players be- come more proficient at managing positions with less space, variations involving spatial deficits will acquire a status of practical as well as theoretical equality. That is already the case with well-established variations of the Sicilian Defence which were looked upon unfavourably in earlier times. If this increased skilfulness proves to be the general case, a positive conse- quence would be the expansion of creative pos- sibilities in the opening. That is certainly the current trend, considering how many new early moves are suddenly becoming respectable. One happy side-effect already is that Internet play- ers and club players, who are experimenting constantly, have become important contribu- tors to the discovery process. As an amateur, you can have an independent say about opening theory and more importantly, feel free of its constraints. I won't need to convince most ac- tive players of this, certainly not my students and friends, who are both extending established lines and trying out new ones. How long will all this last? There's no way of telling. But I wouldn't argue with the con- tinuation of the current direction of events, particularly since the scope of opening theory has expanded steadily for 150 years. In any case, you should take advantage of the oppor- tunity to go in new directions with your own play. Index of Openings for Volume 4 Numbers refer to pages. Codes are from the ECO system. Misc. First Moves

Larsen's Opening (1 b3)

AOI129,131

Bird Opening

[diagram]
Reti Opening

A04287

A07218

[diagram]
English Opening (including Reti-Slav and Closed Reti) AlO 123, 287 All 35,39,42 Al2 48, 51

[diagram]
A31171

[diagram]
A37243

1 d4 Misc. (including English Defence and

Modern Defence with 3 c4) A4090, 108, Ill, 114, 115, 117, 121

A41276

A52295

Benko Gambit

A57172

A58176

Dutch Defence

[diagram]
A87189

A90208

A96201

A97184

1 e4 Misc. (including Owen Defence and

Nimzowitsch Defence)

Scandinavian Defence

[diagram]
Alekhine Defence

B04253

Modern Defence

Pirc Defence

B0786

B09253

Caro-Kann Defence

B10253

Bll157 Bl578 Sicilian Defence

[diagram]
B33209

B53251

B83184

French Defence

COO 161, 252

[diagram]
1 e4 e5 Misc. (including Danish Gambit and

Vienna Game)

C21134

C26224

C29221

Petroff Defence

C42232

C43230

<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<END_CORPUS>>>
