<<<BEGIN_CORPUS>>>
CORPUS_TITLE: ++FUNDAMENTALS
CREATED_AT: 2026-01-13 04:51:52
TEXT_COUNT: 3
NOTES:
- Each text starts with
<<<END_CORPUS_HEADER>>>
<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>> and ends with <<<END_TEXT>>>
<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>.

TABLE_OF_CONTENTS:
01. Play Winning Chess - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2011) | file: 1. Play Winning Chess - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2011)_CLEAN.txt
02. Chess Fundamentals - Jose Capablanca - (Everyman, 2021) | file: 2. Chess Fundamentals - Jose Capablanca - (Everyman, 2021)_CLEAN.txt
03. The Amateurs Mind - Jeremy Silman - (2nd ed, 1999) ...he Amateurs Mind - Jeremy Silman - (2nd ed, 1999)_CLEAN.txt
<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Play Winning Chess - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2011)
FILENAME: 1. Play Winning Chess - Yasser Seirawan - (Everyman, 2011)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 1
SHA256: 561a185c9815f1503b0720d8f21cea8b74b723d23c1397b21b8887f5944d0714
BYTES: 215701

1. f4 e6

2. g4 Qh4+

How can the White King get out of check? Capturing: Taking Men Out of Action I remember playing, as a child, a form of checkers in which the idea was to move your checker next to your opponent's so that he had to capture you, whether he wanted to or not. Chess is altogether different. If your opponent moves his Queen to a position where you can capture it in five different ways, you should stop and ponder why he would offer you such a valuable gift. If he has indeed made a mistake, snap up that Queen! On the other hand, he may be setting a trap. Perhaps taking his Queen will leave you checkmated! Obviously, you would then want to ignore the Queen altogether and deal with the threat of checkmate. In chess, unlike in checkers, you take only the pieces you want to take. Aside from a quick checkmate, one of the best ways to win a game is to slowly capture all of your opponent's men, leaving his King defenseless so that you can checkmate with swift brutality. Remember, however, that this strategy works both ways: Be careful that you don't inadvertently allow your opponent to gobble up all your men! To avoid this kind of humiliation, an experienced player will often choose to resign the game. There are many polite ways to give up. Here are three of them: Tip your King over. Get on your knees and say, "I give up O Mighty Conquerer." (This obsequious display makes your opponent feel good.) Simply say, "I resign." If you are a beginner, I recommend that you never resign a game. Even in a hopeless position, you can still learn a lesson or two. Closely watch the way your opponent puts you out of your misery. It's just a matter of time before you will get to do it to someone else. The Confusing Case of Stalemate One of the more confusing terms to a beginner is that of stalemate. A stalemate occurs when one player has no legal moves on the board but must move because it's his turn to do so. This paradox is clearly illustrated in Diagram 24. Black would love to move something but can't! All his pawns are blocked, his Knight is stuck, and his King can't move into danger. When this happens, a stalemate is declared and the game ends as a draw, or a tie. QUIZ 9. In Diagram 23, it is Black's move. Which pieces can he capture?

DIAGRAM 23.

DIAGRAM 24.

Though a stalemate has been regarded as a draw since the early 19th century, in England in the 17th and 18th centuries it counted as an "inferior" win. In Middle English, the word stale meant imitation, so stalemate meant imitation mate. Modern English language defines the word stalemate as a temporary state of impasse. But in chess, there's nothing temporary about it. Stalemate ends the game. Back in the 1600s and 1700s, many players felt that allowing a game to reach a stalemate was dishonorable. In 1614, a chess player by the name of Saul recorded his feelings about stalemates: "You shall understand that a stale is a lost game by him that giveth it, and no question to be made further thereof." Let's clarify the difference between checkmate and stalemate. In a checkmate, the King is under attack and is unable to get out of danger. In a stalemate, neither the King nor any other piece is able to move, but the King is not being attacked. The Three Phases of a Chess Game A game of chess is roughly divided into three phases: the opening, the middlegame, and the endgame. The opening consists of the first 10 to 15 moves. During this phase, both players bring out their central pawns, quickly mobilizing their Bishops and Knights and castling their Kings. During the next phase of the game, the middlegame, both players develop long-term, strategical plans and marshall their Rooks and Queens and their minor pieces for attack, counterattack, and defense. If both players survive one another's strategies, the game eventually settles down into an endgame. The transition from middlegame to endgame is sometimes hard to pinpoint. Endgames generally arise after an exchange of Queens and other major and minor pieces. Typically, endgames are played with a Bishop versus Knight, a Rook versus Rook, or a Rook and a minor piece versus a Rook and a major piece. As the endgame draws near, the strength of the pawns increases. With fewer pieces to block them, the pawns can move swiftly up the board, like wide receivers in a football game. The strength of the King also increases, and it is able to take an active part in the struggle. Fearful of checks in the opening and middlegame, the King is happy to move out in the open when few pieces are left on the board. More Moves and Rules The Enigmatic Rule of En Passant In the 13th century, if you wanted to move your pawn two squares forward and thus safely bypass an enemy pawn, you could invoke the now-forgotten law of passar battaglia, an Italian phrase meaning to dodge a fight. Nowadays, this law no longer exists, having been superseded by the last rule to be introduced into modern chess: en passant. Introduced in the 15th century and mentioned by Ruy López De Segura (c. 1530-c. 1580) in a book written in 1561, en passant was not universally accepted until 1880, when Italian players abandoned the passar battaglia law. Even today, en passant is undoubtedly the least known and the most misunderstood of all the rules of chess.

DIAGRAM 25.

QUIZ 10. In Diagram 25, White should win the game because he is one Queen ahead. Is Qf7 a good move for him here? The en passant rule states that if you have a pawn on the 5th rank (the 4th rank from Black's perspective) and an enemy pawn uses its two-square option to move past your pawn, you may capture it as if it had moved only one square. Let's look to Diagram 26 for help. If Black plays his pawn from d7 to d6, then White can capture this pawn by exd6. Realizing this, Black chooses to use his two-square option and moves his pawn from d7 to d5, apparently placing the pawn on a safe square. However, the en passant rule can now kick in, and White can still capture the pawn by exd6 e.p., just as if the pawn had moved to d6 instead of d5!

DIAGRAM 26.

One important point to note about the en passant rule is that if an enemy pawn moves two squares and goes by you, you must capture it en passant right away or lose the option. If you don't exercise the option, you can still capture another pawn en passant if the opportunity presents itself later in the game. To illustrate this point, let's go back to Diagram 26. Black has just played his pawn from d7 to d5. White chooses not to capture en passant and instead plays his pawn to d4. Now Black plays the pawn on f7 to f5, once again giving White an en passant option. White no longer can capture the d5 pawn but he can play exf6 e.p. if he wants to. Still confused? Don't panic. You will see helpful examples of this rule later in the book. QUIZ 11. In Diagram 27, if Black decides not to capture the White pawn on g5 by ...fxg5 and instead plays his pawn to f5, could White then capture the pawn en passant?

DIAGRAM 27.

The Leap of the King A composite move of the King and one of the Rooks, castling is the only rule that allows a player to move two pieces at once. Castling is allowed only if you have cleared away all the pieces that stand between the King and the Rook. There are two types of castling: Kingside and Queenside. In the case of Kingside castling, you simply move your King two squares to the right and place your Rook beside it on the left (see Diagram 28). Queenside castling is the same thing in reverse: You move your King two squares to the left and place your Rook beside it on the right (see Diagram 29). Firmly established by the 17th century, castling had existed in other forms since the 1300s. Thirteenth-century castling was quite an adventure, with the King able to leap to all sorts of unlikely places. Jacopo Da Cessole states that a King on square e1 could leap to squares c1, c2, c3, d3, e3, f3, g3, g2, and g1, or even to far away b1 or b2. In the 1400s, Luis Ramirez Lucena mentioned castling, but in a form that required two moves to complete. (The Rook was moved first as one move and then the King could leap over to the Rook on the following move.) Ruy López mentioned modern castling in his 1561 book. Today, castling is an important part of the game. Players usually opt to castle as early as possible in order to place the King in relative safety at the side of the board.

DIAGRAM 28.

DIAGRAM 29.

Here are a few more details: If you have moved your King, you can't castle-even if you move the King back to its original square. If you have not moved your King but you have moved one of your Rooks, you can castle only on the side of the unmoved Rook. You cannot castle if you are in check. You can castle on a subsequent move, but only after you get out of check. You cannot castle through check. In Diagram 30, White cannot castle because his King would move through an attacked square. (Black's Bishop on b5 controls square f1.) Black, on the other hand, can castle. It's perfectly fine for a Rook to pass through an attacked square. QUIZ 12. Can White castle on either side of Diagram 31?

DIAGRAM 30.

DIAGRAM 31.

Gardez! In the past, custom required that you warn your opponent if you attacked his Queen or Rook. It was not at all unusual to hear a well-mannered gentleman say with great seriousness, "Gardez!" Though the custom has long since died out, many amateurs are still under the impression that it is proper etiquette to warn an opponent when his Queen is attacked. In fact, if a modern tournament player issued such a warning, he would in turn be warned by the tournament director not to disturb his opponent! Touch Move and Other Rules The remaining rules don't apply to amateur chess. For example, according to the touch move rule, if it is your move and you touch a piece, you must move it. In a friendly game, this rule is not really necessary unless both players agree ahead of time to follow it. Other rules, such as draw by three-time repetition of position (which states that if the identical position occurs three times and each time the same player must move, a draw can be declared), are tournament rules that rarely apply in normal playing situations. Moreover, they have nothing to do with the way the game is actually played. An Example Game With all those rules out of the way, we can take a look at an actual. game-albeit a short one. For many of you, this may be the first time you have ever played a whole game, so do it carefully. The game is not particularly well played, but it does demonstrate the use of chess notation, the en passant and castling rules, and finally a checkmate. Work through the following moves, one by one. Then be sure that the positions of the pieces on your board are exactly the same as those in Diagram

32. If they are different, you have made a mistake in following the notation. You

should play through the game again to find out where.

1. e4 e6

2. d4 d5

3. e5 c5

4. c3 Nc6

5. Bd3 c4

6. Bc2 Nge7

7. Nh3 b6

8. O-O Bd7

9. b4 cxb3 e.p.

10. axb3 Rc8

11. Qh5 a6

12. Ng5 g6

13. Nxh7 gxh5

14. Nf6 checkmate

As you can see in Diagram 32, Black has won the White Queen but his King is in check and has nowhere to go! Black is checkmated and has lost the game. Black would have been well-advised to avoid capturing the White Queen and to instead guard against the threatened checkmate. In the games given in Chapter Six, "Annotated Games," we will discuss each of the moves, mapping out typical opening strategies and exploring the plays that might follow them.

DIAGRAM 32.

Testing Your Skills Tests help you see how well you have absorbed the information I am giving you. You will find tests sprinkled throughout the chapters. Take as much time as you need and try hard to solve each problem. If some of them give you trouble, don't get upset! Simply look at the solutions at the back of the book and review the chapter that explains that particular concept. For the first test, assume that these moves have been played:

1. e4 e5

2. f4 exf4

3. Nf3 Be7

4. Bc4 Bh4+

TEST 1. The White King is under attack. List all the ways he can get out of check. TEST 2. It is White's turn to play. Hunt down the Black Knight and capture it. TEST 3. It is White's turn to play. Play for both sides and see whether one side can make a new Queen. Remember, in chess the two sides must move in turn. TEST 4. If it is White's turn to play, can he castle on either side? If it is Black's turn to play, can he castle on either side? TEST 5. It is White's turn to play. List all the pieces that the White Knight on d4 can capture. TEST 6. Black is trailing by one piece, but he can even the score with the simple capture 1...Nxb4. Is that the best move? Or is there a better one? TEST 7. Black has only a blocked pawn, and White is tempted by the capturing move 1.Qxf7. Is this a good move? TEST 8. White is considering the move 1.Rxd7 and also 1.Nd5, which attacks the Black Queen. Is anything wrong with either move? TEST 9. It is Black's turn to play. He would like to move his Rook from f8 to an open file. Which is the better square, d8 or e8?

CHAPTER TWO

The First Principle: Force In chess, the word force does not refer to an obscure mystical concept. Nor is the concept of force difficult to understand. When I speak of force, I am referring to the strength of the pieces, either individually or in groups. For example, if you and your opponent have the same pieces on the board and you have one pawn more than your opponent, you have an advantage in force, also known as a material advantage. Gaining a material advantage is one of the best ways to win a game of chess. If you can capture all of your opponent's pieces, his King will be defenseless and your army can easily hunt it down for the big checkmate. If material is even but you have most of your army aimed at the Kingside, whereas your opponent has only a couple of defenders in that sector, then you have an advantage in force on the Kingside. Thus, you can have two kinds of advantages in force: More pieces overall. More pieces in a particular area of the board. Assigning the Pieces Numerical Values As a game progresses and pieces are traded or lost, it is not at all unusual for the armies to be left with different types of men. For example, White may have two Rooks, one Bishop, and six pawns, whereas Black may have two Rooks, one Bishop, one Knight, and three pawns. Who is ahead? The easiest way to answer this question is by using a system that assigns a numerical value to each piece. Then you can assess what each army is worth. In order of increasing importance, numerical values are assigned as follows: Pawn: 1 point. Knight: 3 points. Bishop: 3 points. Rook: 5 points. Queen: 9 points. King: Infinite value, because its loss means the loss of the game. Now we can determine whether White is ahead with two Rooks, one Bishop, and six pawns or whether Black has the edge with two Rooks, one Bishop, one Knight, and three pawns. White's two Rooks are worth 10 points, his Bishop is worth 3 points, and his six pawns are worth 6 points, for a total of 19 points. Black's two Rooks are worth 10 points, his Bishop is worth 3 points, his Knight is worth 3 points, and his three pawns are worth 3 points. Black's grand total is 19 points-exactly the same as White's! We can now see that neither side is materially ahead. Here are some typical material imbalances: A Queen (9 points) versus two Rooks (10 points): The two Rooks are favored. A Queen (9 points) and a pawn (1 point) versus a Rook (5 points), a Bishop (3 points), and a Knight (3 points): The side with the Queen has a material disadvantage with 10 points, compared with a total of 11 points for the enemy pieces. A Knight (3 points) versus three pawns (3 points): Here, neither side has an advantage. A Rook (5 points) and a pawn (1 point) versus a Bishop (3 points) and a Knight (3 points): As far as points go, it's 6 to 6-an even match. However, here is a case in which the numbers may not accurately reflect the true advantage in force. Two minor pieces (remember, Bishops and Knights are minor pieces, not pawns) are usually more active than a Rook and a pawn, especially when many other pieces are on the board. So the two minor pieces are usually considered more valuable. A Rook (5 points) versus a Bishop (3 points) and two pawns (2 points): These positions are about equal. You should now be able to figure out whether trading one of your men for one of your opponent's is favorable to you or to him, at least in terms of force. However, I must warn you against relying too heavily on numbers. Though this table of values is a useful tool, they tend to be more accurate in some types of positions than in others. In one position, three pawns may be superior to a minor piece, whereas in another position, you might well find that a Bishop or Knight completely outweighs three pawns. Thus, after assessing the material advantage in terms of points, you must always take another look at the particular position on the board to see whether it warrants getting involved in the "numbers racket." Use the values as a guide, but use your own eyes as well.

DIAGRAM 33.

QUIZ 13. In Diagram 33, it is White's turn to play. What is his most attractive move? The Romantic Style of Chess Though some uninformed people feel that there is only one correct way to play chess, the experienced chess fanatic comes to realize that every player has his or her unique style of play, each as valid as any other. Some players excel in a purely logical approach to chess, breaking each game down and analyzing it with the rigor of scientists. Others rely on delicate maneuvers and subtle positional understanding, imbuing their games with clarity and depth and rendering each game with the artistic flair of classical musicians. The style that has always appealed most to the public, though, is that of the crazed, attacking maniac. This type of player delights in sacrificing his pieces and pawns in an all- out effort to drag down the enemy King as quickly as possible. An outstanding exponent of this playing style was Frank James Marshall (1877-1944), who held the U.S. Championship from 1909 to 1935. Marshall's daring style often landed him in deep trouble, but fortune smiles on the brave. He was often able to trick his way out of difficulties and, as a result, became known as the Great Swindler. The story goes that in one game Marshall sacrificed his Queen in such a shocking way that the audience, enraptured by the beauty of his move, virtually showered him with gold pieces! Frank Marshall, the Great Swindler. How to Gain an Advantage in Force As I mentioned earlier, there are two kinds of advantages in force: more pieces overall, and more pieces in a particular area of the board. To position more pieces in a particular area of the board, you simply move all your pieces to that sector (usually the Kingside). If your opponent, meanwhile, has moved his pieces elsewhere, you will have an advantage in force in the area where your army is camped. In Diagram 34, Black's whole army has gone off to smell the roses on the Queenside. White's army stands massed and ready to destroy the enemy King. White's attack against the Black King will prove successful (the threat of Qxh7 and checkmate is unstoppable), because the poor Black King and his two defending pawns are completely outnumbered.

DIAGRAM 34.

DIAGRAM 35.

DIAGRAM 36.

QUIZ 14. In Diagram 35, it is Black's move. He would like to move his Rook from f8 to an open file. Which is better, ...Rfd8 or ...Rfe8? QUIZ 15. In Diagram 36, White has his Knight, Rook, and Bishop all aimed at the Kingside and already has an advantage in force there. How can he make that advantage even greater? It's great if you can deploy your men in one area for an attack like this one. It is even better to gain an advantage in force by simply capturing your opponent's pieces. If you succeed, you have a superior army that you can deploy anywhere, secure in the knowledge that your opponent's smaller army cannot match yours. Naturally, your opponent will try hard to prevent you from capturing his pieces, but I'm going to show you some tricks that will often fool even the most experienced players. These tricks, which are officially called tactics, include traps, threats, and schemes that are based on the calculation of variations. (I discuss the calculation of variations in Chapter Seven, "The Four Principles and You.") Basic Tactics We will now examine two basic tactics: the pin and the fork. These tactics are used so often that any student of chess must know them and know them well. The Pin The pin is a tactic in which one piece prevents an enemy piece from moving. For example, in Diagram 37 assume that the following moves have been played:

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3 d6

3. Nc3 Bg4

The White Knight on f3 is pinned by the Bishop on g4. This Knight can legally move, but doing so is hardly desirable because it results in the loss of the White Queen-for example, with 4.d4? exd4 5.Nxd4?? Bxd1. Black's material advantage should then lead to eventual victory. Instead of 4.d4?, White would do better to put the question to Black's Bishop by

DIAGRAM 37.

4. h3

because

4. ... Bxf3

5. Qxf3

leads to an even trade and ends the pin. Let's look at another example. The strongest type of pin is the pin against the King. In Diagram 38, the pinned Knight cannot legally move, because doing so exposes the Black King to attack. It is Black's turn to move. The material count is even, and White is attacking the Black Knight. Black's normal reaction would be to simply move the Knight to a safe square. However, he doesn't have that option here, because any Knight move would place the Black King in danger from the White Bishop. Black does not fear Bxc6 because he can retaliate with ...bxc6 (which amounts to an even trade), so he tries to save himself with

1. ... exd5

Now the White pawn is gone, and the Black Knight is adequately protected by the pawn on b7. Unfortunately for Black, however, White answers with

2. exd5

renewing the attack on the Knight and threatening to win with 3.dxc6. White's pin has made defense against this threat impossible.

DIAGRAM 38.

Now let's look at some ways a pin can be used to win material. The position in Diagram 39 came about after these moves:

1. e4 d5

2. exd5 Qxd5

3. Nc3

Black must now move his Queen to safety. One of the worst possible moves is to sound a retreat with

3. ... Qc6??

because White can then play

4. Bb5

pinning the Queen to its King and trading the Black Queen (9 points) for the White Bishop (3 points), a gain of 6 points!

DIAGRAM 39.

Diagram 40 shows another example. Black is doing very well in this position. He is up a Rook (5 points) for a Bishop (3 points) and a pawn (1 point), and it is his turn to play. His best plan would now be to move his King into the action by

1...Kf7 followed by 2...Ke7 and 3...Kd6. Another good idea is to activate the

Rook by playing it to the 2nd rank via 1...Rb8 and 2...Rb2. Instead, Black gets greedy and tries to win White's d5-pawn right away by grabbing with

1. ... Rxd5??

DIAGRAM 40.

White counters with

2. Bb3

The Black Rook is now pinned to his King, unable to get out of danger. After the futile

2. ... Kf8

White's response is

3. Bxd5

White is 3 points ahead and within sight of an easy win.

DIAGRAM 41.

In Diagram 41, White has a 1-point advantage in force-Bishop and Knight (6 points) versus Rook (5 points)-so things are looking rosy for him. It's Black's turn to play, and his first move is

[diagram]
This attack on the White Bishop also moves the pawn closer to its Queening square. White responds

2. Bxd4??

White has walked into a trap. If someone offers you a free pawn, always study the board carefully to figure out what trick he has in mind. In this case, White grabbed the pawn without a second thought, only to be slapped in the face with reality. Either 2.Bd2 or 2.Bf4 would have been a better move. After

2. ... Rd8

the White Bishop is pinned, because White is unable to move his Bishop without putting his King in checkmate-for example, 3.Bc3 Rd1+ 4.Be1 Rxe1 checkmate. (This type of mate is called a Back Rank Mate.) Now White threatens to move his Bishop into safety with

3. g3

because in response to any Rook check, White's King can then safely step up to g2. Unfortunately, White will not get the opportunity to run away. Black plays

3. ... Rxd4

Now Black is ahead with a 1-point advantage in force-Knight and three pawns (6 points) versus Rook and two pawns (7 points). The Fork The second basic tactic, the fork, is a simultaneous attack on two or more pieces by one enemy piece. In fact, forks are often called double attacks. Though any piece may perform a fork, the Knight is so adept at this maneuver that it could be called Mr. Fork. In Diagram 42, we can see the horrifying effect of a Knight fork. The Black King is under attack so Black must move it. However, his Queen and Rook are also under fire. Black must give up his Queen (9 points) for the Knight (3 points). After a rout like this, many beginners come to fear Knights and go out of their way to capture their opponent's horses as fast as possible. Other examples of forks are given in Tests 10 through 14 at the end of the chapter.

DIAGRAM 42.

DIAGRAM 43.

QUIZ 16. In Diagram 43, it is Black's move. Seeing that White threatens to fork him with Nc7+, Black plays 1 ...Bb8+ White answers with

2 Nc7+

blocking Black's check and imposing a check of his own! White feels that after 2...Bxc7+ 3.Rxc7, his Rook will be well placed in the endgame. Was 2.Nc7+ a good move? Laying Traps Everyone likes the idea of trapping his opponent. Picture the following: You are in the middle of a long, hard struggle with your nemesis, Pit-Bull Hogan. The game has been even for a long time, when suddenly you seem to have made a grave error! Pit-Bull triumphantly captures your Queen, a snarl on his lips and a triumphant gleam in his eyes. He looks for signs of the panic that he knows you must be feeling. Instead, you calmly make your move and call "Checkmate!" Doesn't that victory taste sweet? Of course it does! However, I must burst your bubble with a dire warning. Don't play for traps! Always make moves that deploy your men in a way that helps your position generally. Never play a move that puts you in either of the following emotionally charged situations: Your opponent doesn't see your trap and loses horribly. He sees your trap and counters in such a way that your position falls apart. I'm not saying you shouldn't lay a trap, only that you should be sure your position won't be compromised if your opponent avoids the trap. On occasion, you will find yourself facing an opponent who stumbles into one opening trap after another. On other occasions, your opponent will be the one who is baiting the hook. To successfully trap or avoid being trapped, you must have some familiarity with the basic types of traps: those aimed at weak pawns, those aimed at undefended pieces, and those that batter the King's bodyguards. A Pair of Weaklings The first type of trap is based on the weakness of the pawns on squares f7 and f2. In the opening phase of a game, the f7-pawn becomes a major target of White's attack. Black must be very careful that catastrophe does not strike him on that square. Equally, White must be careful about the pawn on square f2. These pawns are particularly vulnerable because they are protected only by Kings, in contrast with the other pawns in front of the Kings. The Black pawns on both d7 and e7, for example, are protected by four pieces. White would like nothing better than to penetrate the line through f7 and launch a major offensive against the enemy monarch. On the following pages are some typical ways of taking advantage of the weakness of the f7- and f2-pawns. Scholar's Mate:

1. e4 e5

2. Bc4 Nc6

3. Qh5 Nf6??

4. Qxf7 checkmate

Very nice, but what if Black had seen White's threat of checkmate and had taken defensive measures? Instead of 3...Nf6??, Black should have played 3...g6. Then White would play 4.Qf3. (White deserves credit for perseverance! He would once again threaten checkmate on f7.) Then Black would play 4...Nf6 and, instead of the result shown in Diagram 44, all would be well. I can't recommend the Scholar's Mate tactic, because if Black sees the threat (and he usually will), the White Queen will have developed too early and will, as a result, lose time as it runs away from Black's pieces. This concept is discussed in more detail in Chapter Three, "The Second Principle: Time."

DIAGRAM 44.

Legall's Mate:

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3 d6

3. Nc3 g6

4. Bc4 Bg4?

Black has tied down White's Knight on f3 with a pin. However, his Bishop is undefended on g4 and White's army is better developed. White can now launch a surprise attack against square f7.

5. Nxe5!!

White seems to have gone berserk! Black should now limit his losses and play 5...dxe5, to which White would respond 6.Qxg4. However, instead of losing a pawn, Black eats White's Queen -as most people would:

5. ... Bxd1?

So Black captures a Queen. But now Black's pawn on f7 falls and White's attack crashes through:

6. Bxf7+ Ke7

7. Nd5 checkmate

As Diagram 45 shows, Black ate too much and got heartburn.

DIAGRAM 45.

The Case of the Undefended Piece The second type of trap is known as a discovery, or a discovered attack. Discovered attacks are usually directed at undefended pieces. Any undefended piece is subject to loss and must be carefully watched. Some examples of ways to use undefended pieces for setting traps include the following. The Excommunicated Bishop:

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3 d6

3. Bc4 Nc6

4. Nc3 Bg4

5. O-O

The Legall's Mate move, 5.Nxe5, would not work here because Black can play

5...Nxe5! to prevent the checkmate and defend the Bishop on g4.

Next, Black plays

5. ... Nge7??

He would do better to play 5...Nf6, simply defending the Bishop on g4.

6. Bxf7+! Kxf7

7. Ng5+

The Knight checks, thereby uncovering a Queen attack on the Black Bishop-a perfect example of a discovered attack.

7. ... Ke8

8. Qxg4

DIAGRAM 46.

White has now gained a pawn. The final position is shown in Diagram 46. When you first start playing chess, you should be very careful about snatching pawns in the opening. Your Queen can often get caught dipping her hand into the cookie jar, as you'll see in the next example. The Queen That Never Came Home:

1. e4 d5

2. exd5 Qxd5

3. Nc3 Qd8

4. d4 e6

5. Bd3 Qxd4??

Black thinks that White has overlooked a pawn but a surprise is in store.

6. Bb5+!

As you can see in Diagram 47, White has initiated a discovered attack on Black's Queen. Because Black is in check, he can do nothing to defend the Queen. Note that 6...Nc6 would not help, because after 7.Qxd4, the Black Knight would be pinned by the Bishop to his King and would be unable to make a capture. Discovered attacks on far-flung pieces are common traps, and you need to understand them completely in order to foil them. At this point, though, you should concentrate on recognizing the danger of allowing an advancing piece to go undefended. The Battering Ram The final type of trap is based on dismantling the enemy King's cover, otherwise known as playing for a devastating check. Having the skills to blaze a trail to the enemy King is important. Sometimes, however, your opponent cooperates before you can display your skills. Probably the most famous example of an opened-up King is the Fool's Mate. Fool's Mate:

1. f4

This move is called the Bird Opening.

[diagram]
2. g4??

For no reason whatsoever White has opened up his own King to attack on the e1-h4 diagonal.

2. ... Qh4 checkmate

Diagram 48 shows the horrifying result.

DIAGRAM 47.

DIAGRAM 48.

Let's look at another example of how you can blast through the enemy's defenses:

1. f4 e5

2. fxe5

With this second move, White avoids 2.g3 exf4 3.gxf4?? Qh4 checkmate.

[diagram]
Black is not tempted by 2...Qh4+, which would be adequately countered by 3.g3, when Black's Queen must retreat.

3. exd6 Bxd6

Black has sacrificed a pawn so that he can obtain a lead in development. This type of deliberate sacrifice in the opening is called a gambit.

4. Nc3??

Oops. White didn't see the threat. He should have played 4.Nf3, which would develop a piece and prevent ...Qh4+, Black's next move.

4. ... Qh4+

5. g3 Qxg3+!!

6. hxg3 Bxg3 checkmate

The final position is shown in Diagram 49. It should now be clear to you why the King is not safe in his starting position and why I recommend that you castle as quickly as possible. There is one more type of trap I'd like you to look at.

DIAGRAM 49.

The Cheap Check:

1. e4 c6

2. d4 d5

3. Nc3 dxe4

4. Nxe4 Nd7

5. Qe2 Ngf6

6. Nd6 checkmate

As you can see in Diagram 50, the Black King has no way to get out of check, and he cannot capture the rude Knight because the pawn on e7 is pinned by the White Queen. This maneuver is called a Smothered Mate. Looks great, doesn't it? Why, then, do I call it a cheap check? Because if Black sees the threat, White's fifth move (Qe2) would prove to be a liability. Let's say that after 5.Qe2 Black says to himself, "Aha! I see what he's up to. I won't let him do that to me!" Black then plays 5...Ndf6 while his Queen guards square d6 and unveils an attack against the d4-pawn. QUIZ 17. In Diagram 51, it is White's turn to move. He is tempted to play 1.Nc4 in spite of the strong threat of 2.Nd6 checkmate. Is this a good move?

DIAGRAM 50.

DIAGRAM 51.

The defects of White's fifth move are then clear: White has taken a defender away from d4 and blocked his Bishop on f1. The moral: Never make a move with the thought, "I hope he doesn't see it." The King Plays in the Endgame Having played all the crushing checkmates described in the preceding pages, you understand why players castle quickly and hide their Kings. All the hard work is left to the rest of the army. Unless your opponent attacks your King, it becomes easy to forget that you even have one. In the first two phases of a game (the opening and the middlegame), the King is for the most part a liability. However, in the third phase (the endgame), the King takes its place as a fighting piece of great power. Sensing that victory is near, the King steps out of hiding and leads its remaining army in its last battle. It finally adopts the mantle of responsibility. How can the King afford to step out? Why is the King now safe? Though beginners may feel intimidated by the endgame, in top-flight chess endgame skill is very important, and players take every opportunity to cultivate it. The endgame is a phase in which most of the pieces have been lost or traded. It stands to reason that once the board has been cleared of King-eating piranhas, his majesty can safely take a stroll. The King is particularly safe when only pawns are left. So it pays to always keep in mind that the King is a powerful piece and that you should bring the King into play as soon as you can safely do so. Material Advantage in the Endgame It's late at night. You've been sitting at the same board for hours, but you know it's all going to be worthwhile. You are playing your archenemy and the game has been going very well for you. Even though your opponent has traded virtually all his pieces, you are still a whole Queen ahead. "This should be easy," you think. Frustration, however, is going to be your midnight snack tonight. It turns out that no matter what you do, you just can't checkmate his King. It happens all the time. It's no use playing a good opening and gaining a material advantage in the middlegame if you don't know how to win from there! With just two endgame strategies up your sleeve, you should be able to win almost every game if you are ahead by a Rook or more. These strategies are of great importance simply because the circumstances under which you can use them occur so often. I recommend that you make an effort to learn them as thoroughly as possible. The two endgames are: King and Queen versus lone King. King and Rook versus lone King. King and Queen versus Lone King With practice, the endgame strategy I'm about to describe will become easy for you, but only if you bear in mind two important facts: White cannot checkmate Black with the White Queen alone. White's King must trek across the board and assist in the execution. Checkmate with a King and Queen can be accomplished only at the board's edge. From Diagram 52, White proceeds with the endgame as follows:

1. Qb5

DIAGRAM 52.

DIAGRAM 53.

With this move, White is trapping the Black King in a "box" (see Diagram 53). The box method of checkmating is easiest, though slightly faster methods are also possible. The strategy here is to make the box smaller and smaller. After White's Queen has trapped the Black King on the back rank, White's King will march over and assist the Queen as it delivers the death blow. Meanwhile, Black is still struggling to find a way out:

1. ... Ke6

If Black plays 1...Kc7, White tightens the noose with 2.Qa6. In this case, White plays

2. Qc5

and squeezes Black a bit more. White avoided playing 2.Qc6+?, because a response of 2...Ke5 from Black would allow the Black King more room. Instead, Black plays

2. ... Kf6

Other possible moves are 2...Kd7 and 3.Qb6, both of which lead to the same type of play. White's response is

3. Qd5

Notice that White does not lose track of his goals by uselessly checking his opponent. Instead, he calmly continues with his space-gaining strategy. There is nothing Black can do. He must give ground.

3. ... Kg6

White could move his King up at any time, but he continues the Queen's siege:

4. Qe5

And Black continues the King's retreat:

4. ... Kf7

If Black plays 4...Kh6, White would play 5.Qg3, thus trapping the Black King on the edge of the board. Then White would march his King to f6 and checkmate would follow. In this case, however, White plays

5. Qd6

Now Black is trapped on the last two ranks:

5. ... Kg7

He is rapidly running out of breathing room.

6. Qe6

Black is now forced to go to the edge of the board.

6. ... Kh7

If Black plays 6...Kf8, White would respond 7.Qd7, which would then lead to the same type of play.

7. Qg4

As Diagram 54 shows, White has achieved the first part of his goal and the Black King is trapped on the side of the board. Now that Black is completely helpless (he can move his King only to h6, h7, or h8), White can quietly move his King across the board to square f6.

7. ... Kh6

8. Kb2

DIAGRAM 54.

As the King finally starts on its journey, Black plays his only legal move.

8. ... Kh7

9. Kc3 Kh8

10. Kd4

White must be very careful to avoid a stalemate. For example, 10.Qg6?? would have put a smile on Black's face.

10. ... Kh7

11. Ke5 Kh8

12. Kf6 Kh7

13. Qg7 checkmate

Practice this endgame as often as you can, and you will find that you'll master it quickly. Remember, the goal of this simple technique is to avoid useless checks and drive your opponent's King to the edge of the board. King and Rook versus Lone King Because the Rook is weaker than the Queen, it stands to reason that a King-Rook alliance will have more difficulty achieving a checkmate. As with the previous example, White must drive the Black King to the edge of the board. In this case, however, the task can only be carried out with the combined efforts of both the King and the Rook. Diagram 55 shows the starting positions. White makes his move:

1. Kb2

Here are a couple of basic principles to keep in mind: White should move his King as close as possible to the Black King (one square apart) and only then should he use his Rook; and Black should try to keep his King in the middle of the board, because it is impossible for White to checkmate him there.

1. ... Kd4

DIAGRAM 55.

An inferior move is 1...Kc4, to which White would respond 2.Rd1!, trapping the Black King on the a-, b-, and c-files. In this case, White plays

2. Kc2

Note how the White King is taking squares c3 and d3 away from his Black counterpart.

2. ... Ke4

Once again, 2...Kc4 would have been met by 3.Rd1, and the Black King would have lost ground faster than necessary. White continues pushing Black back with his King.

3. Kc3 Ke5

Another possibility for Black is 3...Ke3, though this move would make White's task somewhat easier by setting up the sequence 4.Re1+ Kf2 5.Re4 Kf3 6.Kd3. As things are, White's King is positioned just as well as Black's, and it's time for the White Rook to join in the fight.

4. Kc4 Ke4

If Black played 4...Ke6, White would cut off the Black King with 5.Rb5. Here, White plays

5. Re1+

A Rook check is always strong when the Kings face off, because the checked King is thereby forced to relinquish ground.

5. ... Kf5

An interesting moment: White would like to have the Kings face off as they did a move ago. However, if White plays 6.Kd5, Black could slip away from the face-off with 6...Kf4.

6. Kd4

By playing his King to d4, White invites Black to step into a face-off with

6...Kf4 so that White can play 7.Rf1+ and keep forcing Black toward the edge of

the board (see Diagram 56). The following moves would be 7...Kg5 8.Ke4 Kg6

9.Ke5 Kg5 10.Rg1+ Kh4 11.Kf5 (as before, the White King would avoid facing

off with the Black King, waiting for Black to step into the face-off) 11...Kh3 (Black would have no choice, because 11...Kh5 12.Rh1 is checkmate) 12.Kf4 Kh2 13.Rg3 (making a cage) 13...Kh1 14.Kf3 Kh2 15.Kf2 Kh1 16.Rh3 checkmate. White must avoid 16.Rg2??, which would result in a draw by stalemate.

DIAGRAM 56.

However, Black ignores the invitation and avoids the face-off:

6. ... Kf6

7. Re5

Black is now caught in the small cage shown in Diagram 57, but he keeps on struggling:

7. ... Kg6

White hastens to get his King closer to Black's:

8. Ke4 Kf6

9. Kf4

DIAGRAM 57.

White must avoid the hasty 9.Rf5+?, which allows Ke6 and increases Black's ability to scamper.

9. ... Kf7

The cage would also get smaller with 9...Kg6 10.Rf5.

10. Kf5

The White King has taken squares f6 and g6 away from the Black King.

10. ... Kg7

11. Re7+

The Black King has been successfully forced to the side of the board. However, the only way that White can put the Black King in checkmate is to force the Kings to face off. Then a Rook check will produce checkmate, because the Black King will be unable to go backward or forward without moving into the White King's sphere of control. Black's only hope is to avoid the face-off with

11. ... Kf8

A worse move is 11...Kh6, because White would not play 12.Kf6?, leading to

12...Kh5 13.Kf5 Kh4. After 11...Kh6, White would simply waste a move with

12.Rd7 (12.Rf7 or anywhere else along the 7th rank would be just as good), and

Black would be forced to move his King into the unwanted face-off situation with 12...Kh5. After White has achieved the face-off, 13.Rh7 would be checkmate.

12. Kf6 Kg8

13. Kg6 Kf8

Black obviously does not want his King to be in front of the White King. White now steps back a bit and forces Black to walk toward his doom:

14. Re6 Kg8

15. Re8 checkmate

The King-Rook maneuver may seem difficult at first, but the combination occurs often. Take a little time to master it, and your nights of frustration will become evenings of glee!

DIAGRAM 58.

QUIZ 18. In Diagram 58, can the White King and Bishop win? Could White win if you replaced the Bishop with a Knight? Preference or Principle: A Fine Line By now, you know that a Rook has more force than a Knight and that a Bishop has more force than a pawn. However, you must keep your mind open enough to recognize situations in which you should bend these principles. It is not at all unusual for players to become infatuated with a particular aspect of the game and to make a point of playing for it in one contest after another, usually to their detriment. One example of this type of mania was seen in the Grandmaster David Janowski (1868-1927). Frank Marshall, a good friend of Janowski, wrote: "He had little foibles about the kind of game he liked-his weakness for the two Bishops was notorious-and he could be tremendously stubborn. Janowski could follow the wrong path with more determination than any man I met! He was also something of a dandy and quite vain about his appearance." David Janowski, the stubborn Grandmaster. Janowski loved playing with two Bishops. This love became a liability because his opponents learned to offer him the two Bishops, but only at considerable cost in terms of his other pieces! Giving in to temptation led Janowski to make mistakes, while resisting temptation was frustrating for the lover of the Bishops. It is small wonder that U.S. players for many years called the two Bishops the two Jans. When Less Is More In many instances in chess, a weaker piece proves to have more force than a piece with greater numerical value. Diagram 59 is a case in point. White is to play. If it were Black's move, or if the pawn were on any square other than b7 or d7, White would have a losing position. But here, the pawn is better than the Rook. That news should come as only a small surprise. The big surprise is that after 1.dxc8, White will do better to promote the pawn to a Rook than to a Queen, because after 1.dxc8=Q, Black is stalemated. (Promotion to anything other than a Queen is a tactic called underpromotion.) Promoting the pawn to a Rook allows 1...Kb7, resulting in one of the endgames that you have just learned how to win. Try playing through the moves for practice.

DIAGRAM 59.

DIAGRAM 60.

Generalities are useful in chess. However, the specifics of a position determine whether a particular principle applies. Diagram 60 shows another example of underpromotion. Here, Black is a Queen ahead, but it is White's turn to move. White can promote his pawn to a Queen, thereby regaining material equality. Instead, White promotes to the numerically inferior Knight, calling check and forking Black's King and Queen. After 1.c8=N+ Kb8 2.Nxe7, White is left with an extra Knight. He promotes his other pawn to a Queen, and the win is easy. Tests TEST 10. It is Black's move and he would like to get the Knight on f8 into the game. He is considering 1...Ne6 and 1...Ng6. Which move would you choose? TEST 11. It is White's turn to play. What is White's best move here? TEST 12. It is Black's turn to play. What is Black's best move? TEST 13. It is White's turn to play. What is White's best move? TEST 14. It is Black's move. What would you do in Black's position?

CHAPTER THREE

The Second Principle: Time In this chapter, I'm going to talk about the second principle of chess, time. Though some chess games are timed (see "Chess Timers" in Chapter One, "The Evolution of Chess"), the second principle has nothing to do with clocks. An advantage in time denotes a situation in which you can bring your pieces to a particular part of the board faster than your opponent can. Think about it. Would you rather have your forces huddled on their starting squares or have them mobilized in the middle of the board, ready to charge to any needy area? Let's put it another way: You are fighting a battle on Mars. If your forces are still on Earth, you can expect to lose the battle by default. On the other hand, if your army is just a few thousand miles away, then you can expect to arrive at the scene in time. Proximity immeasurably increases your chances for victory. Time in Action In many ways, the concepts of time and force are similar. Having a time advantage usually means that you have enough force available to stop an enemy assault.

DIAGRAM 61.

In Diagram 61, Black's army is nicely mobilized. His Rook on c8 controls the c-file, while his Bishop and Queen eye the Queenside. It is White's turn to move. White might decide to launch a Kingside attack by 1.Ng5, threatening Qxh7 checkmate. Can Black defend himself? Black can successfully stop White's threat of checkmate because he has time to bring defenders to the Kingside. Note that whereas White has only his Queen and the Knight on g5 to attack with, Black can defend with his pawns on f7, g7, and h7, his Bishop on d7, his Rook on f8, and his Knights on e7 and e8. Additionally, Black's King defends the pawns on h7, g7, and f7, as well as the Rook on f8. After 1.Ng5, Black can stop the checkmate with either 1...h6 (which also attacks the White Knight) or 1...Nf6 (which guards h7 and attacks the White Queen). This latter move gains time because it forces White to move his Queen out of danger. If White plays 2.Qh4, then 2...Ng6 brings another Black piece to the Kingside and attacks the White Queen again-resulting in another gain of time as White is forced to get his Queen out of danger. Obviously, White's Kingside attack never has a chance, because he is outgunned on the Kingside. By gaining time with threats to the White Queen, Black is able to marshall a Kingside defense. White's attacking pieces will be routed. A time advantage can also refer to an advantage in force that enables your men to blast through your opponent's defenses. Take a look at Diagram 62. Look familiar? The principal difference between this diagram and Diagram 61 is that both the h-pawns are gone. Black no longer has the defensive pawn on h7 and White's Rook is no longer blocked by the pawn on h2. As a result, the White Rook joins the attack. The fact that White has gained an important attacker while Black has lost an important defender gives White a winning advantage. After

1.Qh5, the dual threats of 2.Qh7+ and 2.Qh8+ will lead to checkmate.

DIAGRAM 62.

DIAGRAM 63.

QUIZ 19. In Diagram 63, it is White's turn to play. Whose attack is faster? The Attack of the Berserker Beginning chess players tend to want to checkmate their opponent as quickly as possible. Like berserkers-ancient Scandinavian warriors who worked themselves up into battle frenzies-they often move out two pieces and charge the enemy position. If the assault results in checkmate, then well and good. If their opponent fends off the attacking pieces, capturing them or pushing them back to their own territory, then likely as not, berserkers will bring out two more men and charge again. Waves of attack continue until one side or the other wins the game. The berserker will lose many games until he realizes that two men are rarely enough to overpower the whole enemy army. Don't be a berserker. Instead, get all your pieces out and go after your opponent with everything you've got. Development: One Key to a Time Advantage Development-the process of moving one's pieces from their starting posts to new and more effective positions-is an extremely important way to measure time. Let's have a look at the first few moves of a typical opening:

1. e4

White's move controls the important d5 central square and frees the Queen and f1-Bishop.

[diagram]
Black is also fighting for the center! He puts pressure on square d4 and frees his f8-Bishop and Queen.

2. Nf3

White develops a Knight. On g1, the Knight threatened nothing and controlled only three squares (e2, f3, and h3). Now the Knight counters Black's control of square d4, attacks Black's e5-pawn, and has eight squares (e1, g1, h2, h4, g5, e5, d4, and d2) within its sphere of control. Without a doubt, White has improved the position of this Knight.

2. ... Nc6

Black also develops his Knight. It previously controlled only squares a6, c6, and d7. Now it eyes eight squares: b8, d8, e7, e5, d4, b4, a5, and a7. Black continues to put pressure on the d4 central square and also guards his e5- pawn!

3. Bc4

White increases the sphere of control of this Bishop from five squares-e2, d3, c4, b5, and a6-to a hefty ten squares-f1, e2, d3, b5, a6, a2, b3, d5, e6, and f7. (Remember, a piece is not considered to control the square it sits on.) White also continues to fight for the center by jabbing at d5. Other virtues of the 3.Bc4 move: It makes Black's King uncomfortable because the Bishop is now eyeing the delicate f7-pawn, and it allows White to castle on his next move if he wants to.

3. ... Bc5

Black also makes his Bishop stronger, and he puts a third man on the d4 brigade. (The Knight on c6, the pawn on e5, and the Bishop on c5 all attack square d4.) Black intends to move the g8-Knight so that he can clear the back rank and castle. Note how both sides have avoided moving their Queens so that other pieces cannot attack them and gain time. So far, both sides have moved logically, steering undeveloped pieces toward the center. They will not consider launching an attack until their Kings are safely castled and the rest of their men have been brought out. What if White now moved his c4-Bishop again, playing 4.Be2? Is that a good move? No. It is weak, because it moves an already developed piece when other men are begging to be brought into the fight! One Move per Piece This brings us to a very useful principle: Don't move a piece twice in the opening. Only when all your pieces are developed should you move one of them a second time, in an effort to build up a decisive attack. When you move the same piece twice in the opening, you lose time. To White's move of 4.Be2, Black would reply 4...Nf6. As Diagram 64 shows, Black would then have brought out three pieces (not counting his pawns) to White's two! This gaff is called losing a tempo (one unit of time-the plural is tempi). You should make every effort to avoid situations that lead to the loss of tempi. The following game example should be enough to serve as a warning to those of you who may be feeling that the loss of a tempo or two is unimportant and hardly worth worrying about:

DIAGRAM 64.

1. e4 d5

Black's move is called the Center Counter Defense. Though it attacks White's pawn on e4 and frees the Queen and the c8-Bishop, this move is generally considered inferior because it leads to a loss of time. Next, White plays

2. exd5

Is he violating the principle of not moving a piece twice in the opening? Yes, but in this case White has a good reason. By capturing Black's pawn, White temporarily wins material (a pawn is 1 point). Not wanting to be behind in material so early in the game, Black will also move to capture a pawn, thereby violating the principle of not bringing out the Queen too early! With the early development of Black's Queen, White will regain the loss of time that resulted from moving his pawn twice.

2. ... Qxd5

The material balance is once again even.

3. Nc3

White's Knight moves to a nice central post, from which it controls the e4 and d5 squares and increases its own radius of power. White also gains time by attacking the Black Queen, which must move again. You see now why you should not develop a Queen too early. Black's reaction is

3. ... Qe5+?

Black thinks he is attacking with his Queen. Though a check is always tempting, leaving the Queen in the center leads to a further loss of time. A safer square for the Black Queen would have been a5, where White's pieces could not immediately attack her. White plays

4. Be2

stopping the check and developing the Bishop.

4. ... Nc6

Black has finally developed a second piece! White does not give him time to do it again:

5. Nf3

With this move, White brings out another piece and gains more time, because Black's Queen is now under fire. Black responds with another horrible move:

5. ... Qc5?

He had to move his Queen, but he should have made an effort to get away from the White pieces. 5...Qa5 was called for, but even this move leaves Black way behind in development.

6. d4

White gains more time by another attack on the poor Black Queen! Moreover, the pawn move is worthwhile because it helps to control the e5 central square and frees the c1-Bishop.

6. ... Qd6

7. Nb5!

With such a big lead in development, White can justify moving the same piece twice. Anyway, this play does not result in a loss of tempo, because Black must once again move his tormented Queen:

7. ... Qb4+

Black tries to find sanctuary in a check. A quiet move like 7...Qd8 would have allowed 8.Bf4, developing the White Bishop to an aggressive post. The attack on the c7-pawn would then leave Black helpless to prevent a loss of material. White plays

8. Bd2

A move like 8.c3 would also stop the check, but White consistently, and correctly, brings another piece-rather than a pawn-into play.

8. ... Qxb2

Black takes a pawn, miserably opening the way for 9.Nxc7+ followed by

10.Nxa8. White declines the easy win and instead opts to heap more indignities

upon the Black Queen:

9. Bc3!

As you can see in Diagram 65, the Queen is now trapped. White's whole army is ready for battle, while the lazy Black forces are still asleep at home. Black gives up, or, in official terms, he resigns. Going for a Gambit At times, one side (more often White) opens the game with a gambit. A gambit is a voluntary sacrifice of a piece or pawn in the opening, with the idea of a lead in development and a subsequent attack as compensation.

DIAGRAM 65.

Let's have a look at a common gambit.

1. e4 e5

2. d4

Having freed the f1-Bishop with his first move, White now frees his other Bishop. The threat of dxe5 and the loss of a pawn forces Black to react:

2. ... exd4

Black has moved his pawn twice in the opening, hoping that White will now play 3.Qxd4 so that he can respond with 3...Nc6, thereby developing a piece and attacking the White Queen. This strategy would gain time for Black, because White would be forced to move his Queen a second time. However, White has no intention of regaining his lost material:

3. c3!?

Black now moves the pawn a third time!

3. ... dxc3

Black feels compelled to prevent White from capturing the pawn with cxd4. He is obviously breaking the rules. However, White is also going against conventional wisdom by losing material right at the beginning of the game!

4. Bc4

White ignores the impudent pawn and instead rushes to develop his pieces as quickly as possible.

4. ... cxb2

Black moves the pawn a fourth time! However, this move makes sense. Even if White captures the pawn, Black will still be two points ahead.

5. Bxb2

Now White must take the pawn or the pawn will capture the Rook on a1 and turn into a Queen!

DIAGRAM 66.

DIAGRAM 67.

Let's summarize this position (see Diagram 66). White has a substantial lead in development. He hopes to use that lead to blow Black off the board. For his part, Black is two pawns (2 points) ahead. If he can now develop his pieces and catch up with White's development, Black will have a free-and-clear material advantage. As is typical of such gambits, the battle will rage fiercely for the next few moves. White will try hard to pick a fight and kill Black by dint of superior mobilization. Black will ignore White's provocations as much as possible and get his forces out as quickly as he can. A tough and interesting battle will result. You'll find typical plays for similar gambit positions in Chapter Six, "Annotated Games." QUIZ 20. In Diagram 67, it is Black's move. He is already a pawn ahead and is just dying to eat the White pawn on a2. Would capturing the pawn be a good idea? Discovering Positional Chess In the early 1800s, people played chess in one of two simple ways: Either they attacked or they defended. The year 1857 saw the unveiling of a new strategy. That was the year that Paul Morphy (1837-84) of New Orleans won the first American Chess Congress. On the strength of that success, he decided to go to Europe to challenge the world's greatest players. One year later, he had defeated everyone who was brave enough to accept his challenge. Clearly the best player in the world, he returned home to New Orleans and retired from chess. In his final years, he withdrew from society and suffered delusions of persecution. He would eat food prepared only by his mother, and at night he would form a large circle on the ground with women's shoes and dance around them! He died of a stroke at age 47, while taking a bath. What made Morphy a superior chess player? Morphy was the first player to appreciate the value of development. While his opponents would bring out two or three pieces and start a berserker-style attack, Morphy would quietly defend against their threats, develop his whole army, and then shatter their defenses with his greater force. Paul Morphy, development genius. Using a Time Advantage An advantage in development is only a temporary advantage. If, after developing all your pieces, you find yourself with a lead in development, you must attack with great verve and try to make use of the superior force at your disposal. In Diagram 68, Black has a terrible position. His King is still in the center and most of his army is sitting at home. White, on the other hand, has done everything right. His King is safely castled, and, as a result, he is able to use his Rook to guard his strong, cramping (restricting) center pawn on e5. All of White's army is developed and is fighting for the critical central squares. Because of his enormous lead in development, White should try to burst through Black's pawn position and get at the Black King. In line with this strategy, White charges into enemy territory, secure in the knowledge that the greater force he can mobilize should prove decisive:

DIAGRAM 68.

1. Ng5!

White threatens to win a pawn by 2.Nxh7 (the Bishop on d3 would guard the Knight) or 2.Qf3. Black will have difficulty defending his pawn on f7. Here's one possible play sequence: 1...h5? (which guards the h7-pawn but wastes time and gives White a free hand to do anything else that crosses his mind) 2.Qf3 Nf5 (2...f6 3.Nxe6 would cost the lady) 3.Bxf5 exf5 4.exd6+ (discovered check by the Rook on e1) and Black is dead. This scenario shows what can happen when a Rook comes into play down an open file. (An open file is one that is free of pawns.) Rooks love open files. Position your Rooks on open files and watch your opponent's position fry! Black tries an alternative play:

[diagram]
A logical move. Black gets his pawn out of danger and gains time by attacking the White Knight on g5. Under normal circumstances, this move might prove effective, but White's lead in development is so great that White's army manages to come crashing through:

2. Nxe6!!

As you can see in Diagram 69, White is offering up a sacrifice in order to tear down the protective wall around Black's King. Though White will lose his Knight (3 points) for a mere pawn (1 point), he feels that opening up the Black King will eventually enable him to checkmate it. Because the King has an unlimited value, sacrificing a Knight (and any number of other pieces) for a King always turns out to be a great trade! Black has no choice but to accept the offering:

2. ... fxe6

White threatens to capture the Black Queen with his Knight, so the rude horse must be taken out of action. White responds with

3. Qh5+

Notice how all of White's moves are forcing moves. By playing in this fashion, White denies Black the option of developing more of his pieces. Instead, Black is reduced to reacting to White's threats.

DIAGRAM 69.

DIAGRAM 70.

[diagram]
Forced (3...Ng6 loses the Knight).

4. Bxg6+ Nxg6

5. Qxg6+ Ke7

Do you see how White can win from this position? Take some time to study Diagram 70 and try to figure out the plays.

6. exd6+

This move blasts open the e-file and allows the White Rook on e1 to join in the attack. This teamwork is an important concept. White's attack is successful because he has many pieces that can work together to bully the Black King. (An even prettier way of opening the e-file would be the sacrifice 6.Nd5+!! exd5

7.exd6 double check and checkmate! Notice how strong a double check can be.

White would attack the Black King with both his Rook and the d6-pawn. Such a double attack often allows no escape.)

6. ... Kxd6

QUIZ 21. If you can win a pawn but your King is in the center and you are behind in development, should you: Go after the material. Bring your Queen into combat. Ignore the pawn, develop your forces, and try to castle as quickly as possible. If Black plays 6...cxd6 instead, White would have the pleasant choice between

7.Qxe6 checkmate or 7.Nd5 checkmate. The latter is possible because of the pin

on the e-pawn by the Rook on e1. As it is, White can still deliver the death blow:

7. Rxe6 checkmate

Mission accomplished. The King is dead; long live the King! Tests TEST 15. It is White's turn to play. White wants to attack the Black King, so he plays 1.Qf3. Should Black be concerned with White's attack? TEST 16. This is the position after 1.e3 e5 2.Qh5 (attacking the e5-pawn) 2...Nc6

3.Bc4. White is already attacking and threatens to win right away with 4.Qxf7

checkmate. Is it time for Black to panic?

CHAPTER FOUR

The Third Principle: Space So far, I have discussed winning by vicious attacks and winning by the more mundane (but highly effective) method of simply capturing all your opponent's pieces. Now it's time to address another method: squeezing your opponent to death. To squeeze an opponent, you must first acquire a significant advantage in space. When you have an advantage in space, you control more territory than your opponent. Your pieces have more squares to choose from than the enemy pieces, which are severely restricted in their movements. By applying the principle of space, you can win a game by taking so much space away from your opponent that all he can do is pace back and forth in his little cell, waiting for you to proceed with the execution. The Space Count System The space count system enables you to count the squares your pieces and pawns control to determine whether you or your opponent controls more territory. At the beginning of a game, the board is more or less divided in half. White is said to own the squares in the a1-a4-h4-h1 rectangle. Black owns everything in the a8-a5-h5-h8 rectangle. The space count system kicks in when one of you goes beyond these "personal" squares and starts to take control of territory in the enemy's domain.

DIAGRAM 71.

DIAGRAM 72.

Let's look at an example from the game between Yasser Seirawan and Bruno Belloti, played in Lugano in 1988. In Diagram 72, who controls more space? Let's count the squares to find out. White's Bishop breaks into Black's territory on g5 and h6: two squares. His Knight on c3 attacks squares b5 and d5: two more squares for a total space count of 4 so far. (Squares e4 and a4 don't count, because they are already considered part of White's territory. We are interested only in squares beyond the 4th rank). The White Queen hits d5 and h5: two more squares, which brings the total space count to 6. That's it for White's pieces. Now we look at the White pawns. The pawn on d5 controls c6 and e6. The total is now 8. (Remember, a man does not control the square it sits on, so this pawn does not control d5.) The only other man that stabs into Black's territory is the pawn on e4, which controls d5 and f5. Adding 2 to 8 gives us a total space count of 10. Next, we'll count Black's squares. His Rook on a8 hits a big three enemy squares: a4, a3, and a2. His Knight on f6 hits two: e4 and g4. So far we have a total space count of 5. No other Black pieces can lash out at squares in White's territory, so let's turn our attention to his pawns. The only pawn that can stake a claim in White's space is the pawn on c5, which controls b4 and d4. Black's total is 7. Therefore, White has a space count advantage of 3. Of course, space is just one of the factors to be considered when evaluating this position. Other factors are White's King has moved and is thus unable to castle. White is a pawn (1 point) ahead. Black has one pawn island, whereas White has two. (Pawn islands are described in Chapter Five, 'The Fourth Principle: Pawn Structure.") After Black castles and moves his Rook to the b-file, both of his Rooks will sit on half-open files and be able to attack the White pawns on a2 and b2. Neither of White's Rooks will sit on equivalently active files. In this game, both sides had factors working in their favor. Because of White's space advantage, I was glad to be playing White from this position. QUIZ 22. In Diagram 73, who is ahead in the space count? What is the count for each side?

DIAGRAM 73.

The Invincible Capablanca Though most people love to look at the games of the great attacking masters, some of the most successful players in history have been the quiet positional players. These players slowly grind you down by taking away your space, tying up your pieces, and leaving you with virtually nothing to do! Of all the great positional players, probably the most feared was the Cuban genius Jose Raul Capablanca (1888-1942), a man considered in his prime to be virtually unbeatable. Possessing a simple and clear style, Capablanca was particularly famous for his endgame skill. During the first two phases of a game, he was content to gain some advantage in space, convert it into a small material edge (one pawn ahead), and then trade pieces. In the endgame, he would convert his extra pawn into a Queen and win the game easily. After winning the World Championship from Emanuel Lasker in 1921, Capablanca lost his title to Alexander Alekhine in 1927 because of overconfidence. He really thought nobody could beat him, so he failed to prepare properly for the contest. Though Capablanca continued to play in tournaments in the hopes of getting another shot at Alekhine, the new World Champion made a point of never allowing him a return match. Capablanca's final chess event was the Chess Olympiad of 1939, where he played first board for the Cuban team. Three years later, he died of a stroke in New York. José Capablanca, chess genius. How to Use a Space Advantage A space advantage makes your pieces more mobile than your opponent's. Let's see how Rooks, Bishops, and Knights can make use of extra space. Rooks and Open Files To make maximum use of your Rooks, you must understand the following principle: Rooks need open files to be effective. A Rook reaches its full potential (in terms of square control) only on open files or ranks. Because the Rook is hemmed in at the start of the game, your task is usually to maneuver it to an open file. Here is an example from the game between José Capablanca and Karel Treybal, which was played in Carlsbad in 1929. In Diagram 74, White has an enormous advantage in space. He increases this advantage with his next move:

1. b6

Now Black is forced back even further. Notice how he can move only on the 7th and 8th ranks, whereas White has the first six ranks as his stomping ground. If you do a space count for this position, you'll find that the count for White is Knight: 2 (e5 and g5). Bishop: 3 (f5, b5, and a6). Queen: 5 (c5, a5, a6, a7, and a8). Rook on h2: 2 (h5 and h6). Pawns: 11.

DIAGRAM 74.

The total is 23! The space count for Black is considerably less: Queen: 1 (f4). Pawns: 4. Just 5 in all. The Black Queen is under attack, so Black plays

1. ... Qb8

2. Ra1

Though White's advantage in territory is huge, he still has the problem of how to break through. The first thing White does is place his Rooks on the only open file (a1-a8) to prevent the Black Rooks from taking over the a-file. After White has control of the a-file, he can make a decisive penetration from there.

2. ... Rc8

Black is so squeezed that there is nothing for him to do. White can take all the time he wants, without fear of a Black counterattack.

3. Qb4

With this move, Capablanca demonstrates another principle: When placing your Rooks and Queen on an open file, try to lead with the Rooks to ensure the safety of the Queen. As in the opening, the Queen should follow the rest of its army. With this in mind, the point of White's move becomes clearer: The Queen steps out of the way to allow the Rooks to penetrate into Black's territory.

3. ... Rhd8

4. Ra7

The Rook is in! White noticed that the weak link in Black's position is the pawn on b7, which is not guarded by another pawn. White will therefore start to bring as much of his army as possible to bear on this pawn.

4. ... Kf8

Poor Black can only go back and forth, hoping that White won't find a way to lower the boom on his position.

5. Rh1

Reinforcements! This Rook will join its twin on the open a-file.

5. ... Be8

6. Rha1 Kg8

7. R1a4 Kf8

8. Qa3

As shown in Diagram 75, White has completed his domination of the open file. The difference between the range of possible activity for White's Queen and Rooks and the range for Black's is very apparent. The rest of this game is not related to the topic of how to make maximum use of Rooks, but I will include it anyway, as an illustration of Capablanca's style. The game also serves to point out some of the problems of a space disadvantage.

8. ... Kg8

9. Kg3

DIAGRAM 75.

Secure in the knowledge that Black can do nothing, White treads water to lull the opponent into a sense of security.

9. ... Bd7

10. Kh4 Kh8

11. Qa1 Kg8

12. Kg3 Kf8

13. Kg2 Be8

14. Nd2

Finally, White moves into action! Remember, White's target is the pawn on b7. To increase the pressure, he brings his Knight to a5, from where the Knight will work with the a7-Rook to try to devour the pawn.

14. ... Bd7

15. Nb3 Re8

16. Na5 Nd8

Just in time, Black manages to defend the pawn. Can White attack it with anything else?

17. Ba6!!

Most effective! In Diagram 76, you can see that White is attacking the b7-pawn again and now threatens simply to win it by Bxb7. But wait a minute! Isn't White's Bishop on a6 vulnerable to the b7-pawn?

17. ... bxa6

Black has a temporary advantage in force. White counters with

18. Rxd7

White has recovered material and threatens to capture a pawn with Rxh7. If Black guards against the threat with 18...Kg8, then 19.Nb3 would open up a battery on the a-file against the weak pawn on a6, which would prove undefendable. If White eats this pawn, his material advantage should decide the game. So Black decides to play

DIAGRAM 76.

18. ... Re7

This allows a snappy finish.

19. Rxd8+!

The simpler 19.Rxe7 Kxe7 20.Nb3 would have captured the a6-pawn and thus would have been good enough for an eventual win. However, the move played is even better. White is setting himself up to use the Knight fork, which I described in Chapter Two, "The First Principle: Force."

19. ... Rxd8

20. Nxc6

White takes a pawn and threatens both of Black's Rooks and his Queen simultaneously! Black gives up here, because 20...Qc8 21.Nxe7 Kxe7 22.Rxa6 would leave White with a two-pawn advantage and an easy win. From 22.Rxa6, play might have continued 22...Rd7 23.Ra7 Rxa7 24.Qxa7+ Qd7 25.c6 Qxa7

26.bxa7, followed by 27.a8=Q. Then the extra Queen would have led to a quick

checkmate. Congratulations! Perhaps without even realizing it, you have just played the game of a World Champion. You will find that playing over the games of great players (which are documented in countless books) is both instructive and fun. Not only will you come to appreciate the artistry of chess, but you will gain insight into how the Grandmasters win their games, and in time, you can hope to emulate their methods. Bishops and Open Diagonals Like Rooks, Bishops don't like to be hemmed in by pawns. They need open diagonals if they are to reach their full potential. Bearing the needs of your Bishops in mind, you should try to place your pawns and your Bishops on squares of opposite colors. In Diagram 77, it is White's turn to play. White has three significant advantages: He has a large advantage in space. (The space count is 14 to 4 in White's favor.) Black has a weak pawn on b7. A pawn is considered weak if it lies on an open file and cannot be defended by another pawn. I will go into more detail about pawn strengths and weaknesses in Chapter Five, "The Fourth Principle: Pawn Structure." The White Bishop is much more active than its counterpart on d7. White's Bishop, free of all obstructions, is known as a "good Bishop." Black's pathetic creature on d7, blocked by its own pawns, is known as a "bad Bishop."

DIAGRAM 77.

Because it is White's turn to move, he can use a tactic called the double attack -a maneuver in which one player attacks two points in the enemy's position simultaneously. Can you find White's move? The answer is 1.Qb1!, by which the Queen and Bishop bear down on the pawn on h7 and the Queen attacks the pawn on b7. Black has no way to defend both pawns, so he must allow White to capture one of them. The Fianchettoed Bishop: One way to place a Bishop on the longest possible diagonal is to fianchetto it. A White Bishop is said to be fianchettoed if it is placed on g2 or b2. A Black Bishop is fianchettoed if it is placed on g7 or b7. In Diagram 78, the White fianchettoed Bishop on g2 is clearly superior to the Black Bishop on d7. With his Bishop searing down the h1-a8 diagonal, White threatens to penetrate Black's position with Ra8. Another threat is 1.Rd1, by which White pins the Black Bishop on d7 and wins it. In the diagram, it is Black's move, but the following factors make his life difficult:

DIAGRAM 78.

His lack of space-the space count is 28 to 3 against him. His inferior Bishop. The White Rook's control of an open file, by means of which White threatens to penetrate Black's position. Black's best move appears to be

1. ... Bc8

This play puts the Bishop on a safer square and stops any pins on the d-file. However, after

2. Qxd8 Rxd8

3. Ra8

White creates a winning pin on the 8th rank. Giving in to the inevitable, Black plays

3. ... Kf8

If Black instead protects his Rook with 3...Rf8, White would create a zugzwang position with 4.Bc6!. (Zugzwang is a German word for a situation in which one would like to do nothing. However, the rules of the game state that you must make a move when it is your turn.) Black would be forced to play, even though anything he does will actually hurt his position. After 3...Rf8 4.Bc6, Black would have to give up material. Let's pause to examine all his possible replies:

4...Kh8 5.Bb7 Bxb7 6.Rxf8 checkmate.

4...Rd8, which transposes into the game, returning to the main

line.

4...Re8 5.Bxe8.

4...Bb7 5.Rxf8+ Kxf8 6.Bxb7, which puts White a Bishop ahead.

4...Bd7 5.Rxf8+ and 6.Bxd7.

4...Ba6 5.Rxa6.

4...b5 5.cxb5, which leaves Black with the same problems as

before.

4...f6 5.exf6 (5.gxf6 is also good) 5...Kf7 6.Ke4! Rd8 7.Ke5 Rf8

8.Kd6 Rd8+ 9.Kc7. The Bishop on c8 is a goner.

The last option is a good illustration of the power of a King in an endgame. After enough pieces have been traded, the King becomes quite a strong piece! After this interesting diversion, let's go back to the position that existed after

3...Kf8 (which you can see in Diagram 79).

4. Bb7!

White pins the Black Bishop. If Black does nothing to unpin his poor Bishop, White will simply take it and be ahead by 3 points.

4. ... Bxb7

5. Rxd8+

Now White is ahead by 2 points (Bishop = 3 points, Rook = 5). The Rook's power is clearly shown after the following moves:

5. ... Ke7

6. Rh8

This is a greedy Rook!

DIAGRAM 79.

6. ... Bc6

7. Rxh7 Kf8

8. Rh8+ Ke7

9. h7 Bd7

10. Rb8

followed by

11. h8=Q

for an easy win. The Knight as Advance Scout Knights are not long-range pieces like Bishops and Rooks, as illustrated in Diagram 80. Here, both minor pieces are in a corner. (Remember, Bishops and Knights are called minor pieces, whereas Rooks and Queens are called major pieces.) From its corner position on a1, the Bishop controls a hefty seven squares. The poor Knight on h1 cannot compete in terms of space count: It controls only two squares. Does that mean Bishops are better than Knights? No, it just means that you must move your Knight to an advanced square if you want it to reach its potential. To demonstrate, let's relocate that unfortunate Knight from h1 to the e5 central square. Now the Knight controls eight squares, four of which are in the enemy camp and therefore qualify as space-count squares. If the Knight penetrates deeper into Black's territory (say, to e6), the Knight still controls only eight squares, but six of them are now in the enemy camp.

DIAGRAM 80.

DIAGRAM 81.

Bearing these strengths and weaknesses in mind, our battle cry for Knights should be "Forward! Ever forward!" Because of the Knight's unique ability to jump over other pieces, it does not need to open up the battle lines to strut its stuff. Give your Knights an assignment in an advanced outpost and they will wreak havoc on the enemy at every opportunity. Here is an example. What is the space count in Diagram 81? When you figure it out, you realize that Black's position is very bad. The lopsided space count (a crushing 20 to 6) leaves Black with very little room. In particular, note the difference between the Knight and Bishop. The White Knight is firmly entrenched on e6 and is single-handedly eating into Black's position. Black's "bad Bishop" is hopelessly blocked by its own pawns and reduced to inactivity. To win this game, White needs only to penetrate through Black's wall of pawns with his Rook and Queen. How can he do this? Refer to the discussion of Rooks earlier in this chapter, where I stressed the importance of giving your Rooks open files. Remember, you should always try to increase the activity of your pieces! In Diagram 81, it is White's turn to play. From this position the best move is

1. b4!

Shame on you if you wanted to play 1.Nxc7, because after 1...Kxc7, you would have managed to trade your wonderful Knight for Black's wretched Bishop. Notice that the point count-the measure of force-would have remained even after such a trade. The superior 1.b4 immediately gives the White Rook more scope and also threatens to capture the pawn on c5 with 2.bxc5. If Black defends his c5-pawn with 1...b6, the pawn on a6 becomes vulnerable to capture by the White Queen, with 2.Qxa6. Black instead answers with

1. ... cxb4

to which White replies

2. Qxb4

Now the White Queen, backed up by the Rook on b1, attacks the b7-pawn. Because 2...Kc8 would lose horribly to 3.Qxb7+ Kd7 4.Qxc7+ Ke8 5.Qd8 checkmate, Black must advance his b7-pawn and hope for the best:

[diagram]
Now White can maneuver to capture the pawn on a6 or, if he wishes, the pawn on b6. In Diagram 82, can you see how he would win these pawns? To win the a6-pawn, White uses the fork tactic, discussed in Chapter Two, 'The First Principle: Force." The fork is accomplished by

3. Qa4+

which mounts a simultaneous attack on both the Black King on d7 and the pawn on a6. Black then plays

3. ... Kc8

because 3...Ke7 would lose the Black Bishop, which has nothing guarding it, to

4.Nxc7.

4. Qxa6+ Kd7

If Black plays 4...Kb8 instead, White would be able to win in several ways. One method would be 5.Rb3 Qd7 6.Ra3, followed by Qa8 checkmate. As it is, White plays

5. Qb7

DIAGRAM 82.

The White Queen and the Knight can now launch a combined attack on the Bishop on c7.

5. ... Ke8

Black would prefer to move his King to d8, but the impudent White Knight won't allow him to.

6. Qc8+ Ke7

7. Qxc7+ Ke8

Black would like to run away with 7...Kf8, but the White Knight controls square f8, too!

8. Qd8 checkmate

Now look back at Diagram 82. You can see that 3.Qa4+ is a very strong move. However, I did say that White has the option of capturing the b6-pawn instead of the a6-pawn. To make this capture, White plays

3. Nxc7

White does not relish the idea of trading his wonderful Knight, but this move is a good demonstration of a basic principle: Destroy the defender and the target will fall! In this case, destroying the Black Bishop leads to the capture of the b6-pawn. As well as capturing a pawn (1 point), White is also enabling his Rook and Queen to decisively penetrate Black's position. Black has no choice but to play

3. ... Kxc7

or White would simply go back to e6 and be 3 points ahead.

4. Qxb6+ Kd7

5. Qa7+

The White Queen steps away from the b-file to allow the Rook to charge forward.

5. ... Ke8

6. Rb8 checkmate

QUIZ 23. Placing your pawns on the same color squares as your Bishop is: A good idea, because all your pawns can be defended by the Bishop. A bad idea, because the pawns block the Bishop and therefore reduce its potential sphere of activity. As it turned out, capturing either the a6-pawn or the b6-pawn led to a win. But because you have to work so hard to get your Knights into enemy territory, think twice before trading them. Memorization versus Understanding I was just 13, and my opponent, also a young boy, was making his first moves very quickly. It was obvious that he had memorized this particular opening and was repeating the moves of some famous Grandmaster. Cautiously, I picked my way through his opening "minefield" and was only slightly behind when the middlegame started. He finally began to slow down, taking more time to think over his moves. "At least we're out of the book now, and he's on his own," I thought with a good deal of relief. The battle was joined and I needed to concentrate. Ten moves later my opponent resigned. It became obvious that he had a good memory but understood little about the principles of chess. Left to his own devices, his game fell apart remarkably quickly. I have played this type of game repeatedly throughout my career. So many players start out by thinking that memorization is the key to success. Take my word for it: A good memory is useful, but without a firm knowledge of chess fundamentals, you are doomed to constant defeat. How to Gain a Space Advantage in the Opening Rather than waste your time memorizing openings, you will do better to keep yourself fresh and play every opening move with particular goals in mind. With every turn you must ask yourself whether you are Acquiring superior force in some part of the board. Gaining a lead in development. Improving your pawn structure (discussed in Chapter Five, "The Fourth Principle: Pawn Structure"). Gaining space. Let's see how these questions help in actual opening play. In the commentary, I am speaking from White's viewpoint.

1. e4

This move gives me a space count of 5 (the f1-Bishop controls b5 and a6, the Queen controls h5, and the pawn controls d5 and f5) and frees two of my pieces. I could gain an advantage in development if my opponent is not careful.

1. ... Nf6

He is attacking my e4-pawn! That's a frisky move for Black to play. I could just defend my pawn with 2.Nc3, but after 2...e5 I would not have made any significant gain in time. I'll try to punish him for bringing his Knight ahead of his pawns.

2. e5

By attacking his Knight, I force him to move it again, so we will both have moved the same piece twice. However, I'm hoping that his Knight will be more vulnerable in the middle of the board. It's interesting that I am still racking up only 2 points of space count with this pawn. No matter how deeply a pawn goes into an opponent's position, it can never control more than two squares.

2. ... Ne4?

What on earth is he doing with his Knight? Surely he doesn't expect to beat me with this lone piece. I'll attack the Knight again. Either he will have to let me take it, which will give me an advantage in material, or he will have to keep moving it, which will give me an advantage in both time and space.

3. d3

With one move, I attack his Knight and free my Bishop on c1. I learned long ago that moves like 3.Bd3 are bad, because they block my own d2-pawn, which in turn blocks my c1-Bishop. I certainly don't want to entomb my own pieces!

3. ... Nc5

No choice. He can't go to d6 or f6 because of my pawn; g5 is covered by my c1- Bishop. I suspect that Black is not familiar with the concept of time. Moving his Knight again and again is clearly in violation of this principle.

4. d4

I've moved this pawn twice, but the play is justified because it forces him to move his Knight yet again. Anyway, the pawn on d3 was blocking my Bishop on f1.

4. ... Na6

5. Nf3

Let's sum up this position. Black has moved his Knight four times. I have managed to advance both of my center pawns. As a result, I now have a significant advantage both in development and in space (the space count is 10 to 1). This brief demonstration shows the importance of bringing out your pieces and pawns quickly. They help you fight for the territory you need to move about freely.

DIAGRAM 83.

QUIZ 24. After 1.e4 e6 2.d4, we arrive at the position in Diagram 83. Should Black now play 2...d6 or 2...d5? Why? The Role of Defender Make no mistake about it: Everyone likes to attack. However, even the best players sometimes find themselves in an inferior position that requires hours of calm, defensive play. In the top levels of modern chess, every Grandmaster knows how to attack and defend with equal skill. That was not always the case. In the early 1800s, players virtually lived for attack. They would happily sacrifice everything for the chance of a nice checkmate. Though they often succeeded, success was due more to the lackluster defensive play of the time than it was to their attacking skills. For example, an unspoken rule stated that if your opponent sacrificed a piece, you were duty-bound to capture it, even if the capture signaled your own bloody doom. This lemming-like obedience came to an end with the rise of the first official World Champion, Wilhelm Steinitz (1836-1900). In the British Chess Magazine of January 1892, James Cunningham described Steinitz as follows: "He is a man of great physical vigour, and possesses a well-preserved constitution. Everything about him denotes power rather than grace, strength rather than beauty. His features are rugged in outline and his face is the face of a man of action rather than a man of thought." Steinitz started out playing in the berserker style of the day, but he eventually came up with several new and profound positional ideas, which led him to drastically alter his style and become the first true positional player. He would start out with a somewhat passive game and would not worry about being attacked as long as he had certain positional trumps. (He particularly favored a superior pawn structure.) Whilhelm Steinitz, the first great defender. After more than 20 years of dominating world chess, Steinitz was finally beaten by the great Emanuel Lasker. He lost his title and then lost the rematch. In failing health and severe poverty (in those days, it was very difficult for a chess professional to make a living), Steinitz came unglued mentally. He died a pauper in New York. How to Defend Against a Space Advantage Sooner or later, you will find yourself squeezed by your opponent into a cramped position, so you need to know how to defend against such a tactic. Remember the following principle: The player with less space should try to trade some pieces. You may find it helpful to think of a cramped position as being like overpopulation. Twenty people in a small house are crowded and very uncomfortable. Two people in the same house have all the space they need. Let's look at an example of this principle translated into strategy:

1. d4 d5

2. c4

A good move. White puts pressure on the d5-pawn and makes preparations for the eventual opening of the c-file for his Rooks with cxd5. Though this opening is called the Queen's Gambit, no gambit is really involved. If Black captures the c4-pawn with 2...dxc4, White can even the score in several ways, the quickest being 3.Qa4+ followed by Qxc4. After White captures the pawn, he would follow up with e2-e4 to acquire a full pawn center. Because of that possibility, Black's usual response to the Queen's Gambit is to decline the capture on c4 and instead guard his d5-pawn:

[diagram]
This is the most common move, though 2...c6 is also good. Not so good is

2...Nf6, because after 3.cxd5 Nxd5 4.e4, White would once again acquire a full

pawn center and all the space that comes with it.

3. Nc3

White continues to develop pieces and put pressure on the d5-pawn. Notice how the Knight fits comfortably behind the c4-pawn; the two work together to attack Black's center.

3. ... Nf6

A sensible reply. Black also develops his pieces, at the same time giving additional support to the d5-pawn.

4. Bg5

White pins the Black Knight, one of the defenders of the d5-pawn. Notice how White is quickly developing his pieces and at the same time using three of his men to directly or indirectly put pressure on square d5. Here's another important point: White would like to play e3 and free his f1- Bishop. However, if he makes this move too early, he will block the c1-Bishop. By moving the c1-Bishop first, White will be free to follow up with e3. Remember, whenever possible avoid blocking your pieces with your pawns. Black's next move is to break the pin on his Knight:

4. ... Be7

Now, if the Knight moves, the Bishop on g5 will not attack the Queen. Black has developed a new piece and is preparing to castle.

5. e3

White frees the f1-Bishop and gives more support to his pawn on d4.

5. ... O-O

6. Nf3

White has developed his unmoved Knight.

6. ... Nbd7

Black also moves his other Knight into the battle. He avoids 6...Nc6, because he sees that he will have to use his c-pawn to give added defense to the d5-pawn. A

6...Nc6 move would block the pawn and make it unusable.

7. Rc1

White is anticipating the eventual removal of his pawn on c4 (either because White will play cxd5 or because Black will take it with ...dxc4), so he places his Rook on the soon-to-be-opened c-file.

[diagram]
Black gives more support to the d5-pawn and also gives the Queen a little room to move.

8. Bd3

DIAGRAM 84.

White develops the Bishop and prepares to castle. So far both sides have played sensibly. It's now time to take stock. What is going on in the position in Diagram 84? First, do a space count. You should come up with 13 to 6. In case your space count is different, let's run quickly through it so that you can see where you went wrong. Start with White. White's pawns on d4 and c4 control four squares (e5, d5, c5, and b5). His Knights control another four (g5, e5, d5, and b5). His g5- Bishop controls two (f6 and h6) and his d3-Bishop controls three (f5, g6, and h7). These numbers add up to a total space count of 13. Now for Black. Only his d5-pawn strikes into enemy territory, so we count 2 for his pawns. His f6-Knight controls two squares (e4 and g4). Finally, his e7-Bishop controls another two squares (b4 and a3). The squares add up to a total space count of 6 for Black. With this space count, we have confirmed that White has more territory than Black. Because of Black's lack of breathing room, Black is unable to move his Rooks to useful files, and his Bishop on c8 is completely blocked. Obviously, Black must do something about this undesirable state of affairs. Fortunately for Black, Capablanca gave this position some attention many years ago and came up with a solution. His reasoning went something like this: Because Black's position is cramped, he must initiate a series of trades to give himself more room to move. Then Black must stake a bigger claim in the center and advance either his c6- or e6-pawn, challenging White's central position and striking out for still more space. QUIZ 25. You have a large space advantage and your opponent attempts to trade some pieces. What should you do? Let him trade; trades can only work in your favor. Avoid trades as much as possible. Invoke the en passant rule. Black has no choice but to try this tactic:

8. ... dxc4!

The first trade.

9. Bxc4 Nd5!

More trades. White's g5-Bishop cannot avoid being traded.

10. Bxe7 Qxe7

You can see that Black already has extra elbow room.

11. O-O

White avoids 11.Bxd5 or 11.Nxd5 because then 11...exd5! would give Black just what he wants: The Bishop on c8 would no longer be blocked by a pawn.

11. ... Nxc3!

One more trade. Black wanted to play ...e6-e5, but if he made this move too early, he would lose a pawn; for example, 11...e5? 12.Nxd5 cxd5 13.Bxd5. Then the Knight on d5 would have more attackers than defenders.

12. Rxc3 e5

Having given himself more room, Black solves his one remaining problem: the blocked Bishop on c8. By pushing the e5-pawn, Black has freed his Bishop and expanded its territory.

13. dxe5 Nxe5

14. Nxe5 Qxe5

Now that Black has traded pieces and freed his Bishop, he obviously has plenty of room to move about in. Let's do another space count to confirm the wisdom of this strategy: 10 to 9. Black's space count is now almost equal to White's! Play over this example several times, trying to get a feel for the space-giving powers of a trade. Tests TEST 17. What is the space count? TEST 18. It is White's turn to play. Both Bishops seem blocked by their pawns. What should White do in this situation? TEST 19. It is Black's turn to play. Do a space count. Because White controls more territory, would 1...Be6 be a sensible move?

CHAPTER FIVE

The Fourth Principle: Pawn Structure Clearly the weakest man on the board, the little pawn may seem unimportant. In reality, though, the pawn is the foundation upon which most chess strategies are built. The great Polish Grandmaster Saviely Tartakower (1887-1956) was not joking when he wrote, "Never lose a pawn and you will never lose a game." The Importance of Pawns In the 17th and 18th centuries, the power of pawns was universally underrated. It took the legendary French player François-André Philidor (1726-95) to demonstrate that correct handling of the pawns could make a major difference in a game. In 1749, he published a chess book that gave detailed instructions on how to play the middlegame. His comment "Les pions son l'âme du jeu" (Pawns are the soul of the game) became one of the most famous chess sayings. Philidor quite rightly believed that ignorance of the correct way to handle pawns was the primary weakness of his chess-playing contemporaries. But, like most people who are ahead of their time, he was misunderstood. Some players thought he was claiming that the ability to promote a pawn to a Queen made pawns stronger than pieces. Other players did not know what to make of his theories. Though worshiped in chess circles, Philidor was never really appreciated in his lifetime for his great insights. That level of appreciation came only many years after his death. André Philidor: "Pawns are the soul of chess." Less than one hundred years later, in 1857, Paul Morphy dominated the chess world. Able to calculate with immense speed and precision and possessing wonderful technique, Morphy played a wide-open, attacking game that made little use of pawns. Those were the days of never-ending attacks and blood- soaked boards, and even Morphy could not properly handle closed positions in which pawn play was the critical factor. Philidor was still not fully understood. After Morphy retired, Wilhelm Steinitz gradually assumed the mantle of chess leader. In 1873, he changed his style and, with single-minded determination, succeeded in also changing the style of world chess. Positional and defensive ideas became prominent. The intricacies of pawn formations and pawn weaknesses became hot topics of discussion. By 1905, Philidor had been completely vindicated. Now, in the 1990s, his ideas have become common property and are passed along to all players, just as I will now pass them on to you. When You Leave Pawns at Home In the game-opening examples I've shown you, the players have moved both their pieces and their pawns. Some beginners think they should leave their pawns at home, moving them only when necessary to make way for their pieces. Let's see what happens when such a player (White) meets an opponent (Black) who uses his pawns to control space in the center of the board.

1. Nc3

White immediately gets a piece out. Remember, White's strategy is to move as few pawns as possible.

[diagram]
Black takes control of some of the central squares. So far the space count is even: 2 to 2.

2. Nf3 c5

Black uses his pawns to restrict the movements of White's pieces. Note how the d5-pawn takes control of square e4 away from the c3-Knight, and the c5-pawn takes control of square d4 away from the f3-Knight.

3. d3

Finally, White must move a pawn to get a Bishop out.

3. ... Nc6

This Knight fits very nicely behind the c5-pawn. Pawn and Knight can now work together to put pressure on square d4. So far, Black has built up a space- count edge of 8 to 6.

4. Bg5?

White pins Black's e7-pawn. However, White's pieces will now be chased back by the Black pawns.

[diagram]
5. Bf4 e5

6. Bg3 Be6

White's pieces are hemmed in because Black's pawns control the center. As Diagram 85 on the following page shows, the space count stands at 5 for White to 10 for Black. White's pawnless strategy has clearly been unsuccessful. Moreover, the example demonstrates that moving one or two pawns does not lose time, because the opponent must also move his pawns. If he doesn't, his prematurely advanced pieces will be chased backward, resulting in a gain of time for the opponent's pawns.

DIAGRAM 85.

DIAGRAM 86.

Why did White's strategy fail? The answer hinges on the fact that. pawns are worth less than pieces. When a pawn attacks a Bishop, Knight, or Rook, the more powerful piece feels compelled to retreat. When David meets Goliath in chess, the giant gets out of the way! Thus, it makes good sense to lead off a game with your pawns. They clear the road for the heavy artillery. QUIZ 26. After 1.b3 e5, White plays 2.Nf3. The result is shown in Diagram 86. Why is 2.Nf3 a poor move? What Is Pawn Structure? The health and the positioning of all the pawns is called pawn structure. (It is also called pawn formation, or pawn skeleton.) If White has many weak pawns whereas Black's pawns are all well defended, Black is said to have a superior pawn structure. Many players fail to appreciate that the positioning of the pawns dictates the strategies available to both sides. For example, if one side has advanced his pawns and thus gained a space advantage, the other side's strategy might be to trade pieces and decrease crowding in his cramped quarters. If one side's pawn formation is full of weak pawns, the other side's strategy might be to attack these weak men. What Makes a Pawn Weak? When a boxer notices that he has cut his opponent, he repeatedly jabs at the cut in the hopes of making it bad enough for the ring doctor to stop the fight. The same logic applies in chess. If your opponent has a weak pawn (a wound), focus your army on that pawn and make every effort to capture it. Let's take a look at the most typical types of weak pawns: pawn islands and doubled, tripled, isolated, and backward pawns. Pawn Islands It stands to reason that as you move your pawns, they break rank. With every pawn move, what was a solid rank of pawns becomes more and more fragmented. Single pawns or groups of pawns that are separated from other pawns by at least one file are called pawn islands. Diagram 87 shows three pawn islands for White (a2-b2, d4, and f2-g2-h2) and two for Black (a7-b6 and e6-f7- g7-h7). Remember Capablanca's warning: "In the endgame, whoever has the most pawn islands loses."

DIAGRAM 87.

DIAGRAM 88.

Doubled Pawns A pawn that makes a capture and ends up on the same file but in front of another pawn of the same color is said to be doubled. Doubled pawns are usually considered weak, because they do not have the mobility of normal pawns. On occasion, though, a doubled pawn on a center file can be useful, because the pawn can control central squares that normal pawns cannot. In Diagram 88, White's pawns on c4 and c3 are doubled. The pawn on c4 is the one in trouble, because it is unfortunately sitting on a half-open file and vulnerable to attack by several of Black's pieces. If White's c3-pawn was sitting on d3, his c4-pawn would be solidly protected by another pawn and would be quite safe. As it is, Black can launch an all-out attack on the weakling on c4.

1. ... Ne5

Black attacks the c4-pawn with both his Knight and his c7-Rook and threatens to capture the pawn with 2...Nxc4. White defends the pawn with

2. Qa4

White has fended off the double attack. Is the pawn safe? No. One more attacker should be enough to break the defender's back.

2. ... Rfc8

Now the pawn is attacked three times and White is unable to defend it again. After a move like 3.Rfd1, Black would play 3...Nxc4. After 4.Nxc4 Rxc4, Black would start to work on the c3-pawn. This example shows that if an advanced pawn is not defended by another pawn, it can become weak. Doubled pawns are not a liability as long as the front one is defended by a pawn, as you can see from the following opening sequence:

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3 Nc6

3. Bc4 Bc5

4. d3 d6

5. O-O Nf6

6. Be3!

Has White gone mad? He is voluntarily creating a situation in which his pawns will be doubled.

6. ... Bxe3

Black happily obliges.

7. fxe3

What has White gained with his doubled pawns? Take a look at Diagram 89. First, White has gained an open file for his f1-Rook. Because Black does not have an open file for his Rooks, the open file gives White's Rooks an advantage. Second, White has traded the very active Black Bishop on c5 for the previously undeveloped White Bishop on c1. Third, and most important: The combined action of Black's c6-Knight, c5-Bishop, and e5-pawn brought a good deal of pressure to bear on square d4. At any moment, Black might have moved a piece to this square (for example, by playing Nd4). Now White's pawn on e3 takes control of square d4 away from Black altogether. Finally, White allowed his pawns to be doubled because the foremost pawn on e4 is solidly defended by the pawn on d3. As a result, the White pawns on e3 and e4 are not only safe but are highly useful, because they combine to put pressure on four critical center squares (d4, f4, d5, and f5).

DIAGRAM 89.

Tripled Pawns Though doubled pawns can be useful, tripled pawns are always an out-and-out liability. They are invariably undefended by other pawns and are usually sitting ducks for an enemy attack. The square directly in front of tripled pawns can easily fall into the clutches of an enemy piece, supplying an excellent outpost because no pawns are around to chase the piece away. In Diagram 90, White's tripled pawns are undefended by other pawns and are doomed to eventual capture by the enemy. Black, with the half-open c-file for his Rooks and square c5 for his Knight, can use his whole army to attack the tripled pawns via 1...Rfc8, 2...Nd7, and 3...Nb6. White will then be unable to stop Black from winning the c4-pawn with 4...Nxc4. After Black wins this first pawn, he will turn his attention to the next pawn in line: the one on c3. To put it simply: Don't triple your pawns!

DIAGRAM 90.

DIAGRAM 91.

Isolated Pawns An isolated pawn is considered weak because it has no protecting pawns on either side to give it the support it often needs. In Diagram 90, the c4-pawn is isolated as well as tripled. Diagram 91 shows another example of an isolated pawn. Here, the isolated White pawn on d4 cannot be protected by other pawns and must be constantly guarded by pieces. Black can put more and more pressure on the pawn, forcing White to use all his powerful pieces as nursemaids and thereby keeping White in a passive, defensive position. As it turns out, White will lose this pawn anyway, because Black can speedily attack it with everything he's got. Here's how:

1. ... Nf5

Because Black is attacking the pawn with four pieces and White is guarding it with only three, Black simply threatens to take it off the board. White plays

2. Rfd1

Making the pawn safe once more. Black brings another attacker into play:

2. ... Rfd8

This time, though, White has run out of defenders, and the pawn will fall.

3. Rac1 Ncxd4

4. Nexd4 Nxd4

5. Nxd4 Bxd4

Black is now a solid pawn ahead. Backward Pawns A backward pawn is one that has fallen behind the other pawns of its own persuasion and can no longer be supported or guarded by them. In Diagram 92, on squares d6 and f7 Black has two backward pawns. The pawns on h6 and b7 are not backward because they can safely advance.

DIAGRAM 92.

DIAGRAM 93.

QUIZ 27. In Diagram 93, it is Black's turn to play. Point out White's main weakness and identify the best way for Black to attack this weak point. Safety First I have introduced you to some players who were vicious attackers and to others who were more positionally inclined. Former World Champion Tigran Petrosyan (1929-84) of the Soviet Union was a different type of player altogether. He was the ultimate "safely first" player. Always careful about his pawn structure, he rarely exposed himself with any kind of pawn weakness. He would go out of his way to stop his opponent's attacks before they even got started. Criticized for his "boring" playing style, Petrosyan did not win many tournaments, typically taking second or third place. However, he was known as a player who was almost impossible to beat. The critics had to eat their words in 1963, when he won the World Championship from the great Soviet player Mikhail Botvinnik. Tigran Petrosyan, the unbeatable foe. How to Cure a Weak Pawn A pawn becomes weak when it can no longer be protected by another pawn. Your first defense against weak pawns is to avoid exposing them. When you advance your pawns, be sure they cannot fall under attack. You can ward off potential attacks by trailing one pawn behind your advanced pawns so that you can bring it forward in case of trouble. In Diagram 94, the White pawn on e4 is useful because it puts pressure on the important d5 central square and blocks the diagonal of the fianchettoed Bishop on b7. However, Black is starting to mount an attack against this pawn. With the two pieces on b7 and f6 attacking the pawn and only one piece defending it, Black threatens to snap the pawn off the board with ...Nxe4. White could send in another defender with 1.Bf3, but Black would merely increase the pressure with

1...Nc5, and White would then have great difficulty in guarding the pawn.

Fortunately, White has foreseen the possibility of this type of attack and has left a trailing pawn to act as guardian if the need arises. By playing 1.f3, White bolsters the pawn's defense and Black has to throw all thoughts of attacking the pawn out the window.

DIAGRAM 94.

We are all saddled with a weak pawn on occasion. But you can often transform the weakness by either trading the weak pawn or moving it to a square where it is no longer vulnerable. In Diagram 95, White's pawn on c4 is isolated and weak. Black has taken note and mounted an attack against it. Black hopes to further increase the pressure with ...Rc8, followed by ...Rc7 and ...Qc8. With his mind on what promises to be a very pleasant game, Black has forgotten an important principle: Before you attack a weak pawn, you must gain control of the square directly in front of it. If you don't control this square, your opponent can advance the pawn. It is White's turn to play, and Black's lapse allows White to take the advantage:

1. c5!

DIAGRAM 95.

A very strong move. White makes use of the pin on the d-file (1...dxc5 would merely provoke 2.Rxd8) and turns his "weak" pawn into a battering ram. Now the Black b6-Knight and the a6-Bishop are under attack by the White e2-Bishop.

1. ... Bxe2

Black takes care of the problem of the attacked Bishop. Now White cannot play

2.cxb6 because Black would respond with 2...Bxd1., snaring an exchange. (A

player wins an exchange when he trades a minor piece for a Rook.)

2. Qxe2

White regains material equality and renews the threat against Black's b6-Knight.

2. ... Nc8

3. cxd6

Now Black cannot play 3...Nxd6, because 4.e5 would result in a pawn fork against Black's Knights.

3. ... exd6

The situation has undergone a drastic change. White's weak c4-pawn is gone, and Black is left with an isolated pawn on d6. Because White has the square in front of the newly weakened pawn well guarded, he can put pressure on the pawn while simultaneously taking control of more space.

4. Qa6

The space count is now a resounding 25 to 2! All of White's pieces are well placed, and both of his Rooks are sitting on beautiful files. Adding White's strengths to Black's weakness on d6, you can see that Black's position is miserable.

DIAGRAM 96.

Let's look at another example, this time one that favors Black. In Diagram 96, Black has an excellent position. His Rooks are both centrally posted and his c4- Knight is strong (as advanced Knights have a tendency to be). The one drawback is the backward pawn on d6. Black cures this problem immediately:

[diagram]
He gets rid of his one weakness, frees his e7-Bishop, and opens the file for his d8-Rook.

2. exd5 Nxd5

3. Nxd5 Bxd5

With these pieces and a space-count advantage of 11 to 8, Black can be very happy with this position. QUIZ 28. Which statement is false? Doubled pawns are always weak. Tripled pawns are almost always a problem. If you have a weak pawn, you should either try to trade it or start an attack in another sector of the board so that your opponent does not have time to attack the pawn. Good Pawns and Pigs on the 7th A good pawn is any pawn that exerts a cramping pressure on the opponent and is safe from attack. One type of pawn that fits this description is known as a passed pawn, because it has no enemy pawns in front or on either side. Such a pawn is free to advance unless the opponent assigns one of his pieces the passive task of setting up a roadblock in front of it. A passed pawn is useful in the middlegame because it ties up the enemy piece that is blocking its advance, and it is also strong in the endgame because it can run for the border and return as a Queen. From the position in Diagram 97, White's passed pawn is going to thrash the whole Black army. It is White's turn to play. White would like to promote this pawn to a Queen, but Black has blocked it with his Queen. The way to win such positions is to break the blockade.

1. Qf7

A crushing move, setting up the threat of 2.Qe8+ Qxe8 3.dxe8=Q+, and so on. Black counters with

1. ... Ra8

stopping 2.Qe8+, because 2...Qxe8 3.dxe8=Q+ Rxe8 would then lose the precious White pawn.

2. Re1!

Now White threatens to win everything with 3.Re8+ Qxe8 4.dxe8=Q+ Rxe8

5.Qxe8+. Black is powerless to prevent a major loss of material.

2. ... Qf8

DIAGRAM 97.

Also hopeless is 2...Qg8, because it leads to 3.Qf6+ Qg7 4.Re8+ Rxe8 5.dxe8=Q checkmate.

3. Qxf8+ Rxf8

4. Re8 Kg7

5. d8=Q

Accepting his fate, Black can do nothing better than resign. This example showed the passed pawn's great desire to metamorphose into a Queen. Aaron Nimzowitsch called this desire the "pawn's lust to expand." In the next example, we'll take a look at another passed pawn, called a protected passed pawn. The passed pawn on d5 in Diagram 98 is called a protected passed pawn because it is firmly defended by another White pawn. Black must worry about the d5-pawn's advance, but he has no good way of attacking it. Because of the pawn's invulnerability, White is free to leave it on its own and use his pieces elsewhere. In this position, White also controls the only open file and will use it to penetrate Black's position.

1. Re7!

The White Rook charges into the heart of Black's territory. Placing a Rook on the 7th rank is considered advantageous, because most of the enemy pawns reside there and thus become vulnerable to attack.

1. ... Rd7

Black offers a trade, hoping to get rid of the e7-Rook.

2. Rxd7 Qxd7

3. Qe7!

With his protected passed pawn, White will be able to enter any endgame with confidence. More importantly, White is still angling for control of the 7th rank.

DIAGRAM 98.

3. ... Qxe7

An unfortunate necessity. A 3...Rd8 move merely leads to 4.Qxd7 Rxd7 5.Re8 checkmate, which as I've already mentioned is called a Back Rank Mate, and tends to occur frequently.

4. Rxe7

Black loses a pawn because 4...Ra8 (which would guard the a7-pawn) simply exposes the f7-pawn to Rxf7. As you can see, placing a Rook on the 7th rank is worth some effort. I bring this strategy up in this chapter because a Rook on the 7th is one of the worst enemies a pawn can have! Some players go as far as to say that it's worth losing a pawn to place a Rook on the 7th rank, compensating as it usually does for the temporary 1-point disadvantage. A Rook on the 7th is nice, but two Rooks doubled on the 7th are more than twice as nice! Take a look at Diagram 99. Here, the material count is even, and it is White's move. White will win by doubling his Rooks on the 7th rank. Rooks in this position are often able to capture everything in their path; their combined might makes them almost unstoppable. In fact, their power to eat everything is so great that two Rooks on the 7th are often called pigs on the 7th. White sets his pigs in motion with

1. Rdd7

Black has no good reply to White's many threats.

1. ... Rf6

DIAGRAM 99.

Moves like 1...h6 would lose to 2.Rxg7+ Kh8 3.Rh7+ Kg8, and then 4.Rdg7 checkmate.

2. Rxg7+ Kf8

3. Rxh7

White threatens 4.Rh8 checkmate.

3. ... Ke8

White can win in many ways. He could keep feasting with 4.Rxb7 to gain a 3- point material advantage, or he could continue the attack and prepare a pawn for promotion with 4.g5 followed by 5.g6. Play with this position for a while and figure out how you would win the game. The Pawn Chain Having dealt with individual pawn weaknesses and the pawn's worst enemy, it's time to discuss pawn chains. A pawn chain is neither bad nor good. It is simply a group of pawns lined up on a diagonal. Each pawn is considered an individual link in the chain. Pawn chains are created by many kinds of openings. One of the most common pawn chains is an outcome of the French Defense.

1. e4 e6

2. d4 d5

3. Nd2 Nf6

4. e5 Nfd7

5. f4 c5

6. c3

In the resulting position (see Diagram 100), White has a pawn chain that reaches from b2 to e5. Black's chain reaches from f7 to d5. The important thing to remember about a pawn chain is that you must attack it at its base. The base is the pawn that is not protected by any other pawn-the end of the chain. In Diagram 100, the base of White's pawn chain becomes d4. If Black plays ...cxd4, after White's recapture with cxd4 the d4-pawn will have no pawn defenders. Similarly, the base of Black's pawn chain becomes e6, if White plays f4-f5 and fxe6, after Black's recapture with ...fxe6 the e6-pawn will have no pawn defenders. Let's explore some typical moves from Diagram 100.

6. ... Nc6

Because Black can at any moment play ...cxd4, creating the d4 base pawn, Black puts more pressure on d4. Remember, as soon as you figure out which pawn is the base or potential base of the chain, rush over and launch an attack!

DIAGRAM 100.

7. Ndf3

Why has White moved the same piece twice in the opening? White sees that his one weak point is his d4-pawn. Forewarned is forearmed, so he decides to guard the pawn to the extent possible, to ensure its safety. The more common move

7.Ngf3 would lead to 7...cxd4 8.cxd4 Qb6, by which time the d4-pawn would

start to get shaky.

7. ... Qb6

8. Ne2

Now the d4-pawn is well defended and White can implement his plan of playing for an f5 advance and a subsequent attack on Black's pawn on e6. One other point worth noting about the base attack: When you trade pawns at the base of a pawn chain, you tend to open a file for your Rooks.

DIAGRAM 101.

DIAGRAM 102.

Diagram 101 shows a simplified example. Here, both sides are following their respective plans for a base attack. White hopes to play 1.fxe6 fxe6 2.Bg4 to put pressure on the Black e6 base pawn and also to penetrate the 7th rank with Rf7. If it were Black's move, he would do the same type of thing: 1...cxd4 2.cxd4 Bb6 attacks the d4 base pawn and threatens penetration of the 2nd rank with

3...Rc2.

QUIZ 29. In Diagram 102, it is Black's turn to play. White has a pawn chain on d4 and e5. How do you attack a pawn chain? How would you go about it here? The Making of a Champion I have talked about several players from history. One player you might be curious about, who is still alive today, is me! I'm only too happy to satisfy your curiosity. I was born in Damascus in 1960. My father is Syrian and my mother English. When I was two years old, we moved to England; in 1967 we moved again, this time to the United States. We settled first in Seattle, Washington, then moved to the warmer climate of Virginia Beach, Virginia, and finally settled back in Seattle in 1972. While in Virginia Beach, I got used to playing sports on fine, sunny days. The typical cold and rainy days of Seattle made me stir-crazy. When a neighbor offered to teach me chess, I jumped at the chance: anything to relieve the boredom of those long, wet evenings. Yasser Seirawan: America's top player. Those first chess lessons soon led me to the legendary Last Exit on Brooklyn coffee house, a chess haven where an unlikely bunch of unusual people congregates to do battle. There, I learned the ropes. When I got used to one player's crazed attacking style, I would sit down with a defensive player and force myself to learn to attack. This training paid off, and I quickly increased my skills. After playing in tournaments for a few years, I finally became a master in

1977. I won the U.S. Junior Championship in 1978 and the World Junior

Championship in 1979. With that victory (and the International Master title that came with it), I started receiving a steady stream of invitations to international events. After tournaments in Sweden, England, and Holland, I was awarded the International Grandmaster title (the highest title other than World Champion) in

1980. At that time, I was the third youngest person in history to have received

this title. Since that time, I have traveled to every corner of the world and my interest in chess has paid great dividends. With such feathers as the U.S. Chess Championship in my cap, I became the second American since Bobby Fischer to qualify for the World Championship matches. Presently, I am ranked 10th in the world and my main aspiration is to bring the World Champion title back to the United States. Open Positions and Closed Positions Most players think of themselves as attackers, so I will start by explaining open positions, which lend themselves to fast, aggressive games. Open Positions An open position has a minimum number of pawns sitting in the center. Pieces are not blocked and can zip into the enemy camp. As a result, attacks can be mounted quickly and often. To play an open position, getting your pieces out and your King castled into safety as quickly as possible is of utmost importance. In the absence of center pawns, the Rooks are able to enter the foray, often with devastating results. The position shown in Diagram 103 is as open as possible, because all the center pawns have been traded. White has his army ready to move, and his King is safe. Black, on the other hand, is still trying to get his men out. Moreover, his King is still in the center and is vulnerable to the White Rooks and other White pieces. It is White's turn to play.

DIAGRAM 103.

1. Re1+ Be7

2. Qe2!

Excellent! White intensifies the pressure down the e-file and prevents Black from castling (because after castling White would eliminate Black's e7-Bishop with Qxe7). Notice how White's lead in development allows him to bring his Rooks into play, whereas Black's poor things on a8 and h8 are constrained and helpless.

2. ... Nb6

Black blazes a trail for his c8-Bishop. He now hopes to play 3...Be6, which would close the e-file and allow him to castle.

3. Rad1

White's other Rook jumps to an open file. Now 3...Be6 would lose to 4.Bxa6! (which initiates a discovered attack by the Rook on d1) 4...Qc8 5.Bb5+. White would have a material advantage of 1 (a pawn). Black abandons 3...Be6 and plays

3. ... Bd7

Black stops one threat but opens himself up to an even worse one. White now sees that, if he could draw the Black Queen away from the protection of the e7- Bishop, he would be able to checkmate his opponent.

4. Bxc7! Qxc7

For Black, it's either this move or 4...O-O, which would lead to 5.Bxd8 and an insurmountable 10 to 3 advantage in force for White. Even so, Black is doomed:

5. Qxe7 checkmate

Let that be a lesson to you: Castle quickly! On occasion, a player may decide to play an opening gambit (sacrificing a pawn or two) to open up the center and gain a lead in development. Such was the case in a game between Lawrence Crakanthorp and Jonathan Maddox, played in New Zealand in 1933.

1. e4 c5

Black is using what's called the Sicilian Defense. The idea is to control square d4 with a wing pawn so that if White plays a d4 advance, Black can trade the wing pawn for a more valuable center pawn.

2. d4 cxd4

3. Nf3

White wants to recapture a pawn with his Knight rather than with his Queen, because the horse is much more comfortable in the center than the Queen would be. If instead of 3.Nf3 White plays 3.Qxd4, Black would gain valuable time by playing 3...Nc6, thereby attacking the White Queen. As it is, Black plays

[diagram]
Tricky but risky. Black hopes White will take the bait and play 4.Nxe5??, which would lose to 4...Qa5+ with a double attack on White's King and Knight. Black would then win a piece. The trouble with 3...e5 is that it does nothing for Black's development, it weakens his control of the important d5 central square, and it leaves the d7-pawn backward.

4. c3!

A good response. White sacrifices a pawn in order to open up the position and start an attack.

4. ... dxc3

5. Nxc3

Now White's pieces jump nicely into the outpost on d5. Black must be very careful, because the position is open and White has a lead in development.

5. ... Nc6

A good move. Black defends his e5-pawn and develops a piece.

6. Bc4

White develops another piece, controls d5, and eyes the vulnerable f7 point in Black's camp. Note how powerful the Bishop is on square c4. In general, Bishops fare better than Knights in open positions, because few of the pawns in the middle can block their way. Because Bishops are long-range pieces, they can penetrate deep into the enemy camp with just one move. Knights have a shorter range and often need to make two or three moves to position themselves for hostile action.

6. ... Be7??

This move leads to disaster, but a move like 6...Nf6 would also have created unsolvable problems after 7.Ng5!, when Black's f7-pawn falls.

7. Qd5

Oops! White threatens 8.Qxf7 checkmate, and Black can't save himself with

7...Nh6 because a response of 8.Bxh6 would simply repeat the threat of f7

checkmate. Black has to give his King room to run.

7. ... Qc7

8. Qxf7+ Kd8

9. Qxg7

A sobering move. White now has a 1-point material advantage and intends to increase it to 6 points with 10.Qxh8.

9. ... Bf6

Black defends the Rook but leaves his King wide open.

10. Qf8 checkmate

Black lost the game because he weakened control of an important central square, which the White Queen used as a point of entry into Black's position. He also fell behind in development, which allowed White to attack with superior force. Closed Positions We have seen that open games often lead to wild and woolly battles. A much slower type of game results from closed positions. A closed position is one in which the center is filled with pawns, which block the pieces and force both sides to slowly maneuver around the pawn walls to get their armies out.

DIAGRAM 104.

In Diagram 104, the center is completely blocked by pawns-a truly closed position. Play will focus on the wings. Black has a space advantage on the Ringside, so he will attack on that side, whereas White controls more space on the Queenside, so he will attack on that side. The principle at work here is Attack where you have most space to maneuver. In closed positions, you must also work hard to create open files for your Rooks. In Diagram 104, White will play for a c4-c5 advance followed by a capture on d6 with cxd6. This dual-purpose plan leads to the opening of the c- file for White's Rooks and forces Black's base to d6. Black will open up the g- file with ...g5-g4 followed by ...gxf3, which attacks the base of White's pawn chain. To clear lines for your pieces in closed positions, you must start with pawn attacks. Contrast this strategy with that for open positions, in which the pieces lead the attack. One more tip: Knights are often better than Bishops in closed positions. Knights can jump over other pieces and are not blocked by the pawns in their way, whereas Bishops hate walls of pawns. These walls block them and keep them locked up in their prison cells. In Diagram 105, the pathetic White Bishop is imprisoned by its own pawns, and Black's Knight is a real bone in White's throat. The Knight has penetrated the heart of White's position and will torment him for a long time to come. The fact that Black also controls the only open file (remember the importance of open files in closed positions) makes this game extremely unpleasant for White.

DIAGRAM 105.

So which do I recommend for the beginning player: closed or open positions? Open positions, by all means! The type of game produced by open positions will teach you about timing and will introduce you to the tactics necessary to deal with lack of development and an exposed King. In general, closed positions are played more effectively by players with several years' experience under their belts. Of course, you will, on occasion, find yourself faced with a closed position. Don't panic. The suggestions I've given should enable you to handle such positions in an intelligent manner. Combine these suggestions with some experience and you will be able to play both types of game with skill. QUIZ 30. Which statement is false? Closed positions tend to keep out the enemy pieces and allow you to develop at a slower pace. Usually, you can safely postpone castling for quite a while in open positions. Knights generally perform better than Bishops in closed positions. The Great Endgame Players Though players such as Alexander Alekhine and Mikhail Tal made their fortunes with sparkling sacrifices and crowd-pleasing tricks, other great players have chosen less ostentatious paths. Take, for example, the Estonian Grandmaster Paul Keres (1916-75). When he started playing chess, he was a wild man. He ended almost every game with some sort of exciting attack. In addition to playing every game he could, he honed his attacking skills by playing postal chess, in which the opponents send each other one move at a time, written on a postcard. Though a game can take years to finish, postal chess sharpens your analytical abilities and is indispensable for isolated chess players. Keres had as many as 150 games on the go at once! Paul Keres, the great Estonian Grandmaster. Making his mark in tournaments, Keres eventually climbed to the top. Though he was feared as an attacking genius, his style slowly began to change. Eventually, a new Keres emerged. He preferred a quieter, classical type of game and was extremely proficient at the endgame. He was happy to trade pieces and then win in the final stages of play. Is this propensity for the endgame unusual? Not at all! Modern Grandmasters are well aware that the endgame is every bit as important as the opening and the middlegame. Players like Akiba Rubinstein (1882-1961), Emanuel Lasker (1868-1941), José Capablanca, Vasily Smyslov (1921- ), and Tigran Petrosyan are all well known for their phenomenal mastery of this phase of the game. Should the beginner focus on endgame strategy? No. Learn the basic principles of the endgame, but don't be overly concerned with mastering the endgame just now. Instead, attack at every opportunity (but only after all your pieces are developed) and be brutal about finishing off your opponent any way you can. If he avoids a checkmate, then take off all his pieces. When you have three or four pieces and he has only a King, you don't have to worry about an endgame. Enjoy the rout! Pawn Structures in the Endgame We have seen how different pawn structures affect the nature of play in the opening or middlegame. In the same ways, pawn structures affect the endgame. Diagram 106 shows a typical closed position. White has an impotent Bishop blocked on the same color as its own pawns, whereas Black has a powerfully centralized Knight. To make matters worse for White, the Black King will be able to make inroads into White's camp. This point is very important. In an endgame, Kings become powerful pieces and must be rushed into the battle. In this case, Black's King and Knight can join forces and surround the enemy pawn on c4. One final advantage for Black is the fact that his g3-pawn is so far advanced. If Black can somehow get the g2-pawn out of the way, he will be able to move his g3-pawn and perhaps promote it to a Queen. Together, these factors add up to a losing cause for White. It is Black's turn to play, and he wastes no time in rushing his King into the battle area.

1. ... Kb7

Having noticed that the White pawn on c4 cannot be defended by any other pawns, Black hastens to attack it.

2. Kf1

DIAGRAM 106.

White tries to bring his King up for defense, but he will arrive too late.

2. ... Kb6

3. Ke1 Kc5

4. Kd2

White could try to stay put, but he would eventually be pushed back by the superior Black forces. The play would go something like this: 4.Be2 Kb4 5.Bf1 Kc3 6.Kd1 Nc2! (the Black Knight is headed for an even better square on e3- remember, Knights are at their peak of strength on the 6th rank) 7.Ke2 (or 7.Kc1 Ne3, and if the Bishop moves, 8...Nxg2 provides the finishing touch) 7...Kxc4, and Black has won a pawn. Notice how ineffective the White Bishop is, whereas the Black Knight could hop to all sorts of vantage points.

4. ... Nxf3+!

Black hopes to promote his pawn after 5.gxf3 g2 with 6...g1=Q. White does not oblige him:

5. Kc3 Ng5

The nimble Knight runs rings around the Bishop. Now the Bishop can't move to f1 or e2 because of the threat of 6...Nxe4+.

6. Bc2

If White plays 6.Kd2, Black would have the additional option of increasing his King's potential with 6...Kd4. As it is, he plays

6. ... Nxh3!

He is still hoping for 7.gxh3 g2 and the crowning of a new Queen. Another strong Black move is 6...f3!, which breaks White's blockade on g2.

7. Kd3 f3!

A Queen is certainly in the making, because any capture by the White pawn on g2 will be met with 8...g2 followed by 9...g1=Q. White resigns. Now let's look at a vastly different picture. In Diagram 107, we have a wide open board with passed pawns on both sides. Because the White Bishop isn't blocked by pawns, such a position tends to work in favor of the player with the Bishop.

1. Be6!

White stops Black's pawn dead in its tracks and prevents Black's Knight from going to d5 or c4. This move demonstrates why the Bishop's long-range powers are so highly regarded. Because White now threatens to advance and promote his own pawns, Black must make an effort to stop them. Unfortunately for Black, the short-range Knight is not very good at such duties.

DIAGRAM 107.

1. ... Nd7

2. h5

White is not tempted by 2.Bxd7??, because Black would then be free to advance his pawn with 2...a2.

2. ... Nf8

[diagram]
White thwarts Black's attempt to take the White Bishop.

[diagram]
4. g6 b4

5. g7

And the White pawn is headed for a promotion. This time, the White Bishop completely dominated the poor Black horse! QUIZ 31. In an endgame should you: Continue to defend your King? Bring out your King to join in the battle? Tests TEST 20. It is White's turn to play. Can White promote one of his pawns to a Queen? TEST 21. Black has a passed pawn on d5 and a backward pawn on c6. White has doubled pawns on the b-file. Which side would you prefer to play? TEST 22. It is Black's turn to play. Because his Queen is attacked by the White Knight, Black decides to capture the Knight with 1...Nxe5. White now has three ways to recapture. Which is best? TEST 23. It is Black's turn to play, and he is a pawn ahead. Which side has a better chance of winning? TEST 24. It is Black's turn to play. Though 1...O-O is a good move, Black elects to play 1...Nbd7 first. Is it a bad idea for Black to postpone castling in this position?

CHAPTER SIX

Annotated Games After learning the basic principles demonstrated in this book, you should practice by playing as much as possible. If you live in a ghost town or if everyone in your community thinks that chess is the part of your anatomy where your heart resides, consider buying a chess computer. These gadgets sell for as little as $90, and they're getting cheaper all the time. A computer is a perfect opponent. You can set its skill level and demand a game at any time-it never says "No." When you have had a chance to get some games under your belt and have developed a good feel for the information I've given you, start examining a few master games. You will find the moves of particular games chronicled in weekly chess sections in newspapers or in books about the lives and games of particular players. In the meantime, this chapter gives you a taste of annotated games. Play through these games to see how the principles I've discussed are used in actual combat. The Danger of Not Developing Your Pieces Game 1: N.N.-Alphonse Goetz, Strassburg, 1880 (N.N. designates an unknown player, usually someone who has not yet made a mark in the world of chess.)

1. e4

White stakes a claim in the center. He frees his f1-Bishop and Queen.

[diagram]
Black counters by grabbing an equal share of the center.

2. f4

This old opening (called the King's Gambit) is rarely seen nowadays. White sacrifices a pawn so that he can pull Black's center pawn off to the side. This tactic will give White two center pawns to Black's one. White's goal is to get a big share of the center and, while Black is busy defending his extra pawn, White will obtain a lead in development. The one flaw in this plan is that it weakens White's King by allowing one of its protecting pawns to be captured.

2. ... exf4

3. b3??

A horrible move! White should be developing his pieces. Because Black threatens to play 3...Qh4+, White should have played 3.Nf3. Then the game might have continued with 3...d6 4.d4 (by which White would threaten to capture a pawn with 5.Bxf4) 4...g5 5.Bc4, and White would have had a lead in development.

3. ... Qh4+

Usually, you don't want to move your Queen out so early. Here, however, Black's move presents White with two very bad choices: Either put the White King on a horrible square or give away more material.

4. g3??

A better move is 4.Ke2, though Black would retain the advantage, because he has an extra pawn and the White King is stuck in the middle. (By moving his King, White forfeited the right to castle.)

4. ... fxg3

This pawn is going on quite a journey! White cannot capture it because after

5.hxg3, Black would play 5.Qxh1 and be a Rook (5 points) ahead.

5. h3?

White has already lost, but this move leads to a comic finish.

5. ... g2 discovered check

6. Ke2 Qxe4+

7. Kf2

Now Black could win easily with 7...gxh1=Q, which gives him an 11-point material advantage. However, he sees something even better: under-promotion.

7. ... gxh1=N checkmate

As you can see in Diagram 108, in this position the Knight is stronger than a Queen. The underpromotion results in a slaughter. White weakened his King and didn't bother to develop any of his pieces. I hope his pitiful fate will scare you into getting your pieces out as quickly as possible!

DIAGRAM 108.

Game 2: John Odin Howard Taylor-N.N., London,

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3

With this popular move, White attacks Black's pawn and develops a piece.

2. ... Nf6

Black plays what is called the Petroff Defense, hoping to get a symmetrical position after both sides exchange their e-pawns.

3. Bc4

White decides to set up an attack. He shows that he is willing to sacrifice a pawn in order to take a lead in development.

3. ... Nxe4

Black accepts the challenge!

4. Nc3

White is consistently bringing out his army. He avoids 4.Nxe5 d5, which would allow Black to attack White's Bishop with a gain of time.

4. ... Nc5?

Black falls apart. By moving this Knight a third time, he allows White to take a large lead in development. A better move is 4...Nxc3, which would force White to take the time to capture the Black Knight and even the score. This point is important: If you have to move a piece and thereby lose time, try to capture an enemy piece equal in value to the one you're moving. Then your opponent must lose an equivalent amount of time to recapture.

5. Nxe5

White regains his lost material and also makes a threat against Black's f7-pawn.

[diagram]
Suicide! When you are behind in development, you can rarely afford to weaken your King. Another really bad move is 5...Qe7?, which would lead to 6.O-O! Qxe5 7.Re1. Black's Queen would then be lost because it would be pinned to his King. Black should have blocked White's Bishop by moving his Knight yet again, with 5...Ne6. Then 6.d4 followed by 7.O-O would leave White with a dominating position, but at least Black could stay in the game for a while.

6. Qh5+

All of White's pieces now jump on the Black King, which finds itself forced on a long and unpleasant journey toward checkmate.

[diagram]
7. Bf7+ Ke7

8. Nd5+ Kd6

Diagram 109 shows the current position. When you find yourself moving nothing but your King, you know that something has gone terribly wrong!

9. Nc4+

Always working with checks, White does not give Black a moment to catch his breath.

9. ... Kc6

10. Nb4+ Kb5

11. a4+

DIAGRAM 109.

White sacrifices a Knight in order to draw the Black King off on a mission from which it will never return. In general, you will find that when a King is drawn into enemy territory early in the game, it is destined to be quickly checkmated.

11. ... Kxb4

12. c3+ Kb3

Ever since move 7, every one of Black's moves has been his only legal option.

13. Qd1 checkmate

Diagram 110 shows how completely White has managed to surround the Black King.

DIAGRAM 110.

The Danger of Bringing Out the Queen Too Early Game 3: Persifor Frazer-Jean Taubenhaus, Paris,

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3 Nc6

Black knows the best reply. He develops a piece and simultaneously defends his pawn on e5.

3. d4

This move (called the Scotch Opening) is no longer popular, because White will lose a tempo recapturing the pawn on d4.

3. ... exd4

A good decision.

4. Nxd4 Qh4

Black goes hunting for the White pawn on e4. This tactic is risky, because the Black Queen will become vulnerable to attack from White's pieces.

5. Nc3 Nf6?

Black's move is not consistent with his previous plays. He should have tried

5...Bb4, which would pin White's c3-Knight (the lone defender of the e4-pawn)

and renew his threat against the pawn on e4.

6. Nf5

Suddenly, Black's Queen is no longer the hunter but the hunted!

6. ... Qh5

7. Be2

White continues to develop pieces and at the same time mounts an attack against the Queen.

7. ... Qg6

8. Nh4

This attack on the Black Queen leaves it with nowhere to go. Squares h6 and g5 are controlled by White's c1-Bishop, and squares h5 and g4 are under surveillance by the e2-Bishop. The e4-pawn is defended by the c3-Knight, and the g2-pawn is defended by the h4-Knight. Because White will capture his Queen on the next move, Black resigns the game. The moral: Don't move your Queen too early. First, get your pawns and minor pieces out. Next, castle as soon as you can. Finally, find homes for your Rooks and Queen. Game 4: Otto Kraus-Victor Costin, correspondence,

1. d4

This move is just as good as 1.e4. White frees both his c1-Bishop and his Queen, gets a pawn in the center, and pressures the important e5 square.

[diagram]
Not the most common move. Black usually plays 1...d5 (copying White) or

1...Nf6 (developing and controlling e4 and d5). Black's plan with 1...c5 is to

trade White's center pawn for a less valuable wing pawn.

2. dxc5

White forces Black to consider how he is going to recapture a pawn. Another good move for White is 2.d5, which would gain space.

2. ... Qa5+

Black immediately wins back the pawn, but brings out his Queen too early. A better move would be 2...e6 followed by 3...Bxc5, or even 2...Na6 followed by

3...Nxc5. In both cases, the advanced minor piece would be much more useful

than the advanced and exposed Black Queen.

3. Nc3

White calmly blocks the check and develops his Knight to a good square.

3. ... Qxc5

Black has regained his pawn, but his Queen is not completely safe on c5.

4. e4

An excellent move. Now White has a center pawn controlling square d5, and both of his Bishops are ready to be developed.

[diagram]
Simply awful! Black compounds his lack of development by weakening his control of the central squares. This move leaves a gaping hole on d5 and turns the pawn on d7 into a backward pawn. Better moves are 4...Nc6, 4...Nf6, or even

4...e6, which would free the f8-Bishop and keep White's Knight out of d5.

5. Nf3

White brings out another piece and eyes the e5-pawn hungrily.

[diagram]
Though the e5-pawn is already guarded by the Queen, Black decides to give the pawn some additional support. Such consideration would be fine if Black had more pieces out, but he is falling more and more behind in development and should be trying to catch up!

6. Nd5

White places his Knight powerfully in the center and at the same time sets a trap. Also a good move is 6.Be3, which develops another piece with a gain of time, because Black's Queen would be forced to move again.

6. ... Ne7

Black finally develops a Knight and offers to trade his conservative horse for the strong White counterpart on d5. Unfortunately for Black, he has fallen right into White's trap!

7. b4!

Suddenly, Black's Queen has very few squares to retreat to.

7. ... Qc6

The only safe port.

8. Bb5!

White pins Black's Queen to his King but leaves the White Bishop without protection. Has White lost his senses?

8. ... Qxb5

If the Black Queen doesn't take the White Bishop, the Bishop will take the Queen.

9. Nc7+

The point of White's play is now clear. This Knight fork initiates a double attack on Black's King and Queen. Because the Black Queen will be captured with White's next move, Black decides to resign the game. The Danger of Leaving Your Pieces Undefended Game 5: Kaprinay-Hans Hubner, correspondence,

1. c4

White plays the English Opening. As well as giving his Queen some freedom, White hopes to gain control of square d5 by placing his Knight on c3 (which together with the c4-pawn points two attackers at d5) and his f1-Bishop on g2. This opening has been used by all the great players at one time or another, including Bobby Fischer and the present World Champion, Garry Kasparov.

[diagram]
A good reply. Black counters by staking a claim to the d4 square.

2. Nc3

White increases his control of d5, hits the e4 central square, and develops a piece.

2. ... Nc6

Black increases his control of d4, defends the e5-pawn, and also develops a piece. So far, Black is playing well.

3. g3

White intends to fianchetto his Bishop. On g2, the Bishop will control the long h1-a8 diagonal and, in particular, it will reinforce White's control of d5 and e4.

3. ... Nf6

Another good move by Black. He develops his remaining Knight and tries to counter White's control of squares e4 and d5.

4. Bg2 Bb4

Black develops his Bishop and prepares to castle. He also intends to compromise White's pawns with 5. ..Bxc3, forcing White to recapture with 6.bxc3 or 6.dxc3. In either case, White's pawns would be doubled. So far, Black has played in exemplary fashion.

5. Nd5

White moves his Knight a second time, placing it on the advanced d5 post. More common is 5.Nf3, which would continue piece development and prepare the way for castling.

5. ... Nxd5

Not bad, but continued development with 5...O-O would be preferable. After

5...O-O 6.Nxb4 Nxb4, material would be even, and Black would enjoy a lead in

development.

6. cxd5

By threatening Black's Knight, White forces it to move and gains time. Though White has doubled his pawns, the pawn on d5 cramps Black, and the resulting opening of the c-file gives White a nice home for his Rooks later in the game. (Remember, Rooks belong on open files.) White could also have played 6.Bxd5, but that move would put no pressure on Black, who would just ignore it and castle, with good development as the outcome.

6. ... Nd4??

At first glance, this move seems quite good. The problem is that Black has left an unprotected piece on b4 and that his Knight is a target for attack on d4. An even worse move is 6...Na5??, leading to 7.Qa4 Qe7 (defending the Bishop on b4) 8.a3. Then if Black's Bishop moves out of danger, the Knight on a5 would be lost. Black should have played 6...Ne7, which would safeguard all his pieces.

7. e3

White attacks the Knight again and forces it into an undefended position.

7. ... Nf5

Black's choices are limited. Squares e6 and c6 are covered by the White pawn on d5. Squares f3, e2, c2, and b3 are all covered by the White Queen (and other pieces). Black's only other move is 7...Nb5, but then 8.Qa4 would attack the Knight and the Bishop simultaneously and doom one of them to destruction.

8. Qg4!

The White Queen attacks both the Black Bishop on b4 and the Black Knight on f5. Because Black has no way of guarding both pieces, he must lose material. Disgusted with himself, Black resigns. The moral: Take special care of an advanced piece that is undefended or you will lose it. Game 6: Computer-N.N., Seattle, 1989

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3 Nf6

We saw this move-the Petroff Defense-earlier, in Game 2. Black hopes to copy White's moves and gain an equal position.

3. Nxe5 Nxe4?

Black's desire to regain material is understandable, but he walks into a trap. You must be especially careful when you place a piece far from the security of the rest of your army. Black's best move is first to play 3...d6! and only after 4.Nf3 to play Nxe4, because 5.Qe2 would then be comfortably countered with 5...Qe7.

4. Qe2

White threatens to eat the Black Knight. White also has designs against the Black King, which is sitting uncomfortably on the same file as the White Queen.

[diagram]
A good move. Black defends his Knight and frees his c8-Bishop.

5. d3

White attacks the poor Knight again.

5. ... Nf6??

Black is oblivious to White's true threat. Black should have played 5...Qe7 so that after 6.dxe4 Qxe5 7.exd5 Qxe2+ 8.Bxe2, White would be ahead by only a pawn. Instead, after 5...Nf6 the roof caves in.

6. Nc6 discovered check

By this discovered check, White's Queen attacks Black's King while White's Knight attacks Black's Queen, all at the same time!

6. ... Qe7

Any other move loses the Queen to 7.Nxd8.

7. Nxe7 Bxe7

8. Bg5

The wily computer develops his Bishop and threatens to disrupt Black's pawn structure with 9.Bxf6, because the pin on the e7-Bishop would force Black to play 9...gxf6.

8. ... O-O

Black sees a little trick, but it turns out that the only person tricked is himself!

9. Qxe7! Re8

Black will regain a Queen, but White will still end up ahead by a Rook and a Bishop. White is up 9 points now; he will be up by 8 points after the trades. White is willing to part with a point in order to trade several pieces and simplify the position.

10. Bxf6! Rxe7+

11. Bxe7

Now White's strategy is to trade Black's last three pieces, leaving White free to do as he pleases with his remaining men.

11. ... Nc6

Black develops his Knight and attacks the e7-Bishop.

12. Bg5 Nb4

Black threatens to fork White on c2.

13. Na3

White stops the threat and develops a piece.

13. ... Bf5

14. Kd2

Because this is the endgame, White is happy to leave his King in the center, where it can help the other pieces.

14. ... Re8

15. c3

Black doesn't have enough pieces left to sustain any kind of attack, so White now drives Black's Knight back.

15. ... Nc6

16. d4

White gains space and at the same time takes control of square e5 away from the Black Knight.

16. ... Kf8

17. Bf4

White's Bishop attacks the pawn on c7.

17. ... Re7

18. Bd3

White sticks with his plan of trading pieces. Another good move is 18.Nb5, which would attack the c7-pawn.

18. ... Bxd3

19. Kxd3 a6

Black keeps White's Knight from moving to b5.

20. Rhe1

White continues his trading policy.

20. ... Rxe1

21. Rxe1 Nd8

Black has no way to defend the c7-pawn.

22. Bxc7 Ne6

23. Bg3 Ke8

24. Nc2

It's time to put the Knight to work. Remember, don't play with only one or two pieces. Use all of your army!

24. ... Kd7

25. Nb4

The White Knight attacks the d5-pawn and prevents the Black King from coming to the pawn's defense by moving to c6.

25. ... Nc7

26. Bxc7

Success! All of Black's pieces are gone. His King and remaining pawns cannot hope to withstand the power of White's Rook and Knight.

26. ... Kxc7

27. Re7+

This move is even stronger than 27.Nxd5+. White's Rook will now eat everything in its path.

27. ... Kd6

28. Rxf7 a5

29. Nc2 b6

30. Rxg7 Ke6

31. Rxh7 Kf5

32. Rh6

Note how helpless Black is. In fact, Black's cause is completely hopeless, but he plays until the bitter end.

[diagram]
33. Rb6 b4

34. cxb4 axb4

35. Nxb4 Kg5

36. Nxd5

Black's army is completely wiped out! Now all that remains is for White to checkmate the King.

36. ... Kf5

37. f3

Also effective is for White to advance his a-pawn and crown a new Queen. Checkmate would then be easy. But White sees a more satisfying finale.

37. ... Kg5

38. g3 Kf5

39. h3 Kg5

40. h4+ Kf5

Black can also play 40...Kh5, leading to 41.Nf4 checkmate.

41. g4 checkmate

As this game shows, capturing all your opponent's pieces can be a most effective way of winning the battle. The Danger of Weakening Your King′s Position Game 7: Frank Melville Teed-Eugene Delmar, New York, 1896

1. d4 f5

This move is called the Dutch Defense. Black wants to place his Knight behind the f5-pawn and exert maximum pressure on square e4. The one slight drawback to this opening is that it opens the h5-e8 diagonal and exposes the Black King.

2. Bg5

A sharp reply. White pins the Black pawn on e7 and goads Black into advancing his Kingside pawns, thereby weakening the Black King's position.

[diagram]
Black takes the bait! Notice how more and more holes are developing around the Black King. Those holes may eventually serve as entry points for the White pieces.

3. Bh4

White retreats out of danger while continuing to pin the e7-pawn.

[diagram]
Black thinks he is going to capture White's Bishop. Encircling tactics often do win material, but in this case, Black's weakened Kingside interferes with his materialistic plans.

4. Bg3

The White Bishop has no other place to go.

[diagram]
Black traps the Bishop.

5. e3!

A rude shock. White makes a double threat: 6.Qh5 checkmate or 6.exf4, saving the Bishop and winning a pawn.

[diagram]
Black neutralizes the 6.Qh5 threat and intends to meet 6.exf4 with 6...h4, which renews the attack on the Bishop.

6. Bd3

The other White Bishop takes advantage of a hole in the Black camp. Now White threatens 7.Bg6 checkmate.

6. ... Rh6

Black thinks he has stopped the checkmate and will finally capture the g3- Bishop. A surprise awaits him.

7. Qxh5+!!

White draws the Black Rook away from its control of g6.

7. ... Rxh5

8. Bg6 checkmate

Game 8: Zeissl-Walter Von Walthoffen, Vienna, 1898

1. e4 e5

2. Nf3 Nc6

3. Bb5

This is the Ruy López Opening, one of the oldest and most respected openings. White quickly develops his Kingside pieces and prepares to castle, while pressuring Black's pawn on e5.

[diagram]
A sharp but risky response. Black attacks White in the center but weakens his King position at the same time. Safer moves are 3...Nf6 or 3...a6. Note that after

3...a6 White would not win a pawn with 4.Bxc6 dxc6 5.Nxe5, because with Qd4,

Black counterattacks both White's Knight and the e4-pawn.

4. d4

White avoids 4.exf5 e4, because his Knight would get kicked around. The best move here is 4.Nc3, which would develop a piece and defend the pawn on e4.

4. ... fxe4

Black forces White to move his Knight and make some attempt to regain his lost pawn.

5. Nxe5

Material is once again equal.

5. ... Nxe5

6. dxe5 c6!

Material is still equal after the trades. However, the White Bishop is now under attack and White must move it to a place of safety. The problem is Black's hidden threat to pick up White's pawn on e5.

7. Bc4

White gives up a pawn for nothing. A better fighting chance is 7.Nc3! cxb5

8.Nxe4. Though White would be 2 points behind, he would have a lead in

development, more space, and chances for attack. For example, 8...d5 would lose another pawn to 9.exd6 e.p. (remember, e.p. stands for en passant), and the developing 8...Ne7 would run into 9.Nd6 checkmate.

7. ... Qa5+

A double attack. Black hits White's King and the e5-pawn.

8. Nc3 Qxe5

Black is now 1 point ahead. What makes matters really bad for White is that Black pawns firmly control the center, restricting the movement of White's army.

9. O-O d5

Black gains space and time, because White is forced to sound the retreat for his Bishop.

10. Bb3 Nf6

Black pays special attention to time now that he has the advantage in space and force.

11. Be3

White has a lead in development, but Black's center pawns effectively block the White pieces.

11. ... Bd6

A very strong move. Black develops a piece, prepares to castle, and threatens to checkmate White with 12...Qxh2.

12. g3

A terrible move, because it creates holes in the White King's position. Here, however, White has no choice, because Black would counter the other possibility, 12.f4, with exf4 e.p. The ...Qxh2 would still be a threat, and the e3- Bishop would be attacked. Black has forced White to weaken his Kingside-a strategy well worth copying!

12. ... Bg4!

The problem with weakening squares is that enemy pieces tend to head toward them. When Black sees that f3 has been weakened (no White pawn can defend it), he hastens to plant a piece there. The fact that he can develop at the same time is a bonus for Black.

13. Qd2 Bf3

As you can see in Diagram 111, the holes around White's King allow Black's pieces to infiltrate. Drafty positions of this kind often give rise to a quick and violent checkmate.

14. Bf4

White attacks both Black's Queen and Bishop, hoping to trade a piece or two and ease his defensive burden. This strategy is usually a good one for the defender, but here it is simply too late.

14. ... Qh5!

If White captures the Bishop, he will be checkmated, because 15.Bxd6 would lead to Qh3, followed by 16...Qg2 checkmate.

DIAGRAM 111.

15. Nd1

White brings his Knight around to defend square g2 and attempt to stave off checkmate.

15. ... Qh3

Another Black piece penetrates White's position. Now 16...Qg2 checkmate is threatened.

16. Ne3

White stops the checkmate.

16. ... Ng4!

Still another Black piece joins the attack. This time, 17...Qxh2 checkmate is the threat.

17. Rfe1

White tries to create an escape for his King. Another possible move, 17.Nxg4, would lead to 17...Qg2 checkmate.

17. ... Qxh2+

18. Kf1 Qh1 checkmate

This horrible rout was made possible by the holes in White's Ringside, which invited the Black pieces to penetrate White's position. The Satisfaction of Learning Congratulations! You've just played through a number of chess games that featured many classical lessons. Learn these lessons well, and you will suffer fewer losses on your road to chess mastery.

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Four Principles and You Most beginners find the idea of calculating a string of chess moves on the fly terrifying-they feel they just can't do it. Actually, lots of players with a good deal of experience behind them feel the same way. Don't worry about it! Being able to accurately calculate moves comes only after you understand and practice the basic principles of the game. Force, time, space, and pawn structure: These are the elements you should work on. When you have a thorough grasp of these four principles, calculating which moves to make and when to make them will become a cinch. Some top players prefer to strategically assess their games in terms of the four principles, even though they have the knowledge and experience to make rapid calculations. As an example, let's go back to the 1960 World Championship match between Mikhail Botvinnik (the champion) and Mikhail Tal (the challenger). For many years, Botvinnik had ruled world chess. His style was profoundly strategic, but aggressive. Whenever possible, he would come to decisions using the principles that we have studied in this book. Tal, on the other hand, was famous for his ability to calculate long strings of moves with amazing rapidity. During one game, Tal was on the attack. Botvinnik, thinking for a long time, decided on the correct defensive strategy and drew the game. Afterwards, Tal listed a huge series of move variations, thinking that Botvinnik had arrived at the correct strategy by calculating the same possibilities. The young challenger was dumbfounded when the champion stated that he had decided on an overall strategy by weighing his position in the light of the principles-he had made very few calculations. The two different approaches had, however, led to the same solution! QUIZ 32. Which statement is false? You should calculate every possible move and counter- move. Calculating moves is useful, but applying general principles so that you can recognize potential weaknesses is just as important. By the way, Tal eventually won this match (best of 21 games) and became World Champion. However, one year later Botvinnik was granted a rematch and decisively won back his title. Psychological Factors It has often been said that people are their own worst enemies. The saying is particularly applicable to chess players. We can memorize all the openings; we can study the middlegame and master thousands of different positions; we can become endgame experts. But even with experience and significant accomplishments under our belts, we can still be influenced by psychological factors that inhibit the way we play. Let's look at the two biggest mental pitfalls: stress and lack of confidence. Stress Stress is the bane of the serious chess player. A game of tournament chess lasts several hours. If money or ego is on the line, the situation can become very stressful. As stress builds, thinking becomes clouded and nerves start to fray. Some people short-circuit altogether, making blunders they would never make under more casual circumstances. Obviously, chess players must learn to keep calm. Deep breathing is a good method. Grandmaster Svetozar Gligoric used to eat chocolate throughout his games, following the advice of legendary World Champion Alexander Alekhine: "A brain without sugar is not a brain." To avoid becoming a sugar addict (not to mention obese), Fischer drank apple and orange juice throughout his games. Though juice has a high sugar content, it seems more healthy than pounds of chocolate! Lack of Confidence A chess player's confidence is only as solid as his last victory, and loss can transform him into an insecure wimp. If more losses follow, he becomes even more unsure of himself, creating a crisis of confidence that is hard to snap out of. Only you can prevent this crisis from developing. If you lose, consider what you have learned from the experience and keep on playing. Apply the information I've given you in this book, and sooner or later you will start turning the tables, winning as many games as you lose. Be prepared to lose and to win. In mastering anything, you're bound to have setbacks. Learn from your losses. It's amazing what lack of confidence and the fear that comes with it can do. Suppose, for example, that a fairly low-rated player (White) is playing a well- known master (Black). White has a defeatist attitude from the beginning, and his thinking all along is, "I don't even need to analyze this move. If such a strong player makes this threat, then I know it must be good." Of course, Black wins the game without much difficulty. QUIZ 33. Which statement is false? It is important to find out how strong your opponent is so that you can play accordingly. Play an aggressive game to win against anyone, no matter what their strength. Don't let losses bother you. Figure out why you lost and use that insight in your next game. Now suppose that White is playing a complete beginner or someone with a lower rating than himself. White looks long and hard for a way to win. Faced with exactly the same positions as in the first scenario, his thinking now goes like this: "I really want to beat this guy. If I take on d7, I threaten a Back Rank Mate. If he then plays 1...Qxh2+, I just step aside. He will soon run out of checks and I will win." Notice the change in attitude? Don't change your approach to the game out of fear! Play aggressively to win against anyone, even the World Champion. Photo Album Chess is not just a sport for brainy intellectuals but for the masses! These four photographs show hundreds of players competing in the 1989 Software Toolworks Open Tournament. In tournaments, chess clocks are used to time each player's moves. If a player fails to make the required number of moves in a specified period of time, he loses. In tournament chess, each player keeps his own record of the game. Later, the record will provide lessons on what to do or not to do in the future. In this ocean of chess players, note the empty chairs. Some players are tardy! Chess players are notorious late risers. In the U.S. Championship, America's strongest Grandmasters annually compete in a round robin. Moves are recorded on a demonstration board so that the audience can follow the games. During the 1989-90 U.S. Championship, International Master Jack Peters lectures on the games in progress. Yugoslavia's highest-ranked female chess player, Alisa Marie, studies her position. Grandmasters Yasser Seirawan and Nick de Firmian engage in a Blitz game before the television cameras. In Blitz, each player has 5 minutes to complete the game. Blitz is one of the most popular forms of chess. Grandmaster Maxim Dlugy probes the mysteries of his position. Your author, masking his anxiety: "Oh boy, what am I going to do next?" The 1988-89 U.S. Women's Champion, Alexey Rudolph Root, flashes a winning smile. International Master Stuart Rachels pulled off the biggest upset of his career by tying for first place in the 1989-90 U.S. Championship. Arthur Dake, a 75-year-old former U.S. Olympic team player, still pushes the pieces. Yasser Seirawan's first game against then-World Champion Anatoly Karpov took place in Mar del Plata, Argentina in 1982. Hundreds of spectators watched this 13-hour game, which was played over two days. The final result was a draw. In this postmortem, Seirawan points out his crucial error. Nana Alexandria, one of the Soviet Union's finest Woman Grandmasters (WGMs), performs a simultaneous exhibition. In this case, Alexandria plays 40 opponents. Spectators crowd the simultaneous exhibition as Alexandria closes in for the kill. A young Californian gets a private one-on-one lesson. Alexandria gets a smile from her student. Grandmaster Tony Miles (left) plays against the monster chess program Deep Thought. Note the portable computer, which is connected via modem to the supercomputers at Bell Laboratories. Glossary Active: In relation to an opponent's style, denotes a preference for aggressive or tactical types of play. Otherwise, means an aggressive move or position. Advantage: A net superiority of position, usually based on force, time, space, or pawn structure. Algebraic Notation: Many ways of writing chess moves have been devised over the years. In fact, there are probably as many ways of writing chess moves as there are languages. However, algebraic notation has become the international standard. Essentially, each square on the chessboard is given a letter and a number. The files are assigned the letters a, b, c, d, e, f, g, and h, from left to right from White's perspective. The ranks are assigned the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, from bottom to top from White's perspective. Thus, the bottom left corner is square a1 and the top right corner is square h8. When a piece travels from one square to another, algebraic notation enables you to identify the piece and the square to which it is moving. For example, if the Rook moves from square a1 to square a8, you write Ra8. For pawn moves, you write only the square to which the pawn moves; for example, e4. Castling Kingside is written O-O, and castling Queenside is written O-O-O. In this book, algebraic notation is sometimes referred to as chess notation or simply notation. Analysis: The calculation of a series of moves based on a particular position. In tournament play, you are not allowed to move the pieces during analysis but must make all calculations in your head. When the game is over, opponents commonly analyze the game they have just played, moving the pieces about in an effort to discover what the best moves would have been. See also Postmortem. Annotation: Written comments about a position or game. The comments can take the form of narrative, chess notation, or a combination of both. Attack: To start an aggressive action in a particular area of the board, or to threaten to capture a piece or pawn. Back Rank Mate: A checkmate where the King is confined to its back rank. For example, White's Rook is on a8; Black's King is on g8, with pawns on f7, g7, and h7. Backward Pawn: A pawn that has fallen behind its comrades and can no longer be defended by another pawn. Usually considered a weakness. Berserker: A playing style characterized by frenzied attacks with one or two pieces. Named after ancient Scandinavian warriors who worked themselves up into battle frenzies and then charged their opponents with little regard for strategy or personal danger. Bind: When one player has a grip on the position because of a large advantage in space and his opponent is unable to find useful moves. Bishop Pair: Two Bishops versus a Bishop and a Knight or two Knights. Two Bishops work well together because they can control diagonals of both colors. See also Opposite-Colored Bishops. Blockade: To stop an enemy pawn by placing a piece (ideally a Knight) directly in front of it. Popularized by Aaron Nimzowitsch. Blunder: A terrible move that loses material or involves decisive positional or tactical concessions. Book: Opening analysis found in chess books and magazines. A book player relies heavily on memorization of published material rather than on his own creative spark. Break: The offer of an exchange of pawns in order to gain space or mobility. Also called a pawn break. Breakthrough: Denotes a penetration of the enemy position. Brilliancy: A game that contains a stunning sacrifice or an amazing strategic concept. Sometimes such a game receives a special monetary award for excellence, called a brilliancy prize. Calculation of Variations: The working out of chains of moves without physically moving the pieces. Castle: A player castles by moving his King and Rook simultaneously. Castling is the only move in which a player can deploy two pieces in one move. Castling allows a player to move his King out of the center (the main theater of action in the opening) to the flank, where the King can be protected by pawns. Additionally, castling develops a Rook. When White castles Kingside, he moves his King from e1 to g1 and his h1- Rook to f1. When Black castles Kingside, he moves his King from e8 to g8 and his h8-Rook to f8. When White castles Queenside, he moves his King from e1 to c1 and his a1-Rook to d1. And when Black castles Queenside, he moves his King from e8 to c8 and his a8-Rook to d8. Center: The center is the area of the board encompassed by the rectangle c3-c6- f6-f3. Squares e4, d4, e5, and d5 are the most important part of the center. The e- and d-files are the center files. Centralize: To place pieces and pawns in the center, or as close to the center as possible. From there, they can control a good chunk of enemy territory. Checkmate: An attack against the enemy King from which the King cannot escape. When a player checkmates his opponent's King, he wins the game. Classical: A style of play that focuses on the creation of a full pawn center. Classical principles tend to be rather dogmatic and inflexible. The philosophy of the classical players was eventually challenged by the so-called "hypermoderns." See also Hypermodern. Closed Game: A position that is obstructed by blocking chains of pawns. Such a position tends to favor Knights over Bishops, because the pawns block the diagonals. Combination: A calculable, tactical series of moves that usually involves a sacrifice. Compensation: An advantage in one area that balances the opponent's advantage in another area. Material versus development is one example; three pawns versus a Bishop is another. Connected Passed Pawns: Two or more passed pawns of the same color on adjacent files. See also Passed Pawns. Control: To completely dominate an area of the board. Dominating a file or a square, or simply having the initiative, can constitute control. Counterplay: When the player who has been on the defensive starts his own aggressive action. Cramp: The lack of mobility that is the usual result of a disadvantage in space. Critical Position: An important point in the game, where victory or defeat hangs in the balance. Defense: A move or series of moves designed to thwart an enemy attack. Also used in the names of many openings initiated by Black. Examples are the French Defense and the Caro-Kann Defense. Development: The process of moving pieces from their starting positions to new posts, from which they control a greater number of squares and have greater mobility. Doubled Pawns: Two pawns of the same color lined up on a file. This doubling can only come about as the result of a capture. Draw: A tied game. A draw can result from a stalemate, from a three-time repetition of position, or by agreement between the players. See also Stalemate; Three-Time Repetition of Position. Dynamic: Implies action and movement. A dynamic factor concerns itself with actual moves and threats and involves combinations of attack and defense maneuvers. The two main aspects of a dynamic factor are time and force. Elo Rating: The system by which players are rated. Devised by Professor Arpad Elo (1903- ) of Milwaukee and adopted by FIDE in 1970. A beginner might have a 900 rating, the average club player 1600, a state champion 2300, and the World Champion 2800. En Passant: A French term that means in passing. When a pawn advances two squares (which it can do only if it has not moved before) and passes an enemy pawn on an adjacent file that has advanced to its 5th rank, it can be captured by the enemy pawn as if it had moved only one square. The capture is optional and must be made at the first opportunity; otherwise, the right to capture that particular pawn under those particular circumstances is lost. En Prise: A French term that means in take. It describes a piece or pawn that is vulnerable to capture. Endgame: The third and final phase of a chess game. An endgame arises when few pieces remain on the board. The clearest signal that the ending is about to begin is when Queens are exchanged. Equality: A situation in which neither side has an advantage or the players' advantages balance out. Exchange: The trading of pieces, usually ones of equal value. Exchange, The: Winning the Exchange means you have won a Rook (5 points) for a Bishop or a Knight (3 points). Fianchetto: An Italian word that means on the flank. A fianchetto is placing a White Bishop on g2 or b2 or a Black Bishop on g7 or b7. Few players pronounce this word properly, the correct pronunciation being fyan-KET-to. FIDE: The acronym for Fédération Internationale des Échecs, the international chess federation. File: A vertical column of eight squares. Designated in algebraic notation as the a-file, b-file, and so on. See also Half-Open; Open. Flank: The a-, b-, and c-files on the Queenside, and the f-, g-, and h-files on the Kingside. Flank openings start with moves on the flanks (such as 1.b3, 1.c4, and

1.Nf3) and usually involve a fianchetto and attempts to control the center

squares with pawns and pieces from the flanks. Force: Material. An advantage in force arises when one player has more material than his opponent or when he outmans his opponent in a certain area of the board. Forced: A move or series of moves that must be played to avoid disaster. Forfeit: See Time Control. A less common way to forfeit is to arrive for a game more than an hour after it was scheduled to start. Gambit: The voluntary sacrifice of at least a pawn in the opening, with the idea of gaining a compensating advantage (usually time, which permits development). General Principles: The fundamental rules of chess, devised to enable less advanced players to react logically to different positions. Also used more often than you would think by Grandmasters! Ghost: The illusion of a threat. Fear of the opponent or an overly nervous disposition can easily lead to the "perception" of ghosts. Grandmaster: A title awarded by FIDE to players who meet an established set of performance standards, including a high Elo rating. It is the highest title (other than World Champion) attainable in chess. A separate Woman Grandmaster title is awarded to distinguished women chess players. Lesser titles are International Master and FIDE Master, which is the lowest title awarded for international play. Once earned, a Grandmaster title cannot be taken away. See also Elo Rating; Master. Grandmaster Draw: A quick, uninteresting draw between two Grandmasters. Nowadays, this term is applied to a quick draw between any class of player. Half-Open: A file that contains none of one player's pawns, but one or more of the opponent's. Hang: To be unprotected and exposed to capture. Hanging Pawns: A pawn island consisting of two pawns side by side on the 4th rank on half-open files. Sometimes, hanging pawns are the source of dynamic energy for an attack; at other times, they become a target, subject to frontal attack by the enemy. See also Pawn Island. Hold: To avoid defeat. To stave off loss. However, to hold out is to offer tough resistance, but to eventually lose against a better play. A move that would hold the position is one that would most likely allow a successful defense. Hole: A square that cannot be defended by a pawn. Such a square makes an excellent home for a piece, because the piece cannot be chased away by hostile pawns. Hypermodern: A school of thought that arose in reaction to the classical theories of chess. The hypermoderns insisted that putting a pawn in the center in the opening made it a target. The heroes of this movement were Richard Réti and Aaron Nimzowitsch, both of whom expounded the idea of controlling the center from the flanks. Like the ideas of the classicists, those of the hypermoderns can be carried to extremes. Nowadays, both views are seen as correct. A distillation of the two philosophies is needed to cope successfully with any particular situation. See also Classical. Initiative: When you are able to make threats to which your opponent must react, you are said to possess the initiative. Innovation: A new move in an established opening. Intuition: Finding the right move or strategy by "feel" rather than by calculation. Isolated Pawn: A pawn with no like-colored pawns on either adjacent file. The drawbacks of an isolated pawn are that it is not guarded by a friendly pawn and that the square directly in front of it can make a nice home for an enemy piece, because no pawns can chase that piece away. On the other hand, an isolated pawn has plenty of space and controls squares on the open (or half-open) files on either side of it, with the result that minor pieces and Rooks of the same color usually become active. An isolated pawn is, however, considered a weakness. Kingside: The half of the board made up of the e, f, g, and h files. Kingside pieces are the King, the Bishop next to it, the Knight next to the Bishop, and the Rook next to the Knight. See also Queenside. Liquidation: A series of trades culminating in a drawn or won endgame. Defensively, liquidation is used to trade attacking pieces and neutralize the force of an enemy assault. Luft: A German term that means air. By extension, it means to give the King breathing room. It describes a pawn move made in front of the King of the same color to avoid Back Rank Mate possibilities. Major Pieces: Queens and Rooks. Also called heavy pieces. Maneuver: A series of seemingly nonaggressive moves designed to favorably redeploy the pieces. A maneuver is carried out with a strategic goal in mind. Master: In the U.S., a player with a rating of 2200 or more. If a player's rating drops below 2200, the title is rescinded. See also Grandmaster. Mate: Short for checkmate. Material: All the pieces and pawns. A material advantage is when a player has more pieces on the board than his opponent or has pieces of greater value. See also Point Count. Mating Attack: An attack on the enemy King, with checkmate as the ultimate goal. Middlegame: The phase between the opening and the endgame. Minor Pieces: The Bishops and Knights. Mobility: Freedom of movement for the pieces. Notation: See Algebraic Notation. Occupation: A Rook or Queen that controls a file or rank is said to occupy that file or rank. A piece is said to occupy the square it is sitting on. Open: Short for open game or open file. Also refers to a type of tournament in which any strength of player can participate. Though a player often ends up with opponents who are stronger or weaker than himself, the prizes are usually structured around different rating groups, with prizes for the top scorers in each group. Such open tournaments are extremely popular in the United States. See also Open File; Open Game. Open File: A vertical column of eight squares that is free of pawns. Rooks reach their maximum potential when placed on open files or open ranks. Open Game: A position characterized by many open ranks, files, or diagonals and few center pawns. A lead in development becomes very important in positions of this type. Opening: The start of a game, incorporating the first dozen or so moves. The basic goals of an opening are to Develop pieces as quickly as possible. Control as much of the center as possible. Castle early and get the King to safety, while at the same time bringing the Rooks toward the center and placing them on potentially open files. Openings: Established sequences of moves that lead to the goals outlined under Opening. These sequences of moves are often named after the player who invented them or after the place where they were first played. Some openings, such as the Ruy López and the Sicilian, have been analyzed to great lengths in chess literature. Opposite-Colored Bishops: Also Bishops of opposite color. When players have one Bishop each and the Bishops are on different-colored squares. Opposite- colored Bishops can never come into direct contact. Overextension: When space is gained too fast. By rushing his pawns forward and trying to control a lot of territory, a player can leave weaknesses in his camp, or can weaken the advanced pawns themselves. He is then said to have overextended his position. Passed Pawn: A pawn whose advance to the 8th rank cannot be prevented by any enemy pawn. See also Promotion; Underpromotion. Passive: In relation to a move, denotes a move that does nothing to fight for the initiative. In relation to a position, denotes a position that is devoid of counterplay or active possibilities. Pawn Center: Pawns that are inside the rectangle bounded by squares c3, f3, f6, and c6. Pawn Chain: A diagonal line of same-colored pawns. Pawn Island: Two pawns are members of different islands if neither can protect the other. Pawn islands are separated by open files. Pawns that are both doubled and isolated constitute two pawn islands. Having fewer pawn islands than the opponent is advantageous. See also Hanging Pawns. Pawn Structure: Also referred to as the pawn skeleton. All aspects of the pawn setup, including pawn chains, doubled pawns, isolated pawns, backward pawns, and so on. Perpetual Check: A draw caused by one side giving check with each move, eventually resulting in a three-time repetition of position. See also Three-Time Repetition of Position. Pig: Slang for Rook. Pigs on the 7th is a common term for Rooks doubled on the 7th rank. Plan: A short- or long-range goal on which a player bases his moves. Point: A square. Also, in tournament play, the winner of the game earns a point. In the case of a draw, each player earns a half-point. See also Support Point. Point Count: A system that gives the pieces the following numeric values: King -priceless; Queen-9 points; Rook-5 points; Bishop-3 points; Knight-3 points; and pawn-1 point. Poisoned Pawn: A pawn whose capture is a precursor to a strong attack. Positional: A move or style of play that is based on long-range considerations. The slow buildup of small advantages is said to be positional. Postmortem: A Latin term that means after death. After a hard session of tournament chess, the players usually go to a special room where they can analyze their game, or hold a postmortem. Premature: Taking action without sufficient preparation. Prepared Variation: In professional chess, it is common practice to analyze book openings in the hope of finding a new move or plan. When a player makes such a discovery, he will often save this prepared variation for use against a special opponent. Problem Child: Slang for a Bishop that is shut in by its own pawns. Such a piece is usually inactive. For example, after 1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 c5, Black should have a reasonable game. However, Black's one problem will be the Bishop on c8, which is blocked by the e6 pawn. This Bishop is a problem child. Promotion: Also called queening. When a pawn reaches the 8th rank, the pawn can be promoted to a Bishop, Knight, Rook, or (most commonly) Queen of the same color. See also Underpromotion. Protected Passed Pawn: A passed pawn that is under the protection of another pawn. See also Passed Pawn. Queenside: The half of the board that includes the d-, c-, b-, and a-files. The Queenside pieces are the Queen, the Bishop next to it, the Knight next to the Bishop, and the Rook next to the Knight. See also Kingside. Quiet Move: An unassuming move that is not a capture, a check, or a direct threat. A quiet move often occurs at the end of a maneuver or combination that drives the point home. Rank: A horizontal row of eight squares. Designated in algebraic notation as the 1 (1st) rank, the 2 (2nd) rank, and so on. Rating: A number that measures a player's relative strength. The higher the number, the stronger the player. See also Elo Rating. Refutation: A move that demonstrates the flaw in another move or plan. Resign: When a player realizes that he is going to lose and graciously gives up the game without waiting for a checkmate. When resigning, a player can simply say, "I resign," or he can tip his King over in a gesture of helplessness. When you first start playing chess, I recommend that you never resign. Always play until the end. Risk: A move or plan that plays for an advantage while incubating the seeds of danger. Romantic: The Romantic (or Macho) era of chess from the early to mid 1800s, when sacrifice and attack were considered the only manly ways to play. If a sacrifice was offered, it was considered a disgraceful show of cowardice to refuse the capture. Today, a player who has a proclivity for bold attacks and sacrifices, often throwing caution to the wind, is called a romantic. Sacrifice: The voluntary offer of material for compensation in space, time, pawn structure, or even force. (A sacrifice can lead to a force advantage in a particular part of the board.) Unlike a combination, a sacrifice is not always a calculable commodity and often entails an element of uncertainty. Sharp: An aggressive move or position. In relation to a player, denotes someone who enjoys dynamic, attacking chess. Shot: A strong but unexpected move. Simplify: To trade pieces to quiet down the position, to eliminate the opponent's attacking potential, or to clarify the situation. Smothered Mate: When a King is completely surrounded by its own pieces (or is at the edge of the board) and receives an unanswerable check from the enemy, he is said to be a victim of Smothered Mate. Sound: A correct move or plan. In relation to a position, denotes one that is safe from all attack. Space: The territory controlled by each player. Space Count: A numerical system used to determine who controls more space. Each square on the opponent's side of the board that is attacked by a player's piece or pawn adds 1 to the space count. Speculative: Made without calculating the consequences to the extent normally required. Sometimes full calculation is not possible, so a player must rely on intuition, from which a speculative plan might arise. Stalemate: A position in which the player whose turn it is to move has no legal move and is not in check. Stalemate ends the game as a draw, or tie game. Static: Refers to an object not in motion, one that is not an immediate threat but that will be around to influence the play for a long time. Examples of static factors are space, control of squares, poorly situated pieces, and various features of the pawn structure. Strategy: The reasoning behind a move, plan, or idea. Style: Players approach chess in different ways as a result of their personalities and preferences. The types of move a player chooses are usually indicative of the player as a person. Typically, in a game between players of opposing styles (for example, an attacker versus a quiet positional player), the winner will be the one who successfully imposes his style on the other. Support Point: A square that acts as a home for a piece (usually a Knight). A square can be considered a support point only if it cannot be attacked by an enemy pawn, or if the enemy pawn's advance would severely weaken the enemy position. Swindle: A trap that holds or wins an inferior position. Symmetry: A situation in which both sides have the same position. Often arises when Black copies White's moves. Tactics: Situations that are based on the calculation of variations. A position with many traps and combinations is considered to be tactical in nature. Tempo: One move, as a unit of time; the plural is tempi. If a piece can reach a useful square in one move but takes two moves to get there, it has lost a tempo. For example, after 1.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.Qxd4 Nc6, Black gains a tempo and White loses one, because the White Queen is attacked and White must move his Queen a second time to get it to safety. Theory: Well-known opening, middlegame, and endgame positions that are documented in books. Threat: A move or plan that intends to somehow damage the enemy position. Three-Time Repetition of Position: Occurs when the same position recurs twice, with the same player to move and the same movement possibilities. Either player can claim a draw (a tie game) when this happens. See also Perpetual Check. Time: In this book, in addition to the common use of the word ("Black does not have time to stop all of White's threats"), time is a measure of development. Also refers to thinking time, as measured on a chess clock. See Time Control. See also Tempo. Time Control: The amount of time in which each player must play a specified number of moves. In international competitions, the typical time control is 40 moves in 2 hours for each player. After each player has made 40 moves, each is given an additional amount of time (usually 1 hour for 20 moves). If a player uses up his time, but has not yet made the mandatory number of moves, he loses the game by forfeit, no matter what the position on the board. Time Pressure: One of the most exciting moments in a tournament chess game. When one or both players have used up most of their time but still have several moves to make before they reach the mandatory total of 40, they start to make moves with increasing rapidity, sometimes slamming down the pieces in frenzied panic. Terrible blunders are typical in this phase. Some players get into time pressure at almost every game and are known as time-pressure addicts. Transition: The point at which one phase of the game changes into another; for example, the transition from the opening into the middle-game or from the middlegame into the endgame. Transposition: Reaching an identical opening position by a different order of moves. For example, the French Defense is usually reached by 1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5, but 1.d4 e6 2.e4 d5 transposes into the same position. Trap: A way of surreptitiously luring the opponent into making a mistake. Unclear: An assessment of a position. Some positions are good for White, others are good for Black, and still others are equal. Unclear means that the analyst is unable or unwilling to state which applies. Underpromotion: Promotion of a pawn to any piece other than a Queen. Variation: One line of analysis in any phase of the game. It could be a line of play other than the ones used in the game. The term variation is frequently applied to one line of an opening; for example, the Wilkes-Barre Variation (named after the city in Pennsylvania) of the Two Knights' Defense. Variations can become as well-analyzed as their parent openings. Entire books have been written on some well-known variations. Weakness: Any pawn or square that is readily attackable and therefore hard to defend. Wild: A complicated position that requires precise analysis, but the analysis is impeded by unexpected moves resulting in unclear positions. Zugzwang: A German term that means compulsion to move. It refers to a situation in which a player would prefer to do nothing because any move leads to a deterioration of his position, but he moves something because it is illegal to pass. Zwischenzug: A German term that means in-between move. A surprising move that, when inserted in an apparently logical sequence (for example, a check that interrupts a series of exchanges), changes the result of that sequence. Answers to Quizzes and Tests Quizzes Chapter One QUIZ 1: The Xs are on squares a2, d5, and h7. QUIZ 2: Compare your board with Diagram 8, which shows the pieces and pawns in their correct starting positions. QUIZ 3: White's Rook cannot capture the Black Rook because the White Queen is in the way. Rooks cannot jump over other pieces. White's Rook can capture the enemy Queen on d7, though this capture would be a trade because Black would then capture White's Queen with ...Rxf5. White's best moves are Queen moves, with Qxd7 being the strongest (because it captures the Black Queen) and Qxg5 being the next strongest (because it captures a Black Rook). QUIZ 4: No, the Bishops can never take one another, because they are permanently situated on opposite-colored squares. Because of this placement, these pieces are called Bishops of opposite color. Each piece knows the other exists, but for each, the other is like a ghost. QUIZ 5: The White Knight can capture the Black pawns on f6 and d6, or it can capture the Black Rook on c3. With this particular move, it cannot capture the Black pawn on g4. QUIZ 6: White's pawn cannot move because it is blocked by the enemy pawn on c5. If an enemy piece or pawn stood on b5 or d5, White's pawn could move by capturing it. As things stand, the pawn is effectively immobilized. QUIZ 7: White's King can move to f3, e3, d3, f5, and d5, and it can also capture the Black pawn on e5. Note that the King cannot go to f4 or d4, because the pawn controls those squares. It is illegal for the King to walk onto a controlled square and put itself in check. QUIZ 8: White's King has no way to get out of check. Therefore, it is in checkmate and Black has won the game. QUIZ 9: Black's Rook on f7 can capture White's pawn on f4 (with ...Rxf4, though the Rook would then be captured with Qxf4). The Black Rook on c3 can capture White's Bishop on d3 (with ...Rxd3, though the Rook would then be captured with Qxd3) or the pawn on c4 (with ...Rxc4, though the Rook would then be captured by Bxc4). Black's Knight on a5 can capture the pawn on c4 (with ...Nxc4). The Black pawn on d5 can capture White's pawn on c4 (with ...dxc4) or the White Queen (with ...dxe4). QUIZ 10: Playing 1.Qf7 is an awful move because it stalemates Black and thus forces a draw (a tied game). However, White can win by playing 1.Kg2 and marching the White King to g6 or h6. Then Qg7 checkmate would be unstoppable. QUIZ 11: White cannot capture the f5-pawn. En passant requires the passing pawn's first move to be two squares at once. In this case, Black's pawn was already sitting on f6 (in other words, it had moved before) and moved just one square, instead of the obligatory two. If the pawn was sitting on f7, instead of f6, and moved to f5, then White could capture en passant if he wanted to. QUIZ 12: White cannot castle in either direction. A Queenside castle is not legal because the a1-Rook has moved and now stands on b1. White cannot castle Kingside because Black's Bishop is attacking square f1 and White cannot move his King through an attacked square. When the Black Bishop moves out of the way (say, to f7), then White can castle Kingside if he wants to. Chapter Two QUIZ 13: The White Knight can capture the Black Bishop (with Nxe6), but after ...fxe6, White has succeeded only in making an equal trade. White could also consider taking Black's Knight with Nxf5. However, that move also results in an even trade after ...Bxf5. From this position, White's most attractive move is Nxc2, taking a Rook for a Knight (called winning the exchange). Always be on the lookout for ways to trade superior pieces for inferior ones. See the discussion of the point count system in Chapter Two, "The First Principle: Force." QUIZ 14: Black should play the simple 1...Rfe8, putting his Rook on a useful open file. A bad move is 1...Rfd8?, because after 2.Qxd8+ Rxd8 3.Rxd8+, White would have succeeded in capturing two Rooks for a Queen-a 10 to 9 point- count advantage. QUIZ 15: Playing 1.Qh5 brings another attacker and thus more force over to the Kingside. Remember, the more pieces you can involve in an attack, the more likely the attack is to succeed. QUIZ 16: No! With 2.Nc7+, White has placed his Knight in a pin. Black is by no means compelled to capture the Knight. Instead, he should play 2...Kd7. White will be unable to take Black's Rook because doing so places his King in jeopardy. To make matters worse, Black now threatens White's Knight twice, and White has no way to give it more support. Black will win a piece on his next turn. QUIZ 17: No! You must expect Black to see it. After 1.Nc4 d5!, Black has stopped the threat, and the Knight must retreat. All White has accomplished is to allow Black to place another pawn firmly in the center, with a gain of time. QUIZ 18: It is impossible to checkmate with a King and a Bishop versus a lone King. Another man is needed-even a pawn will do. The same can be said about a King and a Knight versus a lone King; checkmate is not possible. Try various move combinations to convince yourself! Chapter Three QUIZ 19: White obviously has a big head start with his attack because he has a tremendous proportion of his army already aimed at the Black King's position. With 1.Bd2! Qa4 2.Bc3, White has gained the time to reposition his Bishop, by forcing Black to make a useless Queen move. The threat of 3.Qxh7+ (using the pin on the Knight on f6) forces Black to play 3...h5. White can then crash through with 4.Nxh5! (sacrificing in order to charge Black's King; White does not want to give Black any time to form a counteroffensive) 4...gxh5 5.Qxh5+ Kg8 (the pin by the c3-Bishop prevents the Knight from capturing the Queen)

6.Qh7+!! (also good is 6.Bxf6, followed by a checkmate on h7) 6...Nxh7 7.Bxh7

checkmate. QUIZ 20: Definitely not! Black is already far behind in development. Though he has advanced a pawn, he must start bringing his pieces out if he wants the pawn to live. Playing 1...Qxa2? would move an already developed piece and give White a few ways of winning. White could rip open the position with 2.e5 and then go after Black's King or go for a material gain with 2.Ra1 Qxb2

3.Ba4+, resulting in a discovered attack on Black's Queen by its white

counterpart on e2. This kind of blunder inspired an old chess story. An old man lies on his deathbed. He gestures for his son to come close so that the old man can whisper an important bit of wisdom in his son's ear. The son, full of expectation, moves to the bed. The man says, "Son, if you are behind in development, don't capture the pawns in front of your opponent's Rooks!" QUIZ 21: You should ignore the pawn. Instead, try to develop your forces and castle as quickly as possible. Chapter Four QUIZ 22: White has a substantial space advantage. Black's c5-pawn controls b4 and d4 (2 points) and his f6-Knight controls e4 and g4 (2 points), for a total of just 4 points. White, on the other hand, is doing much better. His a4-pawn controls b5 (1 point), his c4-pawn controls d5 and b5 (2 points), his d5-pawn attacks c6 and e6 (2 points), his e4-pawn eyes d5 and f5 (2 points), and his f4- pawn controls e5 and g5 (2 points). Both White Knights also attack enemy territory: The c3-Knight controls b5 and d5 (2 points), and the f3-Knight controls e5 and g5 (2 points). The White Queen hits d5 for (1 point). White's total is 14. QUIZ 23: Placing your pawns on the same color squares as your Bishop is a bad idea, because the pawns block the Bishop and therefore cut down on its potential activity. QUIZ 24: Moves like 2...d6 leave you unnecessarily cramped. Why do this to yourself? Black can fight for space with 2...d5. After 3.e5, Black continues the fight for territory with 3...c5. QUIZ 25: Avoid trades. They can only help your opponent. Chapter Five QUIZ 26: Playing 2.Nf3 allows Black to push White back with his pawns by

2...e4. Now 3.Ng5 or 3.Nh4 both make the Knight vulnerable to Black's Queen.

A move of 3.Nd4 leads to 3...c5 4.Nf5 (or 4.Nb5 d5 followed by 5...a6) 4...d5 (with a discovered attack on the Knight by the c8-Bishop) 5.Ng3 f5. Black then has a huge pawn center, whereas White has only moved his Knight repeatedly. QUIZ 27: Playing 1...Nh5 attacks the weak f4-pawn with the Bishop and the Knight and also with the Rook on f8. By throwing most of his army into an attack against White's weakness, Black will win the pawn and will obtain a material advantage. Note that Black's doubled pawn on g6 is firmly protected by the h7-pawn and is not weak at all. QUIZ 28: "Doubled pawns are always weak" is a false statement. Doubled pawns are often weak, but they can also serve some useful functions by defending extra squares that a normal pawn could not. QUIZ 29: You should attack a pawn chain at its base. The base here is d4. If you can destroy the d4 point, then the advanced pawn on e5 will be deprived of an important defender and very likely will fall. Black's best move is 1...c5!, attacking the base. After 2.dxc5 Nxc5, White guards e5 with one piece while Black attacks it with three. White will inevitably lose the e5-pawn. QUIZ 30: "Usually you can safely postpone castling for quite a while in open positions" is a false statement. In open positions, it is extremely dangerous not to castle as quickly as possible. QUIZ 31: Reaching an endgame means that you have traded most of the pieces. With most of the pieces gone, it is important to rush your King into battle as quickly as possible. Remember, the King is a strong piece. Use it when it is safe to do so! Chapter Seven QUIZ 32: "You must calculate every possible move and countermove" is a false statement. Calculating everything out is always time-consuming, often impractical, and sometimes impossible! QUIZ 33: "It is important to find out how strong your opponent is so that you can play accordingly" is a false statement. Don't worry about your opponent's chess skill, good looks, or financial situation. Just play the best game you can, and always play to win! Tests Chapter One TEST 1: White has four ways to get out of check. The first is to capture the offending Bishop with his f3-Knight via 5.Nxh4, though Black would play

5...Qxh4+ and White would still be faced with check. The second is to block

with a pawn via 5.g3. The flaw here is that White loses the pawn via 5...fxg3. The other two possibilities are 5.Ke2 and 5.Kf1, by which White simply steps out of the way. However, White then loses the right to castle. TEST 2: This exercise is a good way of teaching the power of the Queen. Though the Knight will try to run away, it will prove no match for the mighty Queen. White has several ways to capture the Knight, but one simple method is

1. Qe7

White threatens to take the beast.

1. ... Nc6

The only safe square.

2. Qd6

White once again threatens to eat the horse. Note that the Knight's most central squares-e5, e7, d8, d4, b4 and b8-are all covered by the Queen.

2. ... Na5

3. Qd5!

Other moves (such as 3.Qc5) leave the Knight with places to run to. After

3.Qd5!, all the Knight's escape squares are covered and it is caught.

TEST 3: You can crown a new Queen in many ways from this position, and I heartily recommend that you play around with this puzzle for a while to test some of the possibilities. The idea is to learn how pawns react to each other. Here is one possible series of moves:

1. d4 d5

2. e3 b6

3. b4 b5

4. a3 a6

5. c3 c6

6. f3 f5

7. g4 fxg4

8. fxg4 g5

9. h3 h6

Now White has no more useful moves and is forced to start giving up material, when he would really rather just sit tight and do nothing. (This type of situation is called zugzwang.)

10. e4 dxe4

11. d5 cxd5

White has now lost all his pawns. White obviously did not play well or this situation would not have arisen. Play through the moves and try to improve White's play! TEST 4: If it is White's move, he can castle on either side. On the Queenside, his Rook would pass through an attacked square, which is allowed. (The King, however, can't pass through an attacked square.) On the Kingside, White's Rook is attacked, but he can still castle as long as his Rook has not moved. If it is Black's move, he cannot castle on either side, because the Knight on e6 attacks both squares f8 and d8. The Black King would have to move through an attacked square to castle, which is illegal. TEST 5: The White Knight can't capture anything. If the Knight moves, White's King would be exposed to attack by the Rook on d8. Because putting your own King in check is illegal, White must leave his Knight on d4. This concept, called a pin, is explained in detail in Chapter Two, 'The First Principle: Force." TEST 6: Normally, Black would be happy to get his material back with 1...Nxb4. However, in this case, he has the wonderful possibility of 1...Ne2 checkmate. Remember the old chess saying: "When you see a good move, sit on your hands and look for a better one!" TEST 7: No! Don't play 1.Qxf7?? because it creates a stalemate. A better move is

1.Qh3+ Nh6 2.Qxh6 checkmate. Taking the opponent's material is usually a

great idea, but be careful: Greed has a way of blinding us! TEST 8: Trading pieces with 1.Rxd7 is a good, safe move. A bad mistake is

1.Nd5??, which simply loses a piece to 1...Rxd5 or 1...Nxd5. When you head for

a particular square, be careful that you guard it as many times as the opponent attacks it. TEST 9: After 1...Rfe8 2.Rxe8 Rxe8, Black would not have accomplished much. Crushing, though, is 1...Rfd8!, which threatens the Queen and intends to destroy the Rook on d1, the only piece guarding White's Knight on c1. After 1...Rfd8, White would like to take on d8 by 2.Qxd8 Rxd8 3.Rxd8, but that series of moves would lose the Knight to 3...Qxc1+. Also bad is 2.Qb3 Rxd1+ 3.Qxd1 Qxc1, which gives Black an extra Knight. Take one last look at the difference between the two moves: 1...Rfe8 places the Rook on an open file but puts no pressure on White, whereas 1...Rfd8! makes an immediate threat. Always try to play aggressively. Chapter Two TEST 10: Black must avoid 1...Ne6, because of the pawn fork that results from

2.d5. A better move is 1...Ng6.

TEST 11: This position demonstrates a Bishop pin. With 1.Bf3, White wins a whole Rook, because if the Rook on d5 moves, the Rook on a8 will fall. TEST 12: Though 1...Rxc5 would normally be a good move because it equalizes the material, White can do even better with 1...Rh1+, because he then wins the a1-Rook. This tactic, called a skewer, is like a pin, except that when the more valuable piece in front moves, the less valuable one behind is exposed. TEST 13: Playing 1.Qxe6+ Qxe6 2.Rxe6 equalizes the material count, but with

1.Qg5+!, White forks Black's King and Rook and picks up the undefended Rook

on d8. TEST 14: Playing 1...Ke5 forks the Rook and Bishop with the King. Because the pieces cannot guard each other, White will be forced to part with one of them. Chapter Three TEST 15: Certainly not! White is behind in development and is several moves away from generating any real threats. White does not have time to launch a successful attack. An excellent reply to 1.Qf3 would be 1...d5! 2.exd5 Bxd5

3.Bxd5 Qxd5, when it becomes clear that White was never really in a position to

attack. TEST 16: Such two-piece attacks rarely work. Black can push White back with

3...d5 (blocking the checkmate and attacking the Bishop) 4.Bb3 Nf6 (developing

a piece and attacking White's Queen). Thus, while Black gains the center and develops his pieces, White's forces are in retreat. Chapter Four TEST 17: White: 12; Black: 5. TEST 18: By fianchettoing his Bishop with 1.g3 and 2.Bg2, White would succeed in placing it on the open h1-a8 diagonal. This Bishop would then be more active than Black's Bishop. TEST 19: Yes, 1...Be6 makes sense. When you have less space than your opponent, it is a good policy to exchange pieces in order to give yourself more breathing room. Playing 1...Be6 offers to trade Black's passive d7-Bishop for its active White counterpart on b3. If White declines with 2.Bc2, Black would gain three squares in space count, while White would lose two. Chapter Five TEST 20: White uses his space advantage to create a new Queen with a tactical trick involving pawn sacrifices. Here's how:

1. g6! hxg6

If Black plays 1...fxg6, White plays 2.h6!! gxh6 3.f6, and the pawn on f6 will soon become a Queen.

2. f6!!

This move threatens to lead to fxg7, so Black is forced to capture the pawn. However, now White's remaining pawn on h5 has nothing standing between it and the queening square!

2. ... gxf6

3. h6 f5

4. h7 f4

5. h8=Q

White manages to crown a new Queen. Notice that if the starting move were Black's, he could stop White's intentions with 1...g6! (a big mistake is 1...h6?? 2.f6! gxf6 3.gxh6, which allows White to promote first), which leads to 2.hxg6 hxg6 or 2.fxg6 fxg6!, leaving White no hope of getting a new Queen. This example may seem confusing at first. Read through the moves several times and then play them over until the logic of the example is clear. It will give you a good understanding of a pawn's potential. TEST 21: White's position is better, because Black's passed pawn on d5 is firmly blocked and not going anywhere. Though White's doubled pawns on the b-file are not at all weak because of the support given by the a3-pawn, Black's backward pawn is stuck on an open file and subject to attack. By continuing with

1.Qc2 and 2.Rec1, White could put tremendous pressure on the c6-pawn. Here,

piece play is more important than pawn structure. TEST 22: After 2.Rxe5 Bd6 or 2...Bf6, the White Rook would have to retreat, and the Black Bishop would enjoy his superiority. Though 2.fxe5 is a good move because it gives White a protected passed pawn, even better is 2.dxe5, which does three things: White gets a protected passed pawn. White's Bishop is unblocked and springs to life on the g1-a7 diagonal. White opens up the d-file to the backward d5-pawn, which he can now attack by massing his Rooks and Queen on the d-file. TEST 23: Though Black is ahead by a pawn, his pawns are tripled and are thus more or less useless. White is winning, because he can calmly advance his King and eat all his opponent's men. An example:

1. ... Kd5

2. Kg2 Ke4

3. Kg3

Now White threatens to play 4.Kg4 and start eating.

3. ... Kf5

Also hopeless is 3...Kd3 4.Kg4 Kc3 5.b4 Kc4 6.Kxg5 Kb5 7.Kxg6 Ka4 8.Kxg7, which leaves Black with no pawns. Black can't play 8...Kxa3 because White would respond with 9.b5 and the promotion of the remaining White pawn. The main problem with Black's position is that whereas White's pawns can defend themselves, Black's men are helpless and can be easily mowed down.

4. a4

Suddenly, this pawn threatens to become a Queen, and Black must hurry back to stop it.

4. ... Ke5

5. a5 Kd5

6. b4 Kc6

7. Kg4 Kb5

8. Kxg5

The feast begins.

8. ... Kxb4

9. a6

and nothing can stop the White pawn from winning its promotion. TEST 24: Because the center is locked up with pawns (a typical closed position), White's pieces will have more difficulty in getting through to Black's territory. In closed positions, castling can be delayed for a short while without any ill effect. About the Authors Yasser Seirawan Born in Damascus, Syria Yasser moved with his family to Seattle at the age of seven. It wasn't until the famous 1972 Fischer-Spassky encounter that his chess career as a twelve year-old was launched. Yasser became the first official American contender for the world title since Bobby Fischer's retirement in 1975. He qualified for the world championship cycle in 1981, 1985, 1987, 1997, 1999 and 2000 twice becoming a World Champion Candidate Grandmaster. Along the way "Yaz" has earned numerous titles and tournament victories, including 1979 World Junior Champion, earning the International Grandmaster title at nineteen years old (at the time he was the fourth youngest player to ever earn the Grandmaster title), four U.S. Championships, and has been a ten-time member of the U.S. Olympiad chess teams. He has defeated former world champions Garry Kasparov, Anatoly Karpov, Boris Spassky, Vassily Smyslov and Mikhail Tal in tournament play. He was the only American to compete in the prestigious Grandmaster Association's World Cup circuit. Yasser has authored thirteen books on chess including six books of the award-winning series published by Everyman Chess. Yasser has earned numerous awards as an author and journalist. In 2001, the United States Chess Federation presented him with the Grandmaster of the Year award. While in 2002, he won the Fred Cramer Chess Journalist of America Award as Chess Journalist of the year. In 2000, Yasser and his wife Yvette were founders of America's Foundation For Chess. Jeremy Silman International Master Jeremy Silman tied for first place in the 1990 National Open tournament. He also tied for first place in the 1982 US Open. He is a former Pacific Northwest Champion and a former Washington State Champion. Silman has written extensively about chess. He is the author of 20 books, and his magazine articles have been published all over the world. He has produced a video and a computer program. Silman now lives in Beverly Hills, California.

<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: Chess Fundamentals - Jose Capablanca - (Everyman, 2021)
FILENAME: 2. Chess Fundamentals - Jose Capablanca - (Everyman, 2021)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 2
SHA256: f5c495a8102d3e568f9aae1e6274251b5f3f0161c69a5202181b03bc6b8be1bb
BYTES: 183972

Preface

Chess Fundamentals was first published thirteen years ago. Since then there have appeared at different times a number of articles dealing with the so-called Hypermodern Theory. Those who have read the articles may well have thought that something new, of vital importance, had been discovered. The fact is that the Hypermodern Theory is merely the application, during the opening stages generally, of the same old principles through the medium of somewhat new tactics. There has been no change in the fundamentals. The change has been only a change of form, and not always for the best at that.

In chess the tactics may change but the strategic fundamental principles are always the same, so that Chess Fundamentals is as good now as it was thirteen years ago. It will be as good a hundred years from now; as long in fact as the laws and rules of the game remain what they are at present. The reader may therefore go over the contents of the book with the assurance that there is in it everything he needs, and that there is nothing to be added and nothing to be changed. Chess Fundamentals was the one standard work of it kind thirteen years ago and the author firmly believes that it is the one standard work of its kind now.

J. R. Capablanca New York Sept. 1, 1934 Contents

Chapter 1 First Principles

1. Simple Mates 1

2. Pawn Promotion 3

3. Pawn Endings 4

4. Some Winning Positions in the Middlegame 6

5. Relative Value of the Pieces 8

6. General Strategy of the Opening 9

7. Control of the Centre 9

8. Traps 11

Chapter 2 Endgame Principles

9. A Cardinal Principle 12

10. A Classical Ending 12

11. Obtaining a Passed Pawn 13

12. How to find out Which Pawn will be First to

Queen 14

13. The Opposition 14

14. The Relative Value of Knight and Bishop 16

15. How to Mate with a Knight and a Bishop 20

16. Queen against Rook 20

Chapter 3 Planning a Win in Middlegame Play

17. Attacking Without the Aid of Knights 22

18. Attacking with Knights as a Prominent Force 23

19. Winning by Indirect Attack 24

Chapter 4 General Theory

20. The Initiative 25

21. Direct Attacks en Masse 25

22. The Force of the Threatened Attack 26

23. Relinquishing the Initiative 27

24. Cutting Off Pieces from the Scene of Action 28

25. A Player's Motives Criticized in a Specimen

Game 30

Chapter 5 Endgame Strategy

26. The Sudden Attack from a Different Side 32

27. The Danger of a Safe Position 34

28. Endings with One Rook and Pawns 35

29. A Difficult Ending: Two Rooks and Pawns 36

30. Rook, Bishop and Pawns vs. Rook, Knight and

Pawns 38

Chapter 6 Further Openings and Middlegames

31. Some Salient Points about Pawns 40

32. Some Possible Developments from a Ruy Lopez

33. The Influence of a "Hole" 42

Chapter 7 Illustrative Games Game 1 Marshall, F - Capablanca, J 1-0 45 Game 2 Rubinstein, A - Capablanca, J 1-0 46 Game 3 Janowski, D - Capablanca, J 1-0 47 Game 4 Capablanca, J - Znosko Borovsky, E 0-1 48 Game 5 Lasker, E - Capablanca, J 1-0 49 Game 6 Chajes, O - Capablanca, J 1-0 51 Game 7 Capablanca, J - Burn, A 1-0 53 Game 8 Mieses, J - Capablanca , J 0-1 54 Game 9 Capablanca, J - Teichmann, R 1-0 55 Game 10 Capablanca, J - Marshall, F 1-0 56 Game 11 Capablanca, J - Janowski, D 1-0 57 Game 12 Capablanca, J - Chajes, O 1-0 58 Game 13 Morrison, J - Capablanca, J 0-1 59 Game 14 Marshall, F - Capablanca, J 0-1 60

[diagram]
Example 2 [Capablanca, J. RJ

[diagram]
Example 1 fCezpflWawca J. RJ l.Ke2 [Since the Black King is in the center of the board, the best way to proceed is to advance your own King. | Kd5 2,Ke3 [As the Rook has not yet come into play, it is better to advance the King straight into the center of the board, not in front, but to one side of the other King ] Kc4 [Should now the Black King move 2...Ke5 the Rook drives it back hv 3.Rh5+ ]

3.Rh5 Kc3

[If instead 3,.,Kb4 there follows 4.Kd3 ]

4.Rh4 [Keeping the King confined to as few squares as

possible. Now the ending may continue as follows.] Kc2 5.Rc4+ Kb3 6.Kd3 Kb2 7.Rb4+ Ka3 8 Kc3 Ka2 [It should be noticed how often the White King has moved next to the Rook, not only to defend it but also to reduce the mobility of the opposing King. Now White mates in three moves.] 9.Ra4+ Kbl lO.RaS [Or any square on the a-file, forcing the Black King in front of the White.] Kcl 11.Rai# l.Ra7 [In this position the power of the Rook is demonstrated by the first move, which immediately confines the Black King to the last rank- and the mate is quickly accomplishedJ Kg8 2,Kg2 [The combined action of King and Rook is needed to arrive at a position in which mate can be forced. The general principle for a beginner to follow is to keep his King as much as possible on the same rank, or, as in this case, tile, as the opposing King. When, in this case, the King has been brought to the sixth rank, it is better to place it not on the same file, but on the one next to it towards the centerJ Kf8 3.Kf3 Ke8 4,Ke4 Kd8

5.Kd5 Kc8

|On move 5 Black could have played 5...Ke8 and, according to principle. White would have continued 6.Kd6 Kf8 (the Black King will ultimately be forced to move in front of the White King and be mated by a8) 7.Ke6 KgS 8.Kf6 Kh8

9.Kg6 Kg8 10,Ra8# ]

6.Kd6

[Not 6.Kc6 because then the Black King will go back to Kd8 and it will take much longer to mate. ] 6,..Kb8 [If now the King moves back to 6...Kd8 7.Ra8# mates as once, |

7.Rc7 Ka8 8_Kc6 Kb8 9.Kb6 Ka8 10.Rc8#

[It has taken exactly ten moves to mate from the original position ] 1 Chapter 1

First Principles Endings, Middlegame and Openings

1. Simple Mates

The first thing a student should do, is to familiarize himself with the power of the pieces. This can best be done by learning how to accomplish quickly some of the simple mates.

In the ending of Rook and King against King, the principle is to drive the opposing King to the last line of any side of the board.

In this position it took eleven moves to mate, and, under any conditions, I believe it should be done in under twenty. While it may be monotonous, it is worth while for the beginner to practice such things, as it will teach him the proper handling of his pieces.

[diagram]
Example 4 /Capab/anca, J. RJ

[diagram]
Example 3 /Capab/artczr, /?./ [Since the Black King is in the corner, White can play as follows,] l,Bd3 Kg7 2.Bg5 Kf7 3.Bf5 [Already the Black King is confined to a few squares. If the Black King, in the original position, had been in the center of the board, or away from the last row, White should have advanced his King, and then, with the aid of his Bishops, restricted the Black King's movements to as few squares as possible. | Kg7 4Kf2 | In this ending the Black King must not only be driven to the edge of the board, but be must also be forced into a comer, and, before a mate can be given, the While King must be brought to the sixth rank and, at the same time, in one of the last two files; in this case either h6, g6, 17, or f8; and as h6 and g6 are the nearest squares, it is to either of these squares that the King ou girt to go.] Kf7 5.Kg3 Kg7 6.Kh4 Kf7 7.Kh3 Kg7

8.Bg6 Kg8 9.Kh6 KfB [White must now mark time

and move one of the Bishops, so as to force the Black King to go back. | 10.Bh5 Kg8 ll.Be7 KhS | Now the White Bishop must Lake up a position from which it can give check next move along the White diagonal, when the Black King moves back to g8. |

12.Bg4 Kg8 13.Be6+ KhS 14.Bf6#

l.Qc6 | A good way to begin is to make the first move with the Queen, trying to limit the Black King's mobility as much as possible.] Kd4 2.Kd2 [Already the Black King has only one available square. ] Ke5 3.Ke3 Kf5 4.Qd6 Kg5 ' [Should Black play 4,..Kg4then 5.Qg6+ J

5.Qe6 Kh4 6.Qg6 Kh3 7.KI3 Kh4

[However the King moves the Queen mates, c.g.

7...K112 8.Qg2# ]

8.Qg4#

Now we come to two Bishops and King against King. Here it has taken fourteen moves to force the mate and, in any position, it should be done in under thirty.

In all endings of this kind, care must be taken not to drift into a stalemate.

In this particular ending one should remember that the King must not only be driven to the edge of the board, but also into a corner. In all such endings, however, it is immaterial whether the King is forced on to the last rank, or to an outside file, e.g. h4 or a5, e8 or d1.

We now come to Queen and King against King. As the Queen combines the power of the Rook and the Bishop, it is the easiest mate of all and should always be accomplished in under ten moves.

In this ending, as in the case of the Rook, the Black King must be forced to the edge of the board; only the Queen being so much more powerful than the Rook, the process is far easier and shorter. These are the three elementary endings and in all of these the principle is the same. In each case the cooperation of the King is needed. In order to force a mate without the aid of the King, at least two Rooks are required.

[diagram]
Example 6 [Capablanca, J, R.J O Pawn Promotion

[diagram]
Example 5 [Capablanca, J. R.] l.Ke4 Ke6 [Black docs not allow the While King to advance, therefore White is now compelled to advance his pawn so as to force Black to move away. lie is then able to advance his own King.] 2.e3 Kf6 3.Kd5 Ke7 [If Black had played 3...Kf5 then White would be forced to advance the pawn 4.c4+ since he could not advance his King without leaving Black the opportunity to play 4.. Qe4, winning the pawn. Since he has not done so, it is better for White not to advance the pawn yet, since its own safety does not require it, but to try to bring the King still further forward. ]

4.Ke5 Kd7 5,Kf6 Ke8 [Nowr the White pawn is too

far back and it may be brought up within protection of the King.] 6.e4 Kd7 7.e5 [Now it would not do to play 7.KF7 because Black would play Kd6 and While would have to bring back his King to protect the pawn. Therefore he must continue. |

7...Ke8

11lad he moved anywhere else 7...Kd8 While could have played 8.K17 followed by the advance of the pawn to c6. c7, c8: all these squares being protected by lhe King. As Black tries to prevent that. While must now force him to move away, at the same time al wavs keeping lhe King in front of the pawn. ]

8.Ke6 '

[ 8.e6 would make it a draw; as Black would then play Kf8 and we w ould have a position similar to the one explained in connection with Example 5. ]

8..,Kf8 9.Kd7 [King moves and the White pawn

advances to e8, becomes a Queen, and it is all over.] I.e3 Ke5 [The position is drawn, and the way to proceed is for Black to keep the King always directly in front of the pawn, and when it cannot be done, as for instance in this position because of the White King, then the Black King must be kept in front of the White King ] 2.Kd3 Kd5 [This is a very important move. Any other move would lose, as will be shown later. As the Black King cannot be kept close up to the pawn, it must be brought as far forward as possible and. at the same lime, in front of the White King ] 3 e4+ Ke5

4.Ke3 Ke6 5.Kf4 Kf6 ( Again the same case. As the

White King comes up, the Black King must be kept in front of it, since it cannot be brought up to the pawn. [

6.e5+ Ke6 7.Ke4 Ke7 8 Kd5 Kd7 9.e6+ Ke7

10,Ke5 Ke8 ll>Kd6 Kd8 [If now White advances the pawn, the Black King gets in front of it.] 12.e7+ [If instead of advancing the pawn White withdraws his King, Black brings his King up to the pawn and, when forced to go back, he moves to e8 in front of the pawn ready to come up again or to move in front of the White King, should the latter advance.] Ke8 13.Ke6 [White must either give up the pawn or play this move, and a stalemate results.] 3

2. Pawn Promotion

The gain of a pawn is the smallest material advantage that can be obtained in a game; and it often is sufficient to win, even when the pawn is the only remaining unit, apart from the Kings. It is essential, speaking generally, that the King should be in front of his pawn, with at least one intervening square.

If the opposing King is directly in front of the pawn, then the game cannot be won. This can best be explained by the following examples.

The whole mode of procedure is very important and the student should become thoroughly conversant with its details; for it involves principles to be taken up later on, and because many a beginner has lost identical positions from lack of proper knowledge. At this stage of the book I cannot lay too much stress on its importance.

In this position White wins, as the King is in front of his pawn and there is one intervening square. The method to follow is to advance the King as far as is

[diagram]
Example 8 [Capablanca, J. R.J l.Ke4 [In this position White can*! win by 1X5 Black's best answer would be g6 draws. The student should work this out ] [He cannot win by l.g5 because g6 draws. lliis. because of the principle of the "opposition" which governs this ending as well as all the pawn endings al readys given, and which will be explained more fully later on. White can win, however, by playing 1. Qe4. ] l...Ke6 [If l...g6 2.Kd4 Ke6 3.Kc5 Kf6 4,Kd6 Kt7 5.g5 Kg7 6.Ke7 Kg8 7.Kf6 Kh7 8. Kf7 and White wins the pawn. ] 2X5+ Kf6 3.Kf4 g6 [If this pawn is kept back we arrive al the ending shown in Example 7. | 4.g5+ Kf7

5.f6 Ke6 6.Ke4 Kf7 7.Ke5 Kf8 | White cannot force

his l-pawn into a Queen (find out why), hut by giving his pawn up he can win the other pawn and the game. |

8.f7 Kxf7 9.Kd6 Kf8 10.Ke6 Kg7 lLKe7 Kg8

12.Kf6 Kh7 13.K17 Kh8 14.Kxg6 Kg8 [There is

still some resistance in Black's position. In fact, the on ly way to w in is the one given here, as will easily be seen by experiment.] 15,Kh6 Kh8 16,g6 Kg8 17. g7 Kf7 18.Kh7 [And White Queens the pawn and wins ] O Pawn Endings

[diagram]
Example 7 [Capablanca. J. R.] LKd7 [White cannot win by playing In this position White cannot win by playing 1.f6 because Black plays, not l...gxf6, which would lose, but Kg8 and if then

2.fxg7 (If 2/7+ Kf8 and White will never be able

to Queen his pawn without losing it ,*if 2.Ke7 gxf6

3.Kxf6 Kf8 and draws. ) 2. .. Kxg7 and draws, as

shown in a previous case. White, however, can win in the original position by playing l. d7, ] L,.Kg8 2,Ke7 Kh8 3X6 gxf6 [If 3".Kg8 4.17+ Kh8 5X8Q#]

4.KX7 f5 5.g7+ Kh7 6.g8Q+ Kh6 7.Qg6#

4 compatible with the safety of the pawn and never to advance the pawn until it is essential to its own safety.

This ending is like the previous one, and for the same reasons should be thoroughly understood before proceeding any further.

3. Pawn Endings

I shall now give a couple of simple endings of two pawns against one, or three against two, that the reader may see how they can be won. Fewer explanations will be given, as it is up to the student to work things out for himself. Furthermore, nobody can learn how to play well merely from the study of a book; it can only serve as a guide and the rest must be done by the teacher, if the student has one; if not, the student must realize by long and bitter experience the practical application of the many things explained in the book.

This ending, apparently so simple, should show the student the enormous difficulties to be surmounted, even when there are hardly any pieces left, when playing against an adversary who knows how to use the resources at his disposal, and it should show the student, also, the necessity of paying strict attention to these elementary things which form the basis of true mastership in Chess.

[diagram]
Example 10 [Capablanca, J. R.J

[diagram]
Example 9

J. R. ]

l.g4 [IL is generally advisable Lo advance the pawn that is free from opposition. | a5 [Black makes an advance on the oilier side, and now White considers whether or not he should stop the advance. In this case cither way wins, but generally the advance should be stopped when the opposing King is far away ] 2a4 Kf6 3.h4 Ke6 [If 3...Kg6 then the simple counting will show that White goes to the other side with his King, wins the pawn at a5, and then Queens his single pawn long before Black can do the same. |

4.g5 Kf7 5 Kf5 Kg7 6h5 Kf7

[If 6...116 7.g6 and then the two pawns defend themselves and White can go to the other side with his King, to win the other pawn. | 7Ke5 [Now it is time to go lo the other side with the King, win the Black pawn and Queen the single pawn Iliis is typical of all such endings and should be worked out by the student in this case and in similar cases which he can pul up. |

1.fS Ke7

[If 1...g6 2.1'6 and we have a similar ending to one of those shown previously ] [If 1...116 2.g5 ]

2.Ke5 Kf7 3,g5 Ke7

[If 3...g6 4.f6 J [and if 3...116 4.g6+ and in either ease we have a similar ending to one of those already shown. ]

4.h5 [And by following it up with g5-g6 we have the

same ending previously shown. If Black should play

4...g6 himself we have the following.] g6 5.hxg6

hxg6 6.f6+ [With the same result.] 5

In this ending White can win by advancing any of the three pawns on the first move, but it is convenient to follow the general rule, whenever there is no good reason against it, of advancing the pawn that has no pawn opposing it.

Having now seen the case when the pawn are all on one side of the board we shall now examine a case when there are pawns on both sides of the board.

In these cases the general rule is to act immediately on the side where you have the superior forces.

Winning Middlegames Example 12 /Ca/rabtawca, J. R.] Winning Middlegames Example 11 [Capablanca, J. RJ

1.Nxc6 Bg5

[I le cannot take 1...Qx c6 because White threatens 32 mate by 2.Qxh7 1 followed by 3,Rh3 1. ]

2.Ne7+ Qxe7

[Again if 2...Bxe7 3.Qxh7+ Kxh7 4.Rh3+ KgS

5.Rh8# ]

3.Rxe7 Bxe7 4.Qd7 [White wins one of the two

Bishops, remains with a Queen and a Bishop against a Rook and a Bishop, and should therefore win easily.] l...Re8 [White now uncovers his real and most effective threat.] 2.Qxh7+ Kxh7 3.Rh3+ Kg8

4.Rh8#

4. Some Winning Positions in the Middlegame

By the time the student has digested all that has been previously explained, he, no doubt, is anxious to get to the actual game and play with all the pieces. However, before considering the openings, we shall devote a little time to some combinations that often arise during the game, and which will give the reader some idea of the beauty of the game, once he becomes better acquainted with it.

It is Black's move, and thinking that White merely threatens to play 2.Qh6 and to mate on g7, Black plays

1...Re8 threatening mate by way of 2...Re1#. White

now uncovers his real and most effective threat.

The same type of combination may come as the result of a somewhat more complicated position.

White is a piece behind, and unless he can win it back quickly he will lose.

These two examples show the danger of advancing the g-pawn one square, after having castled on that side.

Winning Middlegames Example 13 fCapaManca, J. R.] Winning Middlegames Example 1 5

J. R.]

[diagram]
LNf6+ gxf6 [Forced, otherwise 1- Kh8 2.Qxh7# mates. | 2,Qg3+ Kh8 3.Bxf5# l.Bxh7+ Kxh7 2.Qh5+ Kg8 3,Ng5 [Black cannot slop mate al h7 except by sacrificing the Queen. J Qe4

4.Nxe4 [White is left with a Queen for a Rook, j

Winning Middlegames Example 14 [Capab/anca, J. RJ

1.Bxd7 Qxd7

[If l...Bxe4 2.Qc3 threatens mate, and therefore wins the Queen, which is already attacked. ]

2.Nf6+ gxf6 3.Rg3+ Kh8 4.Bxf6#

This is another very interesting type of combination. Black has a Rook for a Knight and should therefore win, unless White is able to obtain some compensation immediately. White, in fact, mates in a few moves.

The same type of combination occurs in a more complicated form in this position.

A very frequent type of combination is shown in this position. Here White is the Exchange and a pawn behind, but he can win quickly.

Winning Middlegames Example 16 fCapab/anca. J. RJ l.Nxe7+ [Tins clears the line for the Bishop.] Bxe7 [To stop the Knight from moving to g5 after the sacrifice of the Bishop] 2.Rxe7 Nxe7 [Best ]

3.Bxh7+ Kxh7

[If 3...Kh8 4.Qh5 g6 5.Bxg6+ Kg7 6.Qh7+ Kf6

7.g5+ Ke6 8.Bxf7+ Rxf7 9.Qe4# ]

4.Qh5+ Kg8 5.Ng5 Rc8 6.Qh7+ KfB 7.Qh8+ Ng8

8.NH7+ Ke7 9.Rel+ Kd8 10,Qxg8#

The same type of combination is seen here in a more complicated form.

This combination is rather long and has many variations, therefore a beginner will hardly be able to fathom it; but, knowing the type of combination, he might under similar circumstances undertake and carry out a brilliant attack which he would otherwise never think of. It will be seen that all the combinations shown have for a foundation the proper coordination of the pieces, which have all been brought to bear against a weak point.

5. Relative Value of the Pieces

Before going on to the general principles of the openings, it is advisable to give the student an idea of the proper relative value of the pieces. There is no complete and accurate table for all of them, and the only thing to do is to compare the pieces separately.

For all general theoretical purposes the Bishop and the Knight have to be considered as of the same value, though it is my opinion that the Bishop will prove the more valuable piece in most cases; and it is well known that two Bishops are almost always better than two Knights.

The Bishop will be stronger against pawns than the Knight, and in combination with pawns will also be stronger against the Rook than the Knight will be.

A Bishop and a Rook are also stronger than a Knight and a Rook, but a Queen and a Knight may be stronger than a Queen and a Bishop.

A Bishop will often be worth more than three pawns, but a Knight very seldom so, and may even not be worth so much.

A Rook will be worth a Knight and two pawns, or a Bishop and two pawns, but as said before, the Bishop will be a better piece against the Rook.

Two Rooks are slightly stronger than a Queen. They are slightly weaker than two Knights and a Bishop, and a little more so than two Bishops and a Knight. The power of the Knight decreases as the pieces are changed off. The power of the Rook, on the contrary, increases.

The King, a purer defensive piece throughout the middlegame, becomes an offensive piece once all the pieces are off the board, and sometimes even when there are one or two minor pieces left. The handling of the King becomes of paramount importance once the endgame stage is reached.

C49

General Strategy of Opening Example 17 fCapablanca, J. KJ l.e4 e5 2.NI3 [This is both an attacking and a developing move. Black can now either reply with the identical move or play as follows.] Nc6 [This developing move at the same time defends the e- pawn.] 3,Nc3 Nf6 [These moves are of a purely developing nature ] 4.B65 [It is generally advisable not to bring this Bishop out until one Knight is out, preferably the King's Knight. rIhe Bishop could also have been played to c4, but it is advisable whenever possible to combine development and attack.] Bb4 [Black replies in the same manner, threatening a possible exchange of Bishop for Knight with ...ftxe4 to follow. | 5,O-O | An indirect way of preventing 5... Jbcc3, which more experience or study will show to be bad. At the same lime the Kook is brought into action in the center, a very important point ] O-O [Black follows the same line of reasoning.] 6,d3 d6 [These moves have a two-fold object, viz.: to protect the e-pawn and to open the diagonal for the development of the Queen's Bishop. | 7.Bg5 [A very powerfill move, which brings us to the middlegame stage, as there is already in view a combination to win quickly by ftd5. The threat makes il impossible for Black to continue the same course. Ibcrc is a long analysis showing that Black should lose if he also plays 7...j g4.] Bxc3 [He is now forced to play this capture, as experience has shown, thus bringing up to notice three things.]

6. General Strategy of the Opening

The main thing is to develop the pieces quickly. Get them into play as fast as you can.

From the outset two moves, 1.e4 or 1.d4, open up lines for the Queen and a Bishop. Therefore, theoretically one of these two moves must be the best, as no other first move accomplishes so much. Suppose we begin

1.e4:

This example brings to our notice three things.

First, the complete development of the opening has taken only seven moves. (This varies up to ten or twelve moves in some very exceptional cases. As a rule, eight should be enough.) Second, Black has been compelled to exchange a Bishop for a Knight, but as a compensation he has isolated White's a-pawn and doubled a pawn. (This, at such an early stage of the game, is rather an advantage for White, as the pawn is doubled towards the centre of the board.) Third, White by the exchange brings up a pawn to control the square d4, puts Black on the defensive, as experience will show, and thus keeps the initiative, an unquestionable advantage. The value of the initiative is explained in Chapter 4.

The stratetical principles expounded above are the same for all the openings, only their tactical application varies according to the circumstances.

Before proceeding further I wish to lay stress on the following point which the student should bear in mind.

Before development has been completed no piece should be moved more than once, unless it is essential in order to obtain either material advantage or to secure freedom of action.

The beginner would do well to remember this, as well as what has already been stated: viz., bring out the Knights before bringing out the Bishops.

7. Control of the Centre

The four squares, e4, e5, d4, and d5 are the centre squares, and control of these squares is called control of the centre. The control of the centre is of great importance. No violent attack can succeed without controlling at least two of these squares, and possibly three. Many a manoeuvre in the opening has for its sole object the control of the centre, which invariably ensures the initiative. It is well always to bear this in mind, since it will often be the reason of a series of moves which could not otherwise be properly understood. As this book progresses I shall dwell more fully on these different points. At present I shall devote some time to openings taken at random and explain the moves according to general principles. The student will in that way train his mind in the proper direction, and will thus have less trouble in finding a way out when confronted with a new and difficult situation.

C41

Control of the Center Example 19 /Capab/anca, J. R./ I.e4 e5 2.Nf3 d6 3,d4 Bg4 | A bad move, which violates one of the principles set down, according to which at least one Knight should be developed before the Bishops are brought out, and also because it exchanges a Bishop for a Knight, which in the opening is generally bad. unless there is some compensation.]

4.dxe5 Bxf3

[ 4...dxe5 loses a pawn. ]

[diagram]
[If 6 -.Nf6 7.Qb3 wins a pawn. |

7.Qb3 b6 8.Nc3 c6 [To prevent 9.Nd5. Black,

however, has no pieces out except his Queen, and White, w ith a Bishop and a Knight already development, has a chance of obtaining an advantage quickly by playing 9,Qd5 anyway. lhe student is left to work out the many variations arising from this position.]

C41

Control of the Center Example 18 fCapahZtfnca, J. RJ Le4 e5 2.Nf3 d6 [ A timid move. Black assumes a defensive attitude at once. On principle the move is wrong. In the openings, whenever possible, pieces should be moved in preference to pawns.] 3,d4 | White takes the offensive immediately and strives to control the center so as to have ample room to deploy his forces.] Nd7 | Black does not wish to relinquish the center and also prefers the text move to 3...Nc6 which would be the more natural square for the Knight. But on principle 3... d7 is wrong, because it blocks the action of the Queen's Bishop, and instead of facilitating the action of Black's pieces, tends, on the contrary, to cramp them. ]

4.Bc4 h6

| Black is forced to pay the penalty of his previous move. Such a move on Black's part condemns by itself any form of opening that makes it necessary'. While threatened 5,Qg5 and Black could not stop it with 4...Be? because of 5.dxe5 Nxe5 (if 5...dxe5

6.Qd5) 6.Nxe5 dxe5 7,Qh5 and White wins a pawn

and has besides a perfectly safe position. | 5,Nc3 Ngf6 6.Be3 Be7 7.Qe2 [It should be noticed that White docs not castle yet. The reason is that he wants to deploy his forces first, and through the last move force Black to play 7...c6 to make room for the Queen as White threatens 3;Sdl, to be followed by 9. dxc5. Black's other alternatives would finally force him to play r..exd4, thus abandoning the center to White.] c6 8.Rdl Qc7 9.(KO [With this last move White completes his development, while Black is evidently somewhat hampered. A simple examination will suffice to show that White's position is unassailable. There are no weak spots in his armour, and his pieces are ready for any maneuver that he may wish to carry out in order to begin the attack on the enemy's position.)

The student should carefully study this example. It will show him that it is sometimes convenient to delay castling. I have given the moves as they come to mind without following any standard book on openings. Whether the moves given by me agree or not with the standard works, I do not know, but at the present stage of this book it is not convenient to enter into discussions of mere technicalities which the student will be able to understand when he has become more proficient.

These examples will show the practical application of the principles previously enunciated. The student is warned against playing pawns in preference to pieces at the beginning of the game, especially pawn to Rook's third, which are moves very commonly indulged in by beginners.

Opening Traps Example 21 fCapub/cmca, J. KJ

[diagram]
Opening Traps Example 20 [Capablanca, J. RJ

1."Nf6

[Black having the move, should play l...e6 But suppose he plays l...Nf6 instead. ]

2.Bxf7+

[ 2.Ne5 would also give White the advantage, the threat being of course if 1...&xdl 2.j|xf7 mate. Nor docs Bh5 help matters, because of 3.Qxh5 and l...He6 leaves Black with the inferior position. But White's move in the text secures an immediate material advantage, and the beginner at any rate should never miss such an opportunity for the sake of a speculative advantage in position. |

2...Kxf7 3,Ne5+ Kg8 4.Nxg4 [And White has won a

pawn besides having the better position.] l.dxeS Nxe5 [Black should have recaptured with the pawn.] 2.Nxe5 Bxdl 3.Bxf7+ Ke7 4.Nd5#

8. Traps

I shall now give a few positions or traps to be avoided in the openings, and in which (practice has shown) beginners are often caught.

There are a good many other traps - in fact, there is a book written on traps on the chess board; but the type given above is the most common of all. A Classical Ending Example 23 [Capablanca, J. R.] A Cardinal Principle Example 22 [Capablanca, J. R.] I.Kg3 Ke3 2.Kg2 [If 2.Kg4 Kf2 3.h4 g6 will win. ]

2...Kf4 3.KJ2 Kg4 4 Kg2 Kh4 J.Kgl Kh3

[The first part has been completed. The second part will be short and will consist in advancing the h-pawn up to the King.] 6.Khl h5 7.Kgl h4 (This ends the second part. The third part will consist in timing the advance of the g-pawn so as to play ,..g4-g3 when the White King is at hl . It now becomes evident how necessary it is to be able to move the g-pawn either one or two squares according to the position of the White King, as indicated previously. In this case, as it i s White's move, the pawn will be advanced two squares since the White King will be in the comer, but if it were now Black's move the g-pawn should only be advanced one square since the White King is at gl .]

8.Khl g5 9 Kgl g4 lO.Khl g3 ll,hxg3

[If 11.Kgl g2 ] II. ..hxg3 12.Kgl g2 13.K12 Kh2 [And wins.] I.a4 a5 2.Kg2 Kf4 [Best: sec why.] 3.b4 [Best.] axb4 4.a5 b3 5,a6 b2 6.a7 blQ 7,a8Q Qe4+

8.Qxe4+ Kxe4 [This brings the game to a position

which is won by Black, and which constitutes one of the classical endings of King and pawns. I shall try to explain the guiding idea of it to those not familiar with it.] Chapter 2

Endgame Principles

We shall now go back to the endings in search of a few more principles, then again to the middle game, and finally to the openings once more, so that the advance may not only be gradual but homogeneous. In this way the foundation on which we expect to build the structure will be firm and solid.

9. A Cardinal Principle

In the position shown above, White can draw by playing 1.b4 according to the general rule that governs such cases, i.e. to advance the pawn that is free from opposition. But suppose that White, either because he does not know this principle or because he does not, in this case, sufficiently appreciate the value of its application; suppose, we say, that he plays 1.a4. Then Black can win by playing 1...a5, applying one of the cardinal principles of the high strategy of chess:

A unit that holds two.

In this case one pawn would hold two of the opponent's pawns. The student cannot lay too much stress on this principle. It can be applied in many ways, and it constitutes one of the principal weapons in the hands of a master.

The example given should be sufficient proof. We have given a few moves of the main variation after

1.a4.

10. A Classical Ending

In this position White's best line of defence consists in keeping his pawn where it stands at h2. As soon as the pawn is advanced it becomes easier for Black to win. On the other hand, Black's plan to win (supposing that White does not advance his pawn) may be divided into three parts. The first part will be to get his King to h3, at the same time keeping intact the position of his pawns. (This is all important, since, in order to win the game, it is essential at the end that Black may able to advance his rearmost pawn one or two squares according to the position of the White King.)

It is in this analytical way that the student should try to learn. He will thus train his mind to follow a logical Obtaining a Passed Pawn Example 24b fCapa&Zaraa, J. 2?.J Obtaining a Passed Pawn Example 24a [Capablanca, J. /?./ l".b6 2,cxb6 cxb6 [It would not be advisable to try to obtain a passsed pawn because the White pawns would be nearer to Queen than the single Black pawn.]

3.axb6 axb6 [The game properly played would be a

draw. The student should work this out for himself.]

1.b6 axb6

[If l...cxb6 2.a6]

2.c6 bxc6 3.a6 lAs in this case the White pawn is

nearer to Queen than any of the Black pawns, White will win.] sequence in reasoning out any position. This example is excellent training, since it is easy to divide it into three stages and to explain the main point of each part.

The next subject we shall study is the simple opposition, but before we devote our time to it I wish to call attention to two things.

11. Obtaining a Passed Pawn

When three or more pawns are opposed to each other in some such position as the one in Example 24, there is always a chance for one side or the other of obtaining a passed pawn.

In this position the way of obtaining a passed pawn is to advance the centre pawn.

Now if it had been Black's move, see this example:

The Opposition Example 26 [Capablcmca, J. R.] Which Pawn Queens First? Example 25 [Capablanca, J. RJ l.Kd4 Kd6 [Here Black had the option of either opposing the passage of the White King by playing l ...Ad6 or, if he prefers, he can pass with his own King by La4 h5 2,a5 h4 3,b6 axb6 [Now comes a little replying 1...KI'5 ] calculation. White can capture the pawn, but it he does so, he will not, when Queening, command the square where Black will also Queen his pawn. Therefore, instead of taking, he pushes.] 4.a6 h3 5.a7 h2 6.a8Q [.And wins.]

12. How to find out Which Pawn will be First to

Queen

When two pawns are free, or will be free, to advance to Queen, you can find out, by counting, which pawn will be the first to succeed.

In this position whoever moves first wins. The first thing is to find out, by counting, whether the opposing King can be in time to stop the passed pawn from Queening. When, as in this case, it cannot be done, the point is to count which pawn comes in first. In this case the time is the same, but the pawn that reaches the last square first and becomes a Queen is in a position to capture the adversary's Queen when he makes one.

The student would do well to acquaint himself with various simple endings of this sort, so as to acquire the habit of counting, and thus be able to know with ease when he can or cannot get there first. Once again I must call attention to the fact that a book cannot by itself teach how to play. It can only serve as a guide, and the rest must be learned by experience, and if a teacher can be had at the same time, so much the faster will the student be able to learn.

13. The Opposition

When Kings have to be moved, and one player can, by force, bring his King into a position similar to the one shown in the following diagram (see Example 26 for more), so that his adversary is forced to move and make way for him, the player obtaining that advantage is said to have the opposition.

Notice that the Kings are directly opposed to each other, and the number of intervening squares between them is odd - one in this case.

The opposition can take the form show above, which can be called actual or close frontal opposition; or this form:

which can be called actual or close diagonal opposition. The Opposition Example 27 /CqpaWottca, J, /?.J

[diagram]
1.Ke2 Ke7

[The process is comparatively simple in the variation given above, but Black has other lines of defense more difficult to overcome. Let us begin anew with J...Kd8 Now if 2.Nd3 Nd7, or Bf2.Qe3 A'e7, and Black obtains the opposition in both cases, (When the Kings are directly in front on one another, and the number of intervening squares between the Kings is odd, the player who has moved last has the opposition.) Now in order to win, the White King must advance. Hiere is only one other square where he can go, f3. and that is the right place. Therefore it is seen that in such cases when the opponent makes a so-called wailing move, you must advance, leaving a rank or file free between the Kings. Therefore we have

2.Kt3 Kc7 Now. it would be bad to advance,

because then Black, by bringing up his King in front of your King, would obtain the opposition. It is White's turn to play a similar move to Black's first move, viz,: 3.Ke3 when brings the position back to the main variation shown. The student would do well to familiarize himself with the handling of the King in all examples of opposition. 11 often means the winning or losing of a game. ]

2.Ke3 Ke6 3.Ke4 Kf6 4,Kf4

[White can exercise the option of either playing

4.Kd5 and thus passing with his King, or of playing

the text move and prevent the Black King from passing, thereby keeping the opposition. Mere counting will show that the former course will only lead to a draw, therefore White takes the latter course. |

4...Kg0

[If 4...Ke6 5.Kg5 will win. ] 5*Ke5 Kg7 [Now by counting it will be seen that White wins by capturing Black's b-pawn.J Or again, this form:

which can be called actual or close lateral opposition.

In practice they are all one and the same. The Kings always on squares of the same colour, there is only one intervening square between the Kings, and the player who has moved last "has the opposition".

Now, if the student will take the trouble of moving each King backwards as in a game in the same frontal, diagonal or lateral line respectively shown in the diagrams, we shall have what may be called distant frontal, diagonal and lateral opposition respectively.

The matter of the opposition is highly important, and takes at times somewhat complicated forms, all of which can be solved mathematically; but, for the present, the student should only consider the most simple forms. (An examination of some of the examples of King and pawns endings already given will show several cases of close opposition.)

In all simple forms of opposition, when the Kings are on the same line and the number of intervening squares between them is even, the player who has the move has the opposition.

The above position shows to advantage the enormous value of the opposition. The position is very simple. Very little is left on the board, and the position, to a beginner, probably looks absolutely even. It is not the The Opposition Example 28 [Capablancat J. R.J LKhl! [The position of the pawns does not permit White to draw by means of the actual or close opposition, hence he takes the distant opposition; in effect, if I. Kfl (actual or close opposition) Kd2 2.Kf2 Kd3 and White cannot continue to keep the lateral opposition essential to his safety, because of his own pawn al 13. J l...Kd2 [If l...g4 2.Kg2 (White docs not play 2.fxg4 because e4 will win.) 2... Kd2 (If 2...gxf3 3.Kxf3 followed by 4.Qe4? w ill draw. ) 3.fxg4 e4 and mere counting w ill show that both sides Queen, draw ing the game. ] 2-Kh2 Kd3 3TO13! Ke2 4.Kg2 Ke3 5.Kg3 Kd4

6.Kg4 | Attacking the pawn and forcing Black's answer.

| Ke3 7.Kg3 [White can come back to g3, as already shown, and always keep the opposition ] Two Knights vs Pawn Example 29 [Capablanca, J. R.J LNg6 h4 [White cannot take the pawn because the game will be drawn, as explained before.] 2.Ne5 h3

3.Nc6 h2 4.Nb5 hlQ 5.Nc7#

case, however. Whoever has the move wins. Notice that the Kings are directly in front of one another, and that the number of intervening squares is even.

Now as to the procedure to win such a position. The proper way to begin is to move straight up, as given in the example.

This position is an excellent proof of the value of the opposition as a means of defence. White is a pawn behind and apparently lost, yet he can manage to draw.

If the student will now take the trouble to go back to the examples of King and pawns which I have given in this book, he will realize that in all of them the matter of the opposition is of paramount importance; as, in fact, it is in nearly all endings of King and pawns, except in such cases where the pawn position in itself ensures the win.

14. The Relative Value of Knight and Bishop

Before turning our attention to this matter it is well to state now that two Knights alone cannot mate, but, under certain conditions of course, they can do so if the opponent has one or more pawns.

In the above position White cannot win, although the Black King is cornered, but in the following position, in which Black has a pawn, White wins with or without the move.

The reason for this peculiarity in chess is evident. White with the two Knights can only stalemate the King, unless Black has a pawn which can be moved.

[diagram]
Knight vs Two Pawns Example 31 [Capablanca, J. R.J

[diagram]
1...K112 2.Ng4i Khl 3.Kfl g5 4,Kf2 h2 5,Ne3 g4

6.Nfl g3 i 7,Nxg3#

Although he is a Bishop and a pawn ahead the following position cannot be won by White.

It is the greatest weakness of the Bishop, that when the h-pawn Queens on a square of opposite colour and the opposing King is in front of the pawn, the Bishop is absolutely worthless. All that Black has to do is to keep moving his King close to the corner square.

In the above position White with or without the move can win. We have taken the most difficult variation.

Now that we have seen these exceptional cases, we can analyse the different merits and the relative value of the Knight and the Bishop.

It is generally thought by amateurs that the Knight is the more valuable piece of the two, the chief reason being that, unlike the Bishop, the Knight can command both black and white squares. However, the fact is generally overlooked that the Knight, at any one time, has the choice of one colour only. It takes much longer to bring a Knight from one wing to the other. Also, as shown in the following example, a Bishop can stalemate a Knight; a compliment which the Knight is unable to return.

The weaker the player the more terrible the Knight is to him, but as a player increases in strength the value of the Bishop becomes more evident to him, and of course there is, or should be, a corresponding decrease in his estimation of the value of the Knight as compared to the Bishop. In this respect, as in many others, the masters of today are far ahead of the masters of former generations. While not so long ago some of the very best among them, like Pillsbury and Tchigorin, preferred Knights to Bishops, there is hardly a master of today who would not completely agree with the statements made above.

[diagram]
This is about the only case when the Knight is more valuable than the Bishop:

It is what is called a "block position", and all the pawns are on one side of the board. (If there were pawns on both sides of the board there would be no advantage in having a Knight.) In such a position Black has excellent chances of winning. Of course, there is an extra source of weakness for White in having his pawns on the same colour squares as his Bishop. This is a mistake often made by players. The proper way, generally, in an ending, is to have your pawns on the squares of opposite colour to that of your own Bishop. When you have your pawns on squares of the same colour the action of your own Bishop is limited by them, and consequently the value of the Bishop is diminished, since the value of a piece can often be measured by the number of squares it commands. While on this subject, I shall also call attention to the fact that it is generally preferable to keep your pawns on squares of the same colour as that of the opposing Bishop, particularly if they are passed pawns supported by the King. The principles might be stated thus:

When the opponent has a Bishop, keep your pawns on squares of the same colour as your opponent's Bishop.

Whenever you have a Bishop, whether the opponent has also one or not, keep your pawns on squares of the opposite colour to that of your own Bishop.

Naturally, there principles have sometimes to be modified to suit the exigencies of the position.

In the following position the pawns are on one side of the board, and there is no advantage in having either a Knight or a Bishop. The game should surely end in a draw.

Now let us add three pawns on each side to the above position, so that there are pawns on both sides of the board.

[diagram]
It is now preferable to have the Bishop, though the position, if properly played out, should end in a draw. The advantage of having the Bishop lies as much in its ability to command, at long range, both sides of the board from a central position as in its ability to move quickly from one side of the board to the other.

In the above position it is unquestionably an advantage to have the Bishop, because, although each player has the same number of pawns, they are not balanced on each side of the board. Thus, on the Kingside, White has three to two, while on the Queenside it is Black that has three to two. Still, with proper play, the game should end in a draw, though White has somewhat better chances.

Here is a position in which to have the Bishop is a decided advantage, since not only are there pawns on both sides of the board but there is a passed pawn (h- pawn for White, a-pawn for Black). Black should have extreme difficulty in drawing this position, if he can do it at all.

Again Black would have great difficulty in drawing this position.

The student should carefully consider these positions. I hope that the many examples will help him to understand, in their true value, the relative merits of the Knight and Bishop. As to the general method of procedure, a teacher, or practical experience, will be best. I might say generally, however, that the proper course is these endings, as in all similar endings, is: Advance of the King to the centre of the board or towards the passed pawns, or pawns that are susceptible of being attacked, and rapid advance of the passed pawn or pawns as far as is consistent with their safety.

To give a fixed line of play would be folly. Each ending is different, and requires different handling, according to what the adversary proposes to do. Mate with Knight & Bishop Example 39 [Capablanca, J. R] Queen against Rook Example 40 fCqpa&tfrtca, J. RJ l.Ke2 Kd7 [Black in order to make it more difficult, goes toward the white-squared comer.] 2.Kd3 Kc6

3.Bf4 Kd5 4,Ne2 Kc5 5.Nc3 Kb4 6.Kd4 Ka5

7.Kc5 Ka6 8.Kc6 Ka7 9,Nd5 Ka8 [The first part is

now over; the Black King is in the white-squared comer. The second and last part will consist in driving the Black King now from aS to al or h8 in order to mate him. In this position al will be the quickest .|

10.Nb6+ Ka7 U.Bc7 Ka6 12.Bb8 Ka5 13.Nd5

Ka4 14.Kc5! [Black tries to make for hl with his King. White has two ways to prevent that, one by 14. Be 5 Kb3

15.Ne3 and the other which I give as the text, and

which I consider better for the student to learn, because it is more methodical and more in accord with the spirit of all these endings, by using the King as much as possible. |

14...Kb3 15.Nb4 Kc3 16.Bf4 Kb3 17.Be5 Ka4

18.Kc4 Ka5 19,Bc7+ Ka4 2O.Nd3 Ka3 21.Bb6

Ka4 22.NB2+ Ka3 23.Kc3 Ka2 24.Kc2 Ka3

25.Bc5+ Ka2 26.Nd3 Kai 27,Bb4 Ka2 28.Ncl+

Kal 29.Bc3# LQe5+ [Not l.Qa6 because Rc7+ 2.Kb6 Rc6+ 3.Kxc6 Stalemate. The beginner w ill invariably fall into this trap. | L..Ka8 2.Qal+ Kb8 3.Qa5 [hi a few moves we have accomplished our object. The first part is concluded. Now wc come to the second pari. The Rook can only go to a while square, otherwise the first check with the Queen will win it.] Rb3 [The student should find out by himself how to win if 3...Rbl 4.Qe5+ Ka7 See example 41. ]

[diagram]
7.Qg8+ Rb8 8,Qa2#

Calculation by visualising the future positions is what will count.

15. How to Mate with a Knight and a Bishop

Now, before going back again to the middle game and the openings, let us see how to mate with Knight and Bishop, and, then, how to win with a Queen against a Rook.

With a Knight and a Bishop the mate can only be given in the corners of the same colour as the Bishop.

In this example we must mate either at a1 or h8. The ending can be divided into two parts. Part one consists in driving the Black King to the last line. We might begin, as is generally done in all such cases, by advancing the King to the centre of the board.

It will be seen that the ending is rather laborious. There are two outstanding features: the close following by the King, and the controlling of the squares of the opposite colour of the Bishop by the combined action of the Knight and King. The student will do well to exercise himself methodically in this ending, as it gives a very good idea of the actual power of the pieces, and it requires foresight in order to accomplish the mate within the fifty moves which are granted by the rules.

16. Queen against Rook

This is one of the most difficult endings without pawns. The resources of the defence are many, and when used skilfully only a very good player will prevail within the limit of fifty moves allowed by the rules. (The rules is that at any moment you may demand that your opponent mate you within fifty moves. However, every time a piece is exchanged or a pawn advanced the counting must begin afresh.)

This is one of the standard positions which Black can often bring about. Now, it is White's move. If it were Black's move it would be simple, as he would have to Queen against Rook Example 42

J. /?./

[diagram]
l.Qg5+! [Suppose we play 1.Qe5i Kf8 2.Kg6 Rd7 The only defense, but, unfortunately, a very effective one, which makes it very difficult lor White, since he cannot play 3.Qe6 (Nor can he win quickly by

3.Qc5+ because ATe# 4.Kf6 Rd6\ driving back the

King, because of 3...Rg7+ 4.K1'6 Rg6+ draws. Now that we have seen the difficulties of the situation let us go back. The best move is 1,@g5 i . | L..Kh8 [If 1...KH7 2.Qg6 i KhS 3. Kh61 Let us go back again ] [ 1...KT8 2.Qd8+ Kg7 3.Kg5 R13 (The best place for the Rook away from the King. Instead 3...Kh7

4.Qd4 l 5.Kf6 would lead to positions similar

to those already seen ) 4Qd44- Kf8 5,Kg6 (5.Qd6+ Kg7 6 Qe5 Kf8 7Xg6 would also win the Rook. The text move, however, is given to show the finesse of such endings. While now threatens mate at d8. ) 5...Rg3+ 6.Kf6 Rf3+ 7.Ke6 Rh3 While threatened mate at h8. 8.QC4 1 and the Rook is lost. ] 2>Qe5+ Kh7 [Best.] 3,Kg5 Ra7! [Best. If 3...Rg7 + then 4.Kf6 leads to a position similar to those in examples 40 and 41. ] 4*Qe4+ Kg8 5.Qc4+ Kh7 6+Kf6 Rg7 7.Qh4+ Kg8

8.Qh5 | And we have the position of Example 40 with

Black to move,] move his Rook away from the King (find out why), and then the Rook would be comparatively easy to win. We deduce from the above that the main object is to force the Black Rook away from the defending King, and that, in order to compel Black to do so, we must bring about the position in the diagram with Black to move. Once we know what is required, the way to proceed becomes easier to find.

The procedure here is very similar. The things to bear in mind are that the Rook must be prevented from interposing at b8 because of an immediate mate, and in the same way the King must be prevented from going either a6 or c8.

We shall now examine a more difficult position.

Many players would be deceived by this position. The most likely looking move is not the best.

Note, in these examples, that the checks at long range along the diagonals have often been the key to all the winning manoeuvres. Also that the Queen and King are often kept on different lines. The student should carefully go over these positions and consider all the possibilities not given in the text.

He should once more go through everything already written before proceeding further with the book.

Attacking without Knights Example 44 [Capablanca, J. R.J Attacking without Knights Example 43 [Capab/anca, J. R.j LRxa7+ Qxa7 2,Ra5 [And Black moves; White mates.]

[diagram]
Attacking without Knights Example 45 [Capabianca, J. RJ l."Rdg8! 2.RJ2 [If 2.Qxe7 Rxg2+ 3.Khl Bd5 and mate follows in a few moves. |

2...Rxg2+ 3.Kfl Bc4+ 4.Nxc4 Rgl#

l.Rxh6' gxh6 2.Bxh6+ Ke7 [If 2...Nxli6 3.Rxh6 and Black would he helpless. ] 3,Qh7+ Ke8 4.Qxg8+ Kd7 5,Qh7+ Qe7 6.Bf8 Qxh7 7Rxh7E Ke8 8.Rxa7 [Black Resigns] Chapter 3

Planning a Win in Middlegame Play

I shall now give a few winning positions taken from my own games. I have selected those that I believe can be considered as types, i.e. positions that may easily occur again in a somewhat similar form. A knowledge of such positions is of great help; in fact, one cannot know too many. It often may help the player to find, with little effort, the right move, which he might not be able to find at all without such knowledge.

17. Attacking Without the Aid of Knights

It is Black's move, and as he is a Knight and pawn behind he must win quickly, if at all.

Black's last move was ...e4-e3, played with the object of stopping what he thought was White threat, viz.:

1.Ra5, to which he would have answered 1...Qf4+ and

drawn by perpetual check. White, however, has a more forceful move, and he mates in three moves.

White has a beautiful position, but still he had better gain some material, if he can, before Black consolidates his defensive position. Attacking with Knights Example 47 fCapab/anca, J. R.] Attacking with Knights Example 46 [Capab/anca. J. R.J l.Bxh7+ Kxh7 2,Ng5+ Kg6 [Best If 2...K116 3.Nxf7i wins the Queen ] [and if 2...Kg8 3.Qh5 with an trresistahle attack. ] 3,Qg4 f5 4.Qg3 Kh6 [White finally won. This position is elaborated under Example 50.]

1.Nfxg7 Nc5

[Evidently an error which made the winning easier for White. as he simply took the Rook w ith the Knight and kept up the attack. Black should have played 1...Nxg7 Then would have followed 2.Nf6-1 Kg6 3.Nxd7 ft (Best) 4.e5 Kf7 5.Nxf6 Re7

6.Ne4 and Black should lose, ]

2.Nxe8

In these few examples the attacking is being done by Rooks and Bishops in combination with the Queen. There are no Knights to take part in the attack. We shall now give some examples in which the Knights play a prominent part as an attacking force.

18. Attacking with Knights as a Prominent Force

White is two pawns behind. He must therefore press on his attack.

The student should carefully examine the position, as the sacrifice of the Bishop in similar situations is typical, and the chance for it is of frequent occurrence in actual play.

Winning by Indirect Attack Example 49 jCapablanca, J. R] Winning by Indirect Attack Example 48 [C'apablanca, J. R.] I.Nd41 [The obvious move LBc4 might be good enough, since after Rad8 2.b4 would make it difficult for Black. ] L,.cxd4 2.Rxc6 Nb4 [There is nothing better, as White threatened 3. c4.] 3.Bc4+ Kh8 4.Re6 d3

5.Rxd3 [And White, with the better position, is a pawn

ahead J

1...Ra8 Za4

| White's best move was 2.b3 when would follow Nxd2 3.Qxd2 Ra3 and Black would ultimately win the a- pawn, always keeping a slight advantage in position. Hie text move makes matters easier. ]

2...Nxd2 3,Qxd2 Qc4 4Rfdl Reb8

[Black could have regained the pawn by playing

4...Bxc3 but he sees that there is more to be had, and

therefore increases the pressure against White's Queenside. He now threatens, among other things,

5...gxb2. 1

5.Qe3 Rb4 [Threatening to win the Exchange by 6-

Bd4.] 6-Qg5 Bd4+ 7,Khl Rab8 [This threatens to win the Knight, and thus forces White to give up the Exchange ] 8.Rxd4 Qxd4 9.Rdl Qc4 [Now Black will recover his pawn.)

19. Winning by Indirect Attack

We have so far given positions where the attacks were of a violent nature and directed against the King's position. Very often, however, in the middlegame attacks are made against a position or against pieces, or even pawns.

The winning of a pawn among good players of even strength often means the winning of the game.

Hence the study of such positions is of great importance. We give below two positions in which the attack aims at the gain of a mere pawn as a means of ultimately winning the game.

Black is a pawn behind, and there is no violent direct attack against White's King. Black's pieces, however, are very well placed and free to act, and by co- ordinating the action of all his pieces he is soon able not only to regain the pawn but to obtain the better game. The student should carefully this position and the subsequent moves. It is a very good example of proper co-ordination in the management of forces.

An examination of this position will show that Black's main weakness lies in the exposed position of his King, and in the fact that his Queen's Rook has not yet come into the game. Indeed, if it were Black's move, we might conclude that he would have the better game, on account of having three pawns to two on the Queenside, and his Bishop commanding the long diagonal. It is, however, White's move, and he has two courses to choose from. The obvious move, 1.Bc4, might be good enough (see note in example). But there is another move which completely upsets Black's position and wins a pawn, besides obtaining the better position.

These positions have been given with the idea of acquainting the student with different types of combinations. I hope they will also help to develop his imagination, a very necessary quality in a good player. The student should note, in all these middlegame positions, that once the opportunity is offered, all the pieces are thrown into action en masse when necessary; and that all the pieces smoothly co-ordinate their action with machine-like precision.

That, at least, is what the ideal middlegame play should be, if it is not so altogether in these examples. Direct Attacks en Masse Example 50 [Capablanca. J. RJ

12.Bxh7+ Kxh7 13.Ng5+ Kg6 14.Qg4 fS

[Best. 14...e5 would be immediately fatal, e.g.

15.Nc6+ Kf6 16.f4! c4 17.Qg5+ Kxe6 18.Qe5+

[diagram]
2AM/6+ wins the Queen J 21. Rxd3 Qxd3 22.Rcl+ Kb6 (if 22... 7mateintwoJ23.Qc7+ and mate in five moves. ] 15Qg3 Kh6 16.Qh4+ Kg6 17.Qh7+ Kf6 [If 17...Kxg5 1 8.Qxg7 1 and mate in a few moves. ]

18.e4 Ng6 19.exf5 exf5 20. Radi Nd3 21.QH3

Ndf4 22.Qg3 Qc7 23,Rfel Ne2+ [This blunder loses at once, but the game could not be saved in any case, e g. 23...Be6 24.Rxe6+ Nxe6

25.Nd5# ]

24.Rxe2 Qxg3 25.Nh7+ Kf7 26.hxg3 Rh8 27.Ng5+

Kf6 2S.f4 [Black Resigns] Chapter 4

General Theory

Before we revert to the technique of the openings it will be advisable to dwell a little on general theory, so that the openings in their relation to the rest of the game may be better understood.

20. The Initiative

As the pieces are set on the board both sides have the same position and the same amount of material. White, however, has the move, and the move is this case means "the initiative", and the initiative, other things being equal, is an advantage. Now this advantage must be kept as long as possible, and should only be given up if some other advantage, material or positional, is obtained in its place. White, according to the principles already laid down, develops his pieces as fast as possible, but in so doing he also tries to hinder his opponent's development, by applying pressure wherever possible. He tries first of all to control the center, and failing this to obtain some positional advantage that will make it possible for him to keep on harassing the enemy. He only relinquishes the initiative when he gets for it some material advantage under such favorable conditions as to make him feel assured that he will, in turn, be able to withstand his adversary's thrust; and finally, through his superiority of material, once more resume the initiative, which alone can give him the victory. This last assertion is self-evident, since, in order to win the game, the opposing King must be driven to a position where he is attacked without having any way to escape. Once the pieces have been properly developed the resulting positions may vary in character. It may be that a direct attack against the King is in order; or that it is a case of improving a position already advantageous; or, finally, that some material can be gained at the cost of relinquishing the initiative for a more or less prolonged period.

21. Direct Attacks en Masse

In the first case the attack must be carried on with sufficient force to guarantee its success. Under no consideration must a direct attack against the King be carried on a outrange unless there is absolute certainty in one's own mind that it will succeed, since failure in such cases means disaster.

A good example of a successful direct attack against the King is shown in the following diagram:

In this position White could simply play 1.Bc2 and still have the better position, but he prefers an immediate attack on the Kingside, with the certainty in his mind that the attack will lead to a win.

We give, from now on, games and notes, so that the student may familiarise himself with the many and varied considerations that constantly are borne in the mind by the Chess Master. We must take it for granted that the student has already reached a stage where, while not being able fully to understand every move, yet he can derive benefit from any discussion with regard to them.

Another example of this kind:

Direct Attacks en Masse Example 51

J. R.J

2LBh4 Qd7 22.Nxc8 Qxc6 23 Qd8+ QeS 24.Be7+ Kf7 25.Nd6+ Kg6 26.NB4+ Kh5 27.Nxe8 Rxd8

28.Nxg7+ Kh6 29,Ngf5+ Kh5 30,h3! ['Die climax

of the combination started with 21. 114. White is still threatening mate, and the best way to avoid it is lor Black to give back all the material he has gained and to remain three pawns behind ]

In this position the simple move 1.Nxe5 would win, but White looks for complications and their beauties. Such a course is highly risky until a wide experience of actual master play has developed a sufficient insight into all the possibilities of a position. This game won the brilliancy prize at St. Petersburg in 1914.

The student should note that in the examples given the attack is carried out with every available piece, and that often, as in some of the variations pointed out, it is the coming into action of the last available piece that finally overthrows the enemy. It demonstrates the principle already stated:

Direct and violent attacks against the King must be carried en masse, with full force, to ensure their success. The opposition must be overcome at all cost; the attack cannot be broken off, since in all such cases that means defeat.

22. The Force of the Threatened Attack

Failing an opportunity, in the second case, for direct attack, one must attempt to increase whatever weakness there may be in the opponent's position; or, if there is none, one or more must be created. It is always an advantage to threaten something, but such threats must be carried into effect only if something is to be gained immediately. For, holding the threat in hand, forces the opponent to provide against its execution and to keep material in readiness to meet it. Thus he may more easily overlook, or be able to parry, a thrust at another point. But once the threat is carried into effect, it exists no longer, and your opponent can devote his attention to his own schemes. One of the best and most successful manoeuvres in this type of game is to make a demonstration on one side, so as to draw the forces of your opponent to that side, then through the greater mobility of your pieces to shift your forces quickly to the other side and break through, before your opponent has had the time to bring over the necessary forces for the defence.

A good example of positional play is shown in the following game.

[Apparently the best way to meet the manifold threats ol White. 19...cxd5 would make matters worse, as the White Bishop would finally bear on the weak c-pawn via c4. J 2O.Rxe5 g6 21.Qh4 Kg7 22.QJ4 c5 [Forced, as White threatened 23.dxe6 and also 23.Rxa7.) 23,Qc3 [ 23...Qd6 was better. But Black wants to tempt While to play 24.dxc6. thinking that he will soon af ter regain his pawn w ith a safe position. Such, however, is not the case, as While quickly demonstrates. I must add that in any case Black's position is. in my opinion, untenable, since all his pieces are tied up for the defence of a pawn, while While's pieces arc free to act. ]

24.dxe6 Bc8 25.Be2! [The deciding and timely

maneuver. All the Black pieces arc useless after this Bishop reaches d5.] Bxe6 26.Bf3 Kf7 27,Bd5 Qd6 [Nowr it is evident that all the Black pieces arc tied up, and it only remains for White to find the quickest way to force the issue. White will now try to place his Queen at h 6, and then advance the h-pawn lo h5 in order to break up the Black pawns defending the King. J 28.Qe3 Re7 [If 28...f4 29.Q113 h5 3O.Qh4 Re7 31.Qg5 Kg7

32.h4 Qd7 33.g3 fxg3 34.f4 and Black w ill soon

be helpless, as he has to mark time with his pieces while While prepares to advance a2-a4-a5? and finally at the proper time to play Rxe6. |

29.Qh6 Kg8 3O.h4 a6 3Lh5 f4 32.hxg6 hxg6

33.Rxe6 [Black resigns. Commenting on this game, Dr.

E. Lasker said al the time that if White's play were properly analyzed it might be found that there was no way to improve it upon it. These apparently simple games are often of the most difficult nature. Perfection in such cases is much more difficult to obtain than in those positions calling for brilliant direct attack agains t the King, involving sacrifices of pieces.] 1-0

[diagram]
Masters Havana 1913 [Capablanca,J. R.'] 1x4 e6 2*d4 d5 3.Nc3 dxe4 4.Nxe4 Nd7 5.Nf3 Ngf6 6.Nxf6+ Nxf6 7.Ne5 [Ibis move was first shown to me by the talented Venezuelan amateur, M. Ayala. The object is to prevent the development of Black's Queen's Bishop via b7, after ...b7-b6, which is Black's usual development in this variation. Generally it is bad to move the same piece twice in an opening before the other pieces are out, and the violation of that principle is the only objection that can be made to this move, which otherwise has everything to recommend it.] Bd6 8*Qf3 | 8.Bg5 might be better. The text move gives Black an opportunity of which he does not avail himself. ]

8...C6

| 8...c5 was the right move. It would have led to complications, in which Black might have held his own; at least, White's play would be very' difficult. The text move accomplishes nothing, and puts Black in an altogether defensive position. The veiled threat

9...Nxe5 followed by 10..?3a5 < is easily met. ]

9.c3 O-O 10.Bg5 Be7 [The fact that Black has now to

move his Bishop back clearly demonstrates that Black's plan of development is faulty. He has lost too much lime, and White brings his pieces into their most attacking position without hindrance of any sort.]

11.Bd3 Ne8

[The alternative was 1 l...Nd5 Otherwise White would play 12.Qh3, and Black w ould be forced to play 12...g6 (not 12...h6. because of the 13. x116 sacrifice) seriously w eakening his Kingside. ]

12.Qh3 f5 | White has no longer an attack, but he has

compelled Black to creat a marked weakness. Now White's whole plan will be to exploit this weakness (the weak e-pawn), and the student can now see how the principles expounded previously are applied in this game. Every move is directed to make the w eak e- pawn untenable, or to profit by the inactivity of the Black pieces in defending the pawn, in order to improve the position of White al other points ]

13.Bxe7 Qxe7 14.O-O Rf6 15,Rfel Nd6 16.Re2

Bd7 | At last the Bishop comes out, not as an active attacking piece, but merely to make way for the Rook.]

17.Rael Re8 18.c4 Nf7 [A very clever move,

lending lo prevent c4-c5, and templing White to play Xd7.| 19.d5! | Bui it always happens in such cases that, if one line of attack is anticipated, there is another; and this is no exception to the rule, as will be seen. I9.N.xd7 Qxd7 followed by 2O.Bxf5 would be bad, as the following variation shows: Ng5 21.Qg4 Rxf5

22.h4 h5 23.Qxf5 exf5 24.Rx$84 Kh7 25.hxg5

Qxd4 |

19...Nxe5

23. Relinquishing the Initiative

In the third case, there is nothing to do, once the material advantage is obtained, but to submit to the opponent's attack for a while, and once it has been repulsed to act quickly with all your forces and win on material. A good example of this type of games is given below.

34.Nd2

[ 34.Rf5+ might have been belter. The text move did not prove as strong as anticipated. J

34...Kf6 35 Rd5 ReG 3G.Ne4+ Ke7

[ 36...Rxe4 would lose easily. J

37.Rxc5 d3! [Very fine.] 38.Kf2

[White cannot play 3&Rc7+ because of Kd8

39.Rxb7 Rxe4 winning. ]

38...Bxe4 39*fxe4 Rxe4 4€.Rd5 Re3 [The ending is

very difficult to win. At this point White had to make the last move before the game was adjourned.) 41.b4! Re4 42.Rxd3 Rxc4 43.Rh3 Rxb4 44 Rxh7+ Kf6

45.Rxa7 Kf5 46.KI3 Rb2 47.Ra5+ Kf6 48.Ra4

Kg5 49.Rxf4 Rxa2 5O.h4+ Kh5 51.Rf5+ Kh6

52.g4 [Black resigns.]

1-0

C66

Capablanca Jose Raul

[diagram]
Masters Havana 1913 fCap blanca, J. /?./ 1x4 e5 2,Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 Nf6 4.O-O d6 5.Bxc6+ bxc6 6.d4 Be7 7.Nc3 [ 7.dxe5 might be better but at the time I was not familiar with that variation, and therefore I played what I knew to be good. |

7...Nd7 8.dxe5 dxe5 9.Qe2 O-O lO.Rdl Bd6

ll,Bg5 Qe8 12.NB4 g6 [Black offers the Exchange in order to gain time and to obtain at attack. Without considering at all whether or not such a course was justified on the part of Black, it is evident that as far as White is concerned there is only one thing to do, viz. , to w in the Exchange and then prepare to weather the storm. Then, once it is passed, to act quickly with all forces to derive the benefit of numerical superiority.]

13.Bh6 Nc5 14.Rd2 Rb8 IS.Ndl Rb4 [To force

While to play 16.c4, and thus create a hole at d4 lor his Knight. Such grand tactics show the hand of a master. A "hole" in chess parlance has come to mean a defect in pawn formation which allows the opponent to establish his forces in wedge formation or otherwise without the possibility of dislodging him by pawn moves. Thus, in the present position. Black has two "holes" at f6 and h6t where forces, e.g. at Knight or Bishop, could establish themselves, supported by pieces or pawns.] 16x4 Ne6 17.Bxf8 QxfB 18.Ne3 | 18.NF3 was better. | 18",Nd4 19.Qdl c5 [In order to prevent 2O.Hxd4 giving back the Exchange, but winning a pawn and relieving the position.] 20.b3 Rb8 [In order to play ... Jtb7 without blocking his Rook. Black's maneuvering for positional advantage is admirable throughout this game, and if he loses it is due entirely to the fact that the sacrifice of the Exchange, without even a pawn for it, could not succeed against sound defensive play.]

21.Nf3 f5 22.exf5 gxf5 [The position begins to look

really dangerous for White, hi reality Black's attack is reaching its maximum force. Very soon it will reach the apex, and then White, who is well prepared, will begin his counter action, and through his superiority in material obtain an undoubted advantage.] 23,Nil f4

24.Nxd4 cxd4 25.Qh5 Bb7 26,Rel c5

[He could not play 26...Re8 because of 27.Rxd4 Besides, he wants to be ready to play ...e5-e4. At present White cannot with safety play 27,Sxc5. but he w ill soon prepare the way for it. Then, by giving up a Rook for a Bishop and a pawn, he w ill completely upset Black's attack and come out a pawn ahead. It is on this basis that White's whole defensive maneuver is founded. ]

27.13 Re8 28.Rde2 Re6 [Now the Black Rook enters

into the game, but White is prepared. Il is now time to give back the Exchange.] 29.Rjce5 Bxe5 30.Rxe5 Rh6 31.Qe8 Qxe8 32.Rxe8+ Kf7 33.Re5 Rc6

I have passed over the game lightly because of its difficult nature, and because we are at present concerned more with the opening and the middle-game than we are with the endings, which will be treated separately.

24. Cutting Off Pieces from the Scene of Action

Very often in a game a master only plays to cut off, so to speak, one of the pieces from the scene of actual conflict. Often a Bishop or a Knight is completely out of action. In such cases we might say that from that moment the game is won, because for all practical purposes there will be one more piece on one side than on the other. A very good illustration is furnished by the following game.

either case, as will be seen, ]

11...Qxf6 12.Bg3 Bg4 13.h3 Bxf3 14,Qxf3 Qxf3

15.gxf3 f6 [A simple examination will show that

White is minus a Bishop for all practical purposes. He can only free it by sacrificing one pawn, and possibly not even then. At least it would lose time besides the pawn. Black now devotes all his energy to the Queenside, and. having practically a Bishop more, the result cannot be in doubt. The rest of the game is given, so that the student may see how simple it is to win such a game.] 16.Kg2 a5 17.a4 Kf7 18.RK1 Ke6

19.h4 Rfb8 [There is no necessity to pay any attention

to the Ringside, because White gains nothing by exchanging pawns and opening the h-ftle.] 2O.hxg5 hxg5 21.b3 c6 22.Ra2 b5 23.Rhal c4 24.axb5 [If White takes the proffered pawn with 24,bxc4 bxc4 25.dxc4 Black regains it immediately by Rb4 ]

24...cxb3 25.cxb3 Rxb5 26.Ra4 Rxb3 27,d4 Rb5

28.Rc4 Rb4 29.Rxc6 Rxd4 [White resigns.]

0-1

C49

A Winter,W

[diagram]
Victory Tournament 1919 [Capablanca, J. R.J Le4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bb5 Bb4 5.O-O O-O 6.Bxc6 [Nimzowitch's Variation, which I have played successfully in many a game. It gives White a very solid game. Nimzowitch's idea is that White will in due time be able to play 12-f4, opening a line for his Rooks, which, in combination with the posting of a Knight on 15, should be sufficient to win. He thinks that should Black attempt to stop the Knight from going to f5, he will have to weaken his game in some other way. Whether this is true or not remains to be proved, but in my opinion the move is perfectly good. On the other hand, there is no question that Black can easily develop his pieces. But it must be considered that in this variation White docs not attempt to hinder Black's development, he simply attempts to build up a position which he considers impregnable and from which he can start an attack in due course. | dxc6 [The alternative 6...bxc6 gives White the best of the game, without doubt. See the game Capablanca- Kupcluck, from the Havana International Masters Tournament Book 1913 (by J.R. Capablanca); or a game in the Carlsbad Tournament of 191 1, Vidmar playing Black against Alekliine. ]

7.d3 Bd6 8.Bg5 [This move is not at all in

accordance with the nature of this variation. The general strategical plan for White is to play h2-h3. to be followed in time by the advance of g2-g4, and bringing the Knight to f5 via 4Sc3-e2-g3-f5 (or Qc3- dl-c3-f5). Then if possible, the placing the other Knight at cither h4. g3 or e3 as the occasion demands. The White King sometimes remains at gl, and other times it is placed at g2, but mostly at hl. Finally, in mo st cases comes f2-f4, and then the real attack begins. Sometimes it is a direct assault against the King (see Nimzowitch's game in the All-Russian Masters Tournament 1914. at St. Petersburg, against Levitzki, I believe), and at other times it comes simply to finessing for positional advantage in the endgame, after most of the pieces have been exchanged. See the Capablanca-Janowski game. New York 1913. J h6

9.Bh4 c5 [To prevent d3-d4 and to draw White into

playing 10.Sd5, which would prove fatal. Black's plan is to play ...g7-g5, as soon as the circumstances permit, in order to free his Queen and Knight from the pin by the Bishop.] 10,Nd5 [White falls into the trap. Only lack of experience can account for this move. White should have considered that a player of my experience and strength could never allow such a move if it were good,] g5 [After this move White's game is lost.] ll.Nxf6+ [White cannot play 1 l.Nxg5 because Nxd5 will win a piece. Therefore he must play Bg3 either before or after Qxf6+, with disastrous results in

D52

[diagram]
London CCch 1919 fCapablanca, J. R./ l.d4 d5 2.N£3 Nf6 3.c4 e6 4.Nc3 Nbd7 5.Bg5 c6

6.e3 Qa5 |"One of the objects of Black's method of

defence is to attack White's Knight at c3 doubly by ... Qe4, followed by ...dxc4. But 7.Qid2 is probably a strong way of meeting this threat.'1 There are, besides, two good reasons for this method of defense; first, that it is not as much played as some of the other defenses and consequently not so well known, and second that it leaves Black with two Bishops against Bishop and Knight, which, in a general wav. constitutes an advantage.] 7.Bxf5 Nxf6 Ka3 Ne4 9.Qb3 Be7 [This is not the logical place for the Bishop which should have been posted at d6. In the opening, time is of great importance, and therefore the player should be extremely careful in his development and make sure that he posts his pieces in the right places. | 10.Bd3 Nxc3 ll.bxc3 dxc4 12.Bxc4 Bf6 |'T did not want White's Knight to come to c5, from where I could not dislodge it by ...17-1'6 without weakening my c-pawn." The same result could be accomplished by playing I2...Bd6 Incidentally it bears out my previous statement that the Bishop should have been originally played to d6. ]

13.O-O

[The alternative was 13.e4 followed by e4-e5, and then O-O. White would thereby assume the initiative but would weaken his pawn position considerably, and might be compelled to stake all on a violent attack against the King. Tins is a turning point in the game, and it is in such positions that the temperament and style of the player decide the course of the game. ]

13...O-O 14x4 e5 15.d5

["White might play 15.Rfdl keeping the option of breaking up the center later on. I wanted him to advance this pawn as there is now a fine post for my Bishop at c4" ] | By playing I5.d5 While shows that he does not understand the true value of his position. His only advantage consisted in the undeveloped condition of Black's Bishop on cX. He should therefore have made a plan to prevent the Bishop from coming out, or if that were not possible, then he should try to force Black to weaken his pawn position in order to come out w ith the Bishop. There were three moves to consider: first, 15.a4 in order to maintain the White Bishop in the dominating position that it now occupies. This would have been met by Qc7 ] [second, either of the Rooks to d 1 15. Rad 1 in order to threaten I6.dxe5 Jkxe5 17+ xe5 $?xe5 IX. xf7 1. This would have been met by Bg4 ] |and third 1 5.113 to prevent 1 5... g4 and by playing either Rook to dl, followed up as previously stated

25. A Player's Motives Criticized in a Specimen Game

Now that a few of my games with my own notes have been given, I offer for close perusal and study a very fine game played by Sir George Thomas, one of England's foremost players, against Mr. F.F.L. Alexander, in the championship of the City of London Chess Club in the winter of 1919-1920. It has the interesting feature for the student that Sir George Thomas kindly wrote the notes to the game for me at my request, and with the understanding that I would make the comments on them that I considered appropriate. Sir George Thomas' notes are in quotation marks ("")and thus will be distinguished from my own comments.

to force Black to play ...b7-b5, which would weaken his Queenside pawns. Thus by playing 15.h3 White would have attained the desired object. The text move 1 5_d5 blocks the action of the White Bishop and facilitates Black's development. Hereafter While will act on the defensive, and the interest throughout the rest of the game will center mainly on Black's play and the manner in which he carries out the attack. |

15...Qc7 16.Bd3 [''This seems wrong, as it makes the

development of Black's Queen wing easier. He could not have played 16...b6. because of the reply 17.dxc6 followed by 18. d5."J b6 17.c4 Bb7 18.Rfcl [''With the idea of 19.Sabi and 20x5. But it only compels Black to bring his Bishop to c5, which he would do in any case."] Be7 19.Rc2 Bc5 2O.Qb2 f6 ["Il would have been better, probably, to play

20...Rfe8 with the idea of ...f7-f5 presently" ]

[Black's play hereabout is weak; it lacks force, and there seems to be no well-defined plan of attack. It is true that these are the most difficult positions to handle in a game. In such eases a player must conceive a plan on a large scale, which promises chances of success, and with it all, it must be a plan that can be carried out with the means at his disposal. From the look of the position it seems that Black's best chance would be to mass his forces for an attack against White's center, to be followed by a direct attack against the King. He should, therefore, play

20...Rac8 threatening 21...f5. If White is able to

defeat this plan, or rather to prevent it, then, once be has fixed some of the White pieces on the Ringside, he should quickly shift his attack to the Queenside, and open a line for his Rooks, which, once they enter in action, should produce an advantage on account of the great power of the two Bishops. ]

21.RM Rad8 22.a4 Ba6 23,Rdl ["White has clearly

lost Lime with his Rook's moves."] Rfe8 24,Qb3 ["To bring his Queen across after 4Bh4 and Rd6

25.Nh4 g6 26.Be2 cxd5 f"I thought this exchange

necessary here, as White is threatening to play his Bishop via g4 to e6. If he retook with the c-pawn I intended to exchange Bishops and rely on the two pawns to one on the Queen's wing. 1 did not expect him to retake it with the e-pawn, which seemed to expose him to a violent Ringside attack."] [Black's judgment in this instance I believe to be faulty, Had White retaken with the c-pawn, as he expected, he would have had a passed pawn well supported on the Queenside. His only advantage would lie in his having a very well posted Bishop against a badly posted Knight, and on the fact that in such positions as the above, the Bishop is invariably stronger than the Knight, He could and should have prevented all that, by playing 26,..Bc8 as, had White then replied with 27.Qg3 he then could play cxd5 and White would not have been able to retake

[diagram]
Exchange. |

27.exd5 e4 28.g3 e3

[I do not like this move. It would have been better to hold it in reserve and to have played 28...f5 to be followed in due time by ...g6-g5 and ...f5T4, after having placed the Queen at d7, f7. or some other square as the occasion demanded. Hie text move blocks the action of the powerful Bishop at c5, and tends to make White's position safer than it should have been. The move in itself is a very strong attacking move, but it is isolated, and there is no effective continuation. Such advances as a rule should only be made when they can be followed by a concerted action of the pieces. |

29.f4 Bc8 30,ND Bf5 3LRb2 Re4 32,Kg2 Qc8

33.Ngl g5 34.fxg5

[''If now 34. BD gxf4 35.Bxe4 Bxe4+ with a winning attack." ]

34...fxg5 35.Rfl g4

[ 35...Rh6 was the alternative. White's only move would have been 36.Khl The position now is evidently won for Black, and it is only a question of finding the right course. The final attack is now carried on by Sir George Thomas in an irreproachable manner. ]

36.Bd3 Rf6 37.Ne2 QD 38.Rbbl

[If 38.Nf4 e2! (If, however. Black plays 38...QM and While 39.Qc2 I take pleasure in offering the position to my readers as a most beautiful and extra ordinary win for Black, beginning with Qh3+H 1 leave the variations for the student to work out. )

39.Nxe2 Rxe2+ 4O.Rxe2 Be4+ 41.Bxe4 (Best.)

Rxfl and White is lost. ]

38...Qh6 ["Again preventing 39.Bxe4 by the masked

attack on White's Rook. White therefore protects his Rook."] 39,Qc2 ["Making a double attack on the Rook - which still cannot be taken - and preparing to defend the h-pawn." If cither the Rook or Bishop arc taken White would he mated in a few moves.J Qh3+

40.Khl Rxc41!

["If 40...R116 4I.Ngl Qxg3 42.Qg2 Black therefore tries to get the Queen away from the defense." A very beautiful move, and the best way to carry on the attack. ]

41.Qxc4

["The best defense was 4 1.Rxf5 but Black would emerge with Queen against Rook and Knight." ]

41...Bxd3

["Again, not 41...Rh6 because of 42.d6+ " ]

42.Rxf5

["If 42.Qxd3 then, at last Rh6 wins." ]

42...Bxc4 43.Nf4 e2! ["'Hie Queen has no escape, but

White has no lime to take it."] 44,Rgl Qfl [While resigns. A very fine finish, | 0-1

Attack Different Side Example 56 [Capablanca. J. R.]

1...Re4+ 2.Re2 Ra4 3.Ra2 h5 [The idea, as will be

seen very soon, is Io play ...h5-h4 in order to fix White* s Ringside pawns with a view to the future. It is evident to Black that White wants to bring his King to b.3 to support his two weak isolated pawns, and thus to free his Rooks. Black, therefore, makes a plan to shift the attack to the Ringside at the proper time, in order to obtain some advantage from the greater mobility of his Rooks.] 4,Rdl Rda5 [In order to force the Rook to a 1, keeping both Rooks tied up.] 5,Rdal h4 6*Kd2 Kg7 7.Kc2 Rg5 [Black begins to transfer his attack to the Ringside ] 8.Rgl [A serious mistake, which loses quickly. White should have played 8.Kb3 when Black would have answered Raa5 9.£3 and Black would have obtained an opening at g3 for his King, which in the end miglit give him the victory. J

8...Rf4 9.Kd3

[Now the King cannot go 9.Kb3 because of Rb5+ J

9...RB+ 10.Ke2

[If 10.gx£3 Rxgl followed by 11...Shi winning. J

10...Rxh3 [And Black won after a few moves.]

0-1 Chapter 5

Endgame Strategy

We must revert once more to the endings. Their importance will have become evident to the student who has taken the trouble to study my game with Janowski (Example 53). After an uneventful opening - a Ruy Lopez - in one of its normal variations, my opponent suddenly made things interesting by offering the exchange; an offer which, or course, I accepted. Then followed a very hard, arduous struggle, in which I had to defend myself against a very dangerous attack made possible by the excellent manoeuvring of my adversary. Finally, there came the time when I could give back the material and change off most of the pieces, and come to an ending in which I clearly have the advantage. But yet the ending itself was not as simple as it at first appeared, and finally - perhaps through one weak move on my part - it became a very difficult matter to find a win.

Had I been a weak end-game player the game would probably have ended in a draw, and all my previous efforts would have been in vain. Unfortunately, that is very often the case among the large majority of players; they are weak in the endings; a failing from which masters of the first rank are at times not free.

Incidentally, I might call attention to the fact that all the world's champions of the last sixty years have been exceedingly strong in the endings: Morphy, Steinitz, and Dr. Lasker had no superiors in this department of the game while they held their titles.

26. The Sudden Attack from a Different Side

I have previously stated, when speaking about general theory, that at times the way to win consists in attacking first on one side, then, granted greater mobility of the pieces, to transfer the attack quickly from one side to the other, breaking through before your opponent has been able to bring up sufficient forces to withstand the attack. This principle of the middlegame can sometimes be applied in the endings in somewhat similar manner.

In the position below I, with the Black pieces, played as follows:

Another good example, in which is shown the advantage of the greater mobility of the pieces in an ending, is the following from a game Capablanca- Kupchik played at the Havana Masters Tournament,

1913. The full score and notes of the game can be

found in the book of the tournament.

of Rooks because of the threat 27...S116; but in reality it leads to nothing. The best chance was to play 26...Rg8 ]

27.Rxe6 fxe6 28.f4

[Up to now White had played with finesse, but this last move is weak. 28.Ra6 was the proper way to continue, so as to force Black to give up his a-pawn or c-pawn. ]

28...Kc8 29.Kd2

[Again a bad move. 29.Ra3 was the proper continuation, and if then Rb8 30.b3 Kb7 31.b4 Ka8 32.RH3 with excellent winning chances; in fact, I believe, a won game. ]

29...Kb7

| Black misses his only chance. 29. ..Rb8 w ould have drawn. ] 3O.Ra3 Rg8 3LRh3 Rg7 32.Ke2 Ka6 33.Rh6 Re7

34.Kd3 Kb7 | He goes back with the King to support

his c-pawn, and thus be able to utilize his Rook It is, h owe ver, useless, and only While's weak play later on gives him further chances of a draw,] 35,h4 Kc8

36.Rh5 [To prevent the Black Rook from controlling

the open file.] Kd7 37.Rg5 Rf7 38.Kc3 Kc8 [He must keep his King on that side because White threatens to march with his King to a6 via b4 ] 39.Kb4 Rf6 4O.Ka5 Kb7 41.a4 a6 42,h5 Rh6 [He can do nothing but wait for White, The text move stops White from moving his Rook, but only for one move ] 43.b 4 Rf6 [The only other move was 43...Ka7 when White could play 44.Rg7 or even 44.b5. ]

44.b5

[A weak move, which gives Black a fighting chance. In this ending, as is often the case w ith most players. White plays the best moves whenever the situation is difficult and requires careful handling, but once his position seems to be overwhelming he relaxes his efforts and the result is nothing to be proud of. The right move was 44.Rg7 ]

44...axb5 45,axb5 Rfl8! 46.Rg7 Ra8+ 47,Kb4 cxbS

48.Kxb5 Ra2 49,c6+ Kb8 5O.Rxh7 Rb2+ 51.Ka5

Ra2+ 52,Kb4 Rxf2 [Black misses his last chance: 52...Rb2+ forcing the King to c3, in order to avoid the perpetual, w ould probably draw. The reader must bear in mind that my opponent was then a very young and inexperienced player, and consequently deserves a great deal of credit for the light he put up. ]

53.Re7 Rxf4

[ 53..,Rb2+ followed by 54...Sh2 offered better chances. ]

54.h6! Rxd44- 55.Kb5 Rdl 56.h7 Rbl+ 57.Kc5

Rcl+ 58.Kd4 Rdl+ 59.Ke5 Rel+ 60,Kf6 Rhl

61.Re8+ Ka7 62,h8Q Rxh8 63.Rxh8 Kb6 64.Kxe6

Kxc6 65.Kxf5 Kc5 66.Ke5 c6 <57.Rh6 Kb5 68.K44 1-0

C49

[diagram]
Masters Havana /CapaManca, J. R./

17.Re4 Rfe8 [With the object of repeating White's

maneuver, and also not to allow White the control of the open file.] IS.Rael Re6 19.Rle3 Rce8 2O.Kfl Kf8 [Black wants to bring his King to the center of the board in order to be nearer to whatever point White decides to attack. The move is justified at least on the general rule that in such endings the King should be in the middle of the hoard. He does nothing after all but follow White's footsteps. Besides, it is hard to point out anything better. If 20. d5 2].Rg4+ fol lowed by 22.'l?e2, would leave Black in a very disagreeable position | [If 20..T5 21.Rd4! Rxe3? 22.fxe3 Rxe3 23.K12 Re7 24.Ra4 w inning the a-pawn. w hich w ould practically leave White with a passed pawn ahead on the Queenside, as the three pawns of Black on the Ringside would be held by the two of White. |

21.Ke2 Ke7 22.Ra4 Ra8 23.Ra5! [Th is move has a

manifold object. It practically fixes all of Black's pawns except the d-pawn Twhich is the only one that can advance two squares. It specially prevents the advance of Black's f-pawns, and al the same time threatens the advance of White's f-pawns to f4 and f5. By this threat it practically forces Black to play 23...d5 . which is all White desires, for reasons that will soon become evident.] d5 24.c4! Kd6 [Evidently forced, as the only other move to save a pawn would have been 24. ,.dxc4 which would have left all Black's Pawns isolated and weak | [If 24...d4 25.Re4 Kd6 26.B4! Rc5 27.Ra6 and Black's game is hopeless. ] 25,c5+ Kd7 26,d4 f5 [Apparently very strong, since it forces the exchange

White's only advantage in the above position is that he possesses the open file and has the move, which will secure him the initiative. There is also the slight advantage of having his pawns on the Queenside united, while Black has an isolated a-pawn. The proper Danger of a Safe Position Example 58 [Ccipablanca, J, /?./

1.g4 Rxa2

[The mistakes begin. This is the first. Black sees that lie can take a pawn without any danger, and does not stop to think whether there is anything better Instead

1...RC2- was the right move. If then 2.Kg.3

f If White played 2.Ke4 instead, then Re5 + followed by 3...Kxa2. ) 2...R.xa2 |

2.Rdl Ra4+

[Mistake number two, and this time such a serious one as to almost lose the game. Ilie proper move was to play 2...f5 in order to break up White's pawns and at the same time make room for the Black King, which is actually in danger, as will soon be seen. ]

3.Rd4 Raa5

[Mistake number three and this time fatal. His best move was 3,..Rga5 After the text move there is no defense. Black's game is lost. This shows that even an apparently simple ending has to be played with care. From a practically won position Black finds himself with a lost game, and it has only taken three moves. |

4.Rdd8 Rg7

[If 4..T5 5Rh8+ Kg6 6.Rcg8+ Kf6 7.Rxh6+ Rg6 8,g5f Ke7 9.Rhxg6 fxg6 ID.RgYt Ke8 1 l.Rxg6 and wins easily. ]

5.h4 h5 6.Rh8+

[ 6.RI18+ and Black resigns. The reason is evident. If Kg6 7.gxh5+ Rxh5 S.Rxh5 K.xh5 9.RB8+ Kg6

[diagram]
1-0 course is to bring the Rooks forward, so that at least one of them may be able to shift from one side of the board to the other, and thus keep Black's Rooks from moving freely. What this means in general theory has been stated already; it really means: keep harassing the enemy; force him to use his big pieces to defend pawns. If he has a weak point, try to make it weaker, or create another weakness somewhere else and his position will collapse sooner or later. If he has a weakness, and he can get rid of it, make sure that you create another weakness somewhere else.

This ending shows how easy it is to make weak moves, and how often, even in master play, mistakes are made and opportunities are lost. It shows that, so long as there is no great advantage of material, even with a good position, a player, no matter how strong, cannot afford to relax his attention even for one move.

27. The Danger of a Safe Position

A good proof of the previous statement is shown in the following ending between Marshall and Kupchik in one of their two games in the same Tournament (Havana, 1913).

It is evident that Marshall (White) is under great difficulties in the above position. Not only is he bound to lose a pawn, but his position is rather poor. The best he could hope for was a draw unless something altogether unexpected happened, as it did. No reason Endings with Rook + Pawns Example 59 [Capablanca, J. K.J [ l.Rc7i wins. ]

1...Rd6! [Now White has two continuations.] 2.f7

[Or 2,Rc7+ A) Now suppose that Black did not realize that 2... Qd4 was the only move to draw, and consequently played 2...Kb6 instead. Now the best continuation would be 3.17 Rg6+(Best.) 4.Kfl R1'6 5.Rc7 Kc5 Best. White threatened to check with the Rook at e6. 6. Kc2 Al) Rest. If 6...Kc4 both 7.h4 (and 7XeS will win; this last-named move particularly would win with ease. A2) 6...63 7.Rc3 b2 (Best) 8.Rb3 Rxf7

9.Rxb2 Rh7 10.Rd2 Rxh2 ll.Ke.3

This position we have arrived al is won by White, because there are two files between the opposing King and the Pawn from which the King is cut off by the Rook, and besides, the paw n can advance to the fourth rank before the opponent's Rook can begin to check on the file. This last condition is very important, because if the Black Rook were at h8, and Black had the move, he could draw by preventing the advance of the paw n, either through constant check or by playing ."SfX at the proper time. Now that we have explained the reasons why this position is won, we leave it to the student to work out the correct solution. ; B) 2...Kd4! 3.f7 Rg6n I (a very important move, as against 5...Rf6 4.Re7 wins. ) 4.Kfl Rf6 5.R67 Kc3 and White will finally have to sacrifice the Rook for the pawn, or draw by perpetual check. ]

2...Rd8!

[If there were nothing more in the ending it would not be of any great value, but there are other very can be given for Black's loss of the game except that he felt so certain of having the best of it with a pawn more and what he considered a safe position, that he became exceedingly careless and did not consider the danger that actually existed.

28. Endings with One Rook and Pawns

The reader has probably realized by this time that endings of two Rooks and pawns are very difficult, and that the same hold true for endings of one Rook and pawns. Endings of two Rooks and pawns are not very common in actual play; but endings of one Rook and pawns are about the most common sort of endings arising on the chess board. Yet though they do occur so often, few have mastered them thoroughly. They are often of a very difficult nature, and sometimes while apparently very simple they are in reality extremely intricate. Here is an example from a game between Marshall and Rosenthal in the Manhattan Chess Club Championship Tournament of 1909-1910.

interesting features. Now suppose that Black did not realize that 2...Sd8 was the only move to draw, there would he two other moves to try. Either 2...Rg6f

3.Kf3 Rf6+ 4.Ke3

A) If 4...b3 5.Rh5+ wins, because if the King goes hack Kc6 (and if'the King goes up 5...Kc4 then followed by 7.af4 wins. Alien

6.Rh6 ;

B) 4...Re6i 5,Kd3 Rf6 (If 5."Rd6) 6.fCe4 winsj 6.RJ15+ Kc6 7,Rh6 wins ] [Or 2...RC6 3.Rg7! Kc4 (If 3 4Jig? and White will either capture The pawn or go to f3, and come out with a winning ending. ) 4.h4 b3

5.Rg4+ Kc5 6.Rg3 and White will either capture

the pawn or play Sf3, according to the circumstances, and come out with a winning ending. ]

3.Rh5+ Kc4 [And While will finally have to sacrifice

the Rook for Black's pawn ]

D02

[diagram]
PI Capablanca ose Raul

[diagram]
Association Ch fCapabZanca, J. RJ

21...Rae8

[The first move is already wrong. There is nothing to gain by this move. Black should play 21...a5 to be followed by ...a5-a4; unless White plays b2-b3. That would fix the Queenside. After that he could decide what demonstration he could make with his Rooks to keep the opponent's Rooks at bay. ]

22.Rd4 [This move not only prevents 22...f4 which

Black intended, but threatens 23.b3, followed, after

23...c.xb3 I 24.axb.3, by the attack with one or both

Rooks against Black's a-pawn.| Rf6 [Probably w ith the idea of a demonstration on the Kingside by ...Sg6 and...ggZ] 23,b3 cxb3+ 24.axb3 Kf7 25.Kd3 [ 25. Rai should have been played now; in order to force Black to defend with Re7 White, however, does not want to disclose his plan al once, and thus aw aken Black to the danger of his position, hence this move, which seems to aim at the disruption of Black's Queenside pawns. |

25...Re7 26.Rai Ke6

| Ih is is a mistake. Black is unaware of the danger of his position. lie should have played 26...g5 threatening 27...ah6, and. by making this demonstration against White's h-pawn, stop the attack against his Queenside pawns, w hich will now develop. |

27.Ra6 Rc7

| He could not play 27...Kd6 because 28.c4 would win at least a pawn. This in itself condemns his last move 26...Qe6, which has done nothing but make his situation practically hopeless. ] 28,Rda4 g5 [Nowr forced, but it is a little too late. He could not play 28... RIT7 because 29.f4 would have left his

In this position Marshall had a simple win by 1.Rc7+, but played 1.f6, and thereby gave Black a chance to draw. Luckily for Marshall, Black did not see the drawing move, played poorly, and lost. Had Black been up to the situation he would have drawn by playing 1...Rd6.

The fact that out of one apparently simple ending we have been able to work out several most unusual and difficult endings should be sufficient to impress upon the student's mind the necessity of becoming well acquainted with all kinds of endings, and especially with endings of Rook and pawns.

29. A Difficult Ending: Two Rooks and Pawns

Following our idea that the best way to learn endings as well as openings is to study the games of the masters, we give two more endings of two Rooks and pawns. These endings, as already stated, are not very common, and the author is fortunate in having himself played more of these endings than is generally the case. By carefully comparing and studying the endings already given (Examples 56 and 57) with the following, the student no doubt can obtain an idea of the proper method to be followed in such cases. The way of procedure is somewhat similar in all of them.

game completely paralyzed. Black now finally awakens to the danger, and tries to save the day by the counter-demonstration on the Ringside, which he should have started before. ]

29.H4! g4

[Black is now in a very disagreeable position. If he played 29...gxh4 30. Rxh4 would leave him in a very awkward situation, as he could not go back with the King, nor could he do much with either Rook. He practically would have to play h6 when White would answer 31,b4 threatening to win a pawn by .32.b5. or, if that were not enough, he might play Qd4, to be followed finally by the entry of the King at c5 or e5. ]

30.Ke2 gxf3+

[Again he cannot play 30...h5 because 31T4 would leave him paralyzed. The advance of his h- pawn would make While's h-pawn sat e, and consequently his King's Rook would have to retire to f7 to defened the a-pawn. That would make it impossible for his King to go to d7, because of the a- pawn. nor could he advance a single one of his pawns. On the other hand. White would play b3-b4? threatening to win a pawn by b4-b5, or he might first play Nd4 and then at the proper time b_3-b4-b5, if there was nothing better. Black meanwhile could really do nothing but mark time with one of his Rooks. ]

31.Kxf3 RH7 32.Ke2

[Probably w rong. The text move gives Black good chances of drawing. 32.b4 at once was the right move. ]

32...Kdb 33.b4 Rb7 flliis could never have happened

had White played 32.b4, as he could have followed it up by 33.b5 after Black's 32...±d6 ] 34,h5 [Not good. 34.f4 offered the best chances of winning by force. If then Rg7 35.h5 Rg2+ 36.Kd3 Rlil 37.Rxa7 Rxa7 3S.Rxa7 Rxh5 39.Ra6 with winning chances. ]

34...h6

[Black misses his last chance. 34. ..f4 would draw. If then 35.exf4 Rbe7H 36.KCI Rxl'4 37.Rxa7 Re3! ]

35.f4 Rg7 36.Kd3 Rge7 37.Ral Rg7 38.Kd4 Rg2

39.R6a2 Rbg7

[ 39...Rgg7 would have offered greater resistance, but the position is lost in any case (I leave the student to work this out). ]

40.Kd3! Rxa2 41.Rxa2 Re7

[Nothing would avail. If 41 ...Rgl 42.Ra6! Rdl +

43.Kc2 Rlil 44.b5 Rxh5 45.Rxc6+ Kd7 46.Ra6

and White will win easily. ]

42.Rg2 Reb 43,Rg7 Re7 44.Rg8 c5 [Black is

desperate. He secs he can no longer defend his pawns.]

45.Rg6+ Reb 46.bxc5+ Kd7 47.Rg7+ Kc6 48.Rxa7

Kxc5 49.R17 1-0

C48

[diagram]
National New York fCqpaZtfttnct*, J. RJ

[diagram]
27.g4 [Already preparing to play g4-g5 when the time

comes.) bb [Black wants to play ...c6-e5, but White, or course, prevents it ] 28.b4! Kb7 [Tins King should come to the Kingside, where the danger lurks.] 29.Kf2 b5 [With the object of playing ...d?bb and ...a6-a?. followed by ...axb4, and thus have an open file for his Rook and be able to make a counter-demonstration on the Queenside in order to stop White's advance on the right. White, however, also prevents Ibis. | 30,a4! Rd4 [Of course if 3O...bxa4 Black will have all his pawns on the Queenside disrupted and isolated, and White can easily regain the lost pawn by playing either Rook on the a-file. ]

31.Rbl Re5 [He still wants to play ...c6-c5. but as it is

easy to foresee that White will again prevent it, the text move is really a serious loss of time. Black should bring his King over to the other side immediately.]

32.Ke3 Rd7 33.a5 | The first part of White's strategic

plan is now accomplished. Black's pawns on the Quccnsidc are fixed for all practical purposes. | Rc6 | If .33...Rxf5 .34.gxf5 would have given White a very powerful center. Yet it might have been the best chance for Black. ] 34,Rbfl Rde7 35.g5 fxg5 36.Rxg5 [The second part of White's strategical plan is now accomplished. It remains to find out if the advantage obtained is sufficient to win. White not only has a passed pawn, but his King is in a commanding position in the center of the board ready to support the advance of White's pawns, or, if necessary, to go to c5. or to move to the ri ghl wing in case of danger. Besides, While holds the open file with one of his Rooks. Altogether White's position is superior and his chances of winning are excellent.] Rh6 37.Rg3 Rhe6 [To prevent 38.d4,

It is Black's move, and no doubt thinking that drawing such a position (that was all Black played for) would be easy, he contented himself with a waiting policy. Such conduct must always be criticised. It often leads to disaster. The best way to defend such positions is to assume the initiative and keep the opponent on the defensive.

Also Black fears to keep his Rook in front of his two Kingsidc pawns which lie may want to utilize later.]

38.h4 g6 39.Rg5 h6

[White threatens 40.h5, which would finally force Black to take, and then White would double his Rooks against the isolated pawn and win it, or tie up Black's Rooks completely. The text move, however, only helps White; therefore Black had nothing better than to hold light and wail. 39...Re5 would not help much, as White would simply answer 4O.Rf8 Re8

41.Rxc5 and whichever Rook Black took. White

would have an easy game. The student should carefully study these variations. ] 4O.Rg4 Rg7 41.d4 Kc8 42.RT8+ Kb7 | 42...Kd7 would not help much, but since he made the previous move he should now he consistent and play it. |

43.e5 g5 44.Ke4 Ree7 45.hxg5 hxg5 46.RT5 Kc8

47.Rgxg5 Rh7 48,Rh5 Kd7 49.Rxh7 Rxh7 5O.Rf8

Rh4+ 51.Kd3 Rh3+ 52.Kd2 c5 53.bxc5 Ra3 54,d5 [Black resigns.] 1-0 R + B vs R + N Example 62 [Capablanca. J. R. ]

1...Rb8 2.b3 [Forced, but which blocks b3 for the

White Knight.] Rb5 [Bringing the Rook to attack the Ringside pawns so as to force the King to that side to defend them, and thus indirectly making more secure the position of Black's Queenside pawns ] 3.c4 Rh5

4.Kgl c5 [Note that the White Knights sphere of

action is very limited, and that after 5;Nd2 White's own pawns arc in the way ] 5.Nd2 Kf7 6,Rfl4- |This check accomplishes nothing. IL merely drives Black's King where it wants to go. Consequently it is a very had move. 6.a3 at once was the best move. ]

6...Ke7 7.a3 Rh6 [Getting ready to shift the attack to

the Queenside, where he has the advantage in material and position.] 8.h4 Ra6 [Notice how similar are the maneuvers with this Rook to those seen in the previous endings.] 9.Rai Bg4 [Paralyzing the action of the Knight and fixing the whole Kingside.J 10.Kf2 Ke6

11.a4

[White cannot answer 1 l.Nf3 because BxfB followed by 1 2.Kxf3 Ke5 w ill win a pawn, on account of the check at f6 which cannot be stopped. ]

11...Ke5 12.Kg2 Rf6 13.Rel d3 14.RH Kd4

[Now the King attacks White's pawns and all will soon be over.] 15.Rxf6 gxf6 16.Kf2 c6 [Merely to exhaust White's move, which will finally force him to move either the King or the Knight.] 17.a5 a6 18.Nfl Kxe4 IRKel Be2 20,Nd2+ Ke3 21.Nbl f5

22.Nd2 h5 23,Nbl KB 24,Nc3 Kxg3 25,Na4 f4

26.Nxc5 f3 27,Ne4+ Kf4 [The quickest way to win.

White should resign ] 28.Nd6 c5 29.b4 cxb4 30.c5 b3 3LNc4 Kg3 32,Ne3 b2 [White resigns. A very good example on Black's part of how to conduct such an ending.] 0-1

Black's game has the disadvantage of his double c- pawn, which, to make matters worse, he cannot advance, because as soon as Black plays ...b7-b6, White replies b3-b4. It is on this fact that White builds his plans. He will stop Black's Queenside pawns from advancing, and will then bring his own King to e3. Then in due time he will play d3-d4, and finally e4-e5, or g2-g4-g5, thus forcing an exchange of pawns and obtaining in that way a clear passed pawn on the e-file. It will be seen that this plan was carried out during the course of the game, and that White obtained his winning advantage in that way. The play was based throughout on the chance of obtaining a passed pawn on the e-file, with which White expected to win.

The winning tactics in all these endings have merely consisted in keeping the opponent's Rooks tied to the defence of one or more pawns, leaving my own Rooks free for action. This is a general principle which can be equally applied to any part of the game. It means in general terms:

Keep freedom of manoeuvre while hampering your opponent.

There is one more thing of great importance, and that is that the winning side has always had a general strategical plan capable of being carried out with the means at his disposal, while often the losing side had no plan at all, but simply moved according to the needs of the moment.

30. Rook, Bishop and Pawns vs Rook, Knight and

Pawns

A final example of preserving freedom whilst imposing restraint. We shall now examine an ending of Rook, Bishop and pawns against Rook, Knight and pawns, where it will be seen that the Rook at times is used in the same way as in the endings already given.

From the first game of the Lasker - Marshall Championship Match in 1907. In this position it is Black's move. To a beginner the position may look like a draw, but the advanced player will realise immediately that there are great possibilities for Black to win, not only because he has the initiative, but because of White's undeveloped Queenside and the fact that a Bishop in such a position is better than a Knight (see Section 14). It will take some time for White to bring his Rook and Knight into the fray, and Black can utilize it to obtain an advantage. There are two courses open to him. The most evident, and the one that most players would take, is to advance the pawn ...c6-c5-c4 immediately in conjunction with the Bishop check at a6 and any other move that might be necessary with the Black Rook. The other, and more subtle, course was taken by Black. It consists in utilizing his Rook in the same way as shown in the previous endings, forcing White to defend something all the time, restricting the action of White's Knight and White's Rook, while at the same time keeping freedom of action for his own Rook and Bishop.

[diagram]
Chapter 6

Further Openings and Middlegames

31. Some Salient Points about Pawns

Before going back to the discussion of openings and middlegame positions, it might be well to bear in mind a few facts concerning pawn positions which will no doubt help to understand certain moves, and sometimes even the object of certain variations in the openings, and of some manoeuvres in the middle games.

In the position of the diagram we have an exceedingly bad pawn formation on Black's side. Black's c-pawn is altogether backward, and White could by means of the open file concentrate his forces against that weak point. There is also the square c5, which is controlled by White, and from where a White piece once established could not be dislodged. In order to get rid of it, Black would have to exchange it, which is not always an easy matter, and often when possible not at all convenient. The same holds true with regard to Black's e-pawn, f-pawn and g-pawn, which create what is called a "hole" at f6. Such pawn formations invariably lead to disaster, and consequently must be avoided.

In this position we might say that the White centre pawns have the attacking position, while the Black centre pawns have the defensive position. Such a formation of pawns occurs in the French Defence. In such positions White most often attempts, by means of f2-f4 and f4-f5, to obtain a crushing attack against Black's King, which is generally castled on the Kingside. To prevent that, and also to assume the initiative or obtain material advantage, Black makes a counter-demonstration by ...c7-c5, followed by ...cxd4 (when White defends the pawn by c2-c3), and the concentrating of Black's pieces against the White pawn at d4. This in substance might be said to be a determined attack against White's centre in order to paralyze the direct attack of White against Black's King. It must be remembered that at the beginning of the book it was stated that control of the centre was an essential condition to a successful attack against the King.

In an abstract way we may say that two or more pawns are strongest when they are in the same rank next to one another. Thus the centre pawns are strongest in themselves, so to speak, when placed at e4 and d4 (or e5 and d5), hence the question of advancing either the one or the other to the fifth rank is one that must be most carefully considered. The advance of either pawn often determines the course the game will follow.

Another thing to be considered is the matter of one or more passed pawns when they are isolated either singly or in pairs. We might say that a passed pawn is either very weak or very strong, and that its weakness or strength, whichever happens to be in the case to be considered, increases as it advances, and is at the same time in direct relation to the number of pieces on the board. In this last respect it might be generally said that a passed pawn increases in strength as the number of pieces on the board diminishes.

[diagram]
C82

From a Ruy Lopez Example 65 fCapablanca, J. RJ l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.O-O Nxe4 6.d4 b5 7.BB3 d5 Rdxe5 Be6 9.c3 Be7 I0,Rel Nc5 ll.Bc2 Bg4 12.Nbd2 O-O 13.Nb3 Ne6 [So tar a very well known variation of the Ruy Ixipez. In fact, they arc the moves of the Janowski-Lasker game in Paris, 1912. | 14.Qd3 g6

[diagram]
Having all this clear in mind we will now revert to the openings and middlegame. We will analyze games carefully from beginning to end according to general principles. I shall, whenever possible, use my own games, not because they will better illustrate the point, but because, knowing them thoroughly, I shall be able to explain them more authoritatively than the games of others.

32. Some Possible Developments from a Ruy Lopez

That some of the variations in the openings and the manoeuvres in the middlegame are often based on some of the elementary principles just expounded can be easily seen in the following case.

Let us suppose the game went on, and that in some way White, by playing one of the Knights to d4 at the proper time, forced the exchange of both Knights, and then afterwards both the Bishops were exchanged, and we arrived at some such position as shown in the following diagram. (I obtained such a position in a very similar way once at Lodz in Poland. I was playing the White pieces against a consulting team headed by Salwe.)

Now we would have here the case of the backward c- pawn, which will in no way be able to advance to c5. Such a position may be said to be theoretically lost, and in practice a first-class master will invariably win it from Black. (If I may be excused the reference, I will say that I won the game above referred to.)

After a few moves the position may be easily thus:

The Black pieces can be said to be fixed. If White plays 1.Qc3, Black must answer 1...Qd7, otherwise he will lose a pawn, and if White returns with the Queen to a3 Black will again have to return with 2...Qb7 or lose a pawn. Thus Black can only move according to White's lead, and under such conditions White can easily advance with his pawns to f4 and g4, until Black will be forced to stop f4-f5 by playing ...f7-f5, and we might finally have some such position as the following:

From a Ruy Lopez Example 66 [Capablanca. J. RJ [In this situation the game might go on as follows.] Lgxf5 gxf5 2.Qf3 Qd7 [White tlircatcncd to win a pawn by 3.Qxd5? and Black could not play 2...Rf8 because 3.Rxc6 would also win a pawn at least. ] 3,R5c2 Rg6 4.Rg2 Kh8 5.Rcgl Rcg8 6.Qh5 Rxg2

7.Rxg2 Rxg2 8.Kxg2 Qg7+ 9.Kh2 Qg6 10,Qxg6

hxg6 11.b4 [And White wins ] 1-0

[diagram]
Now suppose that in the position in the preceding diagram it were Black's move, and he played 1...Rf8. White would then simply defend his f-pawn by some move like 2.Qf3, threatening 3.Rxc6, and then he would bring his King up to g3, and when the time came, break through, as in the previous case. White might even be able to obtain the following position.

Black would now be forced to play 1...Rc8, and White could then play 2.Qc2, and follow it up with 3.Kf3, and thus force Black to play ...fxg4, which would give White a greater advantage.

A careful examination of all these position will reveal that, besides the advantage of freedom of manoeuvre on White's part, the power of the pawn at e5 is enormous, and that it is the commanding position of this pawn, and the fact that it is free to advance, once all the pieces are exchanged, that constitute the pivot of all White's manoeuvres.

I have purposely given positions without the moves which lead to them so that the student may become accustomed to build up in his own mind possible positions that may arise (out of any given situation). Thus he will learn to make strategical plans and be on his way to the master class. The student can derive enormous benefit by further practice of this kind.

33. The Influence of a "Hole"

The influence of a so-called "hole" in a game has already been illustrated in my game against Blanco (Example 52), where has been shown the influence exercised by the different pieces posted in the hole created at e5.

In order to further illustrate this point, I now give a game played in the Havana International Masters Tournament of 1913.

D53

I I Janowski,David Markelowicz

[diagram]
Masters International 1913 [Capablanca, J. R.] I.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Be7 5.e3 Nbd7

6.Bd3 dxc4 7.Bxc4 Nb6

[Of course the idea is to post a Knight al d57 but as it is the other Knight which will he posted there this maneuver does not seem logical. Ihe Knight at b6 does nothing except to prevent the development of his own Queen's Bishop. The normal course 7..,O-O followed by ...c7-c5, is more reasonable. For a beautiful illustration of how to play White in that variation, see the Janowski-Rubinstein game of the St. Petersburg Tournament of 1914. ]

8.Bd3

[ 8_Bb3 has sonic points in its favor in this position, the most important being the possibility of advancing the e- pawn immediately after Nfd5 9.Bxe7 Qxe7 ]

8...Nfd5 9,Bxe7 Qxe7 10.Nf3

[Had White's Bishop been at b3 he could now play

10.e4 as indicated in the previous note, a move

which he cannot make in the present position, because of Nf4 threatening, not only the g-pawti, but also ll...Qxd3+, As White's King's Bishop should never be exchanged in this opening without a very good reason White therefore cannot play 10.c4. |

10...0.0 11.O-O Bd7 12.Rcl

[ 12.Rcl White is perfectly developed, and now threatens to win a pawn as follows: - 13.Nxd5 Nxd5 14.e4 followed by 15.Rxc7. ]

12...c6

[The fact that Black is practically forced to make this move in order to avoid the loss of a pawn is sufficient reason in itself to condemn the whole system of development on Black's part. In effect, he plays . ,.Nd7, and now he has to shut off the action of his own Bishop, which thereby becomes little more than a pawn for a while. In fact, it is hard to see how this Bishop will ever be able to attack anything. Besides, it can be easily seen that White will soon post his two Knights at e5 and c5 respectively, and that Black will not be able to dislodge them without seriously weakening his game, if he can do it at all. From all these reasons it can be gathered that it would probably have been better for Black to play

12...Nxc3 and get rid of one of the tw o White

Knights before assuming such a defensive position. In such cases, the less the number of pieces on the board, the better chances there are to escape. ]

13.Ne4 f5 [This practically amounts to committing

suicide, since it creates a hole at e5 for White's Knight, from where it will be practically impossible to dislodge him. If Black intended to make such a move he should have done it before, when at least there would have been an object in preventing the White Knight from reaching c5.] 14.Nc5 Be8 15.Ne5 [The position of White's Knights, especially the one at c5, might be said to be ideal, and a single glance shows how they dominate the position. lhe question henceforth will be how is White going to derive the full benefit from such an advantageous situation. This we shall soon see.] Rb8 [There is no object in this move, unless it is to be followed by ...Qd7. As that is not the case, he might have gone with the Rook to 15...Rc8 as he docs later. ] 16,Rel Rf6 17.QB Rh6 18.Qg3 Rc8 [White threatened to win the Exchange by playing either 19.Qf7 or 19.<Sg4J 19.13 Rc7 20.a3 Kh8 2Lh3 [Perhaps all these precautions are unnecessary, but White feels that he has more than enough lime to prepare his attack, and wants to be secure in every way before he begins.] g5 22.e4 f4 23.Qf2 Ne3 [ He had better have played 23,..Nf6 and later try to get rid of White's Knights by means of ...? d7. ] 24,Rxe3 [With this sacrifice of the Rook for a Knight and pawn White obtains an overwhelming position.] fxe3 25.Qxe3 Nc8 [ 25...Nd7 was better in order to get rid of one of the two White Knights. There were, however, any number of good replies to it. among them 26.Ncxd7 Bxd7 27.Qxg5 Qxg5 28.Nf7+ Kg7 29.Nxg5 and w ith two pawns for the Exchange, and the position so much in his favor. White should have no trouble in winning. ] 26,Ng4 Rg6 27.e5 Rg7 28.Bc4 Bf7 [All these moves arc practically forced, and as it is easily seen they tie up Black's position more and more. White's maneuvers from move 24 onwards arc highly instructive.] 29.Nf6 Nb6 [This wandering Knight has done nothing throughout the game. | 3O.Nce4 h6 31h4 Nd5 32.Qd2 Rg6 334Bxg5 QfB [If 33...hxg5 34.Kf2 and Black would be helpless. ] 34T4 Ne7 35.g4 hxg5 36.fxg5 [After 36.fxg5 Black resigns. There is nothing to be done. If Bg8 37.Q112+ Kg7 38.Bxe6 The student should notice that, apait from other things. White throughout the game has had control of the Black squares, principally those at c5 and c5. J 1-0

Chapter 7 Illustrative Games

From now on to the end of the book I shall give a collection of my games both lost and won, chosen so as to serve as illustrations of the general principles laid down in the foregoing pages.

Game 1 Marshall, F - Capablanca, J 1-0 Game 2 Rubinstein, A - Capablanca, J 1-0 Game 3 Janowski, D - Capablanca, J 1-0 Game 4 Capablanca, J - Znosko Borovsky, E 0-1 Game 5 Lasker, E - Capablanca, J 1-0 Game 6 Chajes, O - Capablanca, J 1-0 Game 7 Capablanca, J - Burn, A 1-0 Game 8 Mieses, J - Capablanca , J 0-1 Game 9 Capablanca, J - Teichmann, R 1-0 Game 10 Capablanca, J - Marshall, F 1-0 Game 11 Capablanca, J - Janowski, D 1-0 Game 12 Capablanca, J - Chajes, O 1-0 Game 13 Morrison, J - Capablanca, J 0-1 Game 14 Marshall, F - Capablanca, J 0-1

D53

[diagram]
match Scranton 01.05.1909 [Capablanca, J. R.j l.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Be7 5.e3 Ne4 [I had played this defense twice before in the match with good results, and although I lost this game I still p layed it until the very last game, when I changed my tactics. The reason was my total lack of knowledge of the different variations in this opening, coupled with the fact that 1 knew that Dr. E, Lasker had been successful with it against Marshall himself in 1907. I thought that since Dr. I ,asker had played it so often, it should be good. Hie object is to exchange a couple of pieces and at the same time to bring about a position full of possibilities and with promising chances of success once the endgame stage is reached. On general principles it should be wrong, because the same Knight is moved three times in the opening, although it involves the exchange of two pieces. In reality the difficulty in this variation, as well as in nearly all the variations of the Queen's gambit, lies in the slow development of the Black Queen's Bishop. How ever, whether this variation can or cannot be safely played is a question still to be decided, and it is outside the scop e of tills book. I may add that al present my preference is for a different system of development, but it is not unlikely that I should some time come back to this variation.] 6.Bxe7 Qxe7 7*Bd3 [ 7,cxd5 is preferable for reasons that we shall soon see. ]

7...Nxc3 8.bxc3 Nd7

[Now 8...dxc4 would be a better way to develop the game. The idea is that after 9.Bxc4 b6 followed by would give Black's Bishop a powerful range. for this variation see the eleventh game of the match. ]

9.Nf3 O-O

[No longer would 9...dxc4 10.Bxc4 b6 be good, because 1 l.Bb5 would prevent Bb7 on account of l2.Ne5] KUxdS exd5 U.Qb3 Nf6 12,a4 c5 | Played with the intention of obtaining the majority of pawns on the Queenside. Yet it is doubtful whether this move is good, since it leaves Black's Queenside pawns disrupted in a way. The safer course would have been to play 1 2...c6 ]

13.Qa3 b6

|This exposes Black to further attack by a4-a5 without any compensation for it. If I had to play this position nowadays I would simply play 13...Re8 Then after 14.Qxc5 flf, instead. White played then Bg4 would give Black an excellent game. ) 14...Qxc5 would follow and I believe that Black would regain the pawn. ]

14.a5 Bb7 15.O-O Qc7 16.Rfbl Nd7

[Black's position was bad and perhaps lost in any case, but the text move makes matters worse. As a matter of fact I never saw White's reply 17. U'5. Il never even passed through my mind that this was threatened. Black's best move would have been

16..,Rfb8 If that loses, then any other move would

lose as well. ]

17.Bf5 RfcS

[From bad to worse. 17...N16 offered the only hope. ]

18 Bxd7 Qxd7 19 a6 Bc6 20,dxc5 bxc5 2LQxc5

Rab8 [The game was lost. One move was as good as another.] 22.Rxb8 Rxb8 23,Ne5 Qf5 24,f4 Rb6

25.Qxb6!

[Black resigns. Of course, if 25.Nxc6? Rh1-F would have been drawrn. The text move is pretty and finishes quickly. A well played game on Marshall's part. | 1-0

D33

[diagram]
San Sebastian 13.03.1911 [Capablanccii J. R.] l.d4 d5 2.Nf3 c5 3.c4 e6 4.cxd5 exd5 5.Nc3 Nc6

6.g3 Be6

[ 6...N16 is the normal move in this variation. White's development was first introduced by Schlechter and elaborated later on by Rubinstein. It aims at the isolation of Black's d-pawn, against which the White pieces are gradually concentrated. In making the text move I was trying to avoid the beaten track. Being a developing move there should be no objection to it in the way of general principles, except that the Knights ought to come out before the Bishops. ]

7.Bg2 Be7 8.O-O Rc8

[In pursuance of the idea of changing the normal course of this variation, but with very poor success. The move in theory ought to be unsound, since the Black King's Knight is yet undeveloped. I had not yet learned of the attack founded on Qg5 and the exchange of the Bishop at e6. Either 8...Nf6 ] [or 8...h6 to prevent cither g5 or 4}g5? was right. ]

9.dxc5 Bxc5 lO.NgS Nffi ll,Nxe6 fxe6 12.Bh3

Qe7 13.Bg5 O-O? [This is a mistake. The right move was 13...Rd8 in order to get the Rook away from the line of the Bishop at h3 and at the same time to support d5. Incidentally it shows that White failed to take proper advantage of Black's weak opening moves. Against the text move White makes a very fine combination which I had seen, but which I thought could be defeated. ] 14Bxf6 Qxf6 [I considered 14...gxf6 which it seemed would give me a playable game, but 1 thought White's combination unsound and therefore let him play it, to my lasting regret. ]

15.Nxd5! Qh6 16.Kg2!

[ Illis is the move which I had not considered. I thought that Rubinstein would have to play 16.Bg2 when I had in mind the following winning combination: Ne5! L7.Nf4 (if 17.Rcl Qxcl J8.Oxcl Bxpi wins; 17...Ng4 18.h3 (if J8.Nh3 Bxf2+ wins the Exchange ) 18...Nxf2 19.Rxf2 Bxf2 1 2O.Kxf2 g5 and Black should win. It is curious that this combination has been overlooked. It has been taken for granted that I did not sec the move 17.Qcl. ]

16...Rcd8 [After White's last move there was nothing

for me to do but submit to the inevitable.] 17.Qcl! exd5 18,Qxc5 Qd2 19.Qb5 Nd4 2O.Qd3 Qxd3

21.exd3 Rfe8 22.Bg4

[Tli is gives Black a chance. He should have played

22.Rfel It*then Nc2 23.Rxe8+ Rxc8 24.Rcl Rc2

25,Kfl Nd4 (if Kf8 27,Bxd5 would win J 26.Rc8 i Kf7 27.Rc7+ Re7 28.Rc5 wins. ]

22...R66 23.Rfel Rxel 24,Rxel Rb6 25.Re5 Rxb2

26.Rxd5 Nc6 27,Be6+ Kf8 28.Rf5+ Ke8 29.B17+

Kd7 3O.Bc4 a6 [A bad move, which gives away any legitimate chance Black had to draw. It loses a very important move. In fact, as the course of the game will show, it loses several moves. The proper way was to play 3O...Kd6 If then 31.Rb5 Rxb5 32.Bxb5 Nd4 " followed by _.b7-b5; and White would have an exceedingly difficult game to draw on account of the dominating position of the Knight at d4 in conjunction with the extra pawn on the Queenside and the awkward position of While's King. (See how this is so.) ]

31.Rf7+ Kd6 32.Rxg7 b5 33 Bg8 aS 34.Rxh7 a4

35.h4 b4 36.RB6+ Kc5 37.Rh5+ Kb6 38.Bd5

[With these last three moves White again gives Black a chance. Even before the last move 38. Be 4 would have won with comparative ease, but the text move is a downright blunder, of which, fortunately for him. Black docs not avail himself. ]

38...b3

[ 38...Rxa2 would make it practically impossible for White to win, if he can win at all. White's best continuation then would have been 39.Bc4 Rc2 4O.Rb5+ Kc7 41.Bg8 a.3 42.h5 a2 43.Bxa2 Rxa2 and if there is a win it is very difficult to find it, as against 44.h6 Ra6! offers excellent chances for a draw. ]

39.axb3 a3 4O.Bxc6 Rxb3

| If 40...a2 41.Rb5+ Ka6 42.Rb8 |

41.Bd5 a2 42.Rh6+ [Resigns. As an endgame, this is

rather a sad exhibition for two masters. The redeeming feature of the game is Rubinstein's line combination in the middlegame, beginning w ith 14. xf6 ] 1-0

reason 1 9.h4 appears the proper way to carry' on the attack. ]

19...Rad8 20.Radi g5 [This move is preparatory to ...

g7-g6, which would make Black's position secure. Unfortunately for Black, he did not carry out his original plan.[ 2Lc4 Rxd3 | 21...g6 w ould have left Black with a perfectly safe game. ]

22.Rxd3 Rd8

[A very serious mistake, which loses a pawn. 22...gb was the right move, and would have left Black with a very good game. In fact, if it should come to a simple ending, the position of the Black King would be an advantage. ]

23.Rxd8 NxdS 24.B4 [This wins a pawn, as will soon

be seen.] gxh4 [Black cannot reply 24...Ne6 because 25.hxg5+ Nxg5 26.Qh4 wins the Knight. ]

25.Qxh4+ Ke6 26,Qg4+ Kf6 27.Qg5+ Ke6

28.Qxg7 Qd6 29.c5 Qd5 30.e4! Qdl+ 31.Kh2 f6

32.Qg4+! Ke7 33.Nxe5 Qxg4 34.Nxg4 Neb 35.e5

fxe5 36.Nxe5 Nd4 [The game went on for a few more moves, and, there being no way to counteract the advance of White's two passed pawns. Black resigned. ] 37.g4 Ke6 38,f4 a5 39,bxa5 Kd5 4O.g5 Kxc5

41.gb Nf5 42.Kh3 Kd5 43.Kg4 Ng7 44.Kg5 c5

45.Nd7 c4 46.Nb6+ Kd4 47.Nxc4 Kxc4 48,f5 Kd5

49.f6 Ne6+ 5O.Kh6

1-0

A46

[diagram]
Havana [Capablanccii J. R.] l.d4 Nf6 2,Nf3 d6 3.Bg5 Nbd7 4.e3 e5 5.Nc3 c6

6.Bd3 Be7 7.Qe2 Qa5 8.O-O NfB 9.Rfdl Bg4

[At last Black is on bis way to obtain full development. The idea of this irregular opening is mainly to throw White on his own resources. At the time the game was played, the system of defense was not was as well known as the regular forms of the Queen's Pawn openings. Whether it is sound or not remains yet to he proved. Its good features are that it keeps the center int act without creating any particular weakness, and that it gives plenty of opportunity for deep and concealed maneuvering. The drawback is the long time it takes Black to develop his game. It is natural to suppose that White will employ that time to prepare a well- conceived attack, or that he will use the advantage of his development actually to prevent Black's complete development, or failing that, to obtain some definite material advantage.] 10.h3 Bh5 ll.dxe5 dxe5

12.Ne4 Nxe4

| A very serious mistake. I considered 1 2...O-O-O which was the right move, but desisted because I was afraid that by playing 13.Bxf6 gxf6 !4.Ng3 Bg6 15.Nf5 While would obtain a winning position for the endgame. Whether right or wrong this shows how closely related are all parts of the game, and consequently how one will influence the other. |

13. Bxe7 Kxe7 14.Bxe4 Bg6

[Not good. The natural and proper move would have been 14...Nc6 in order to bring all the Black pieces into play ] [ 1 4...Bxf3 at once was also good, as it would have relieved the pressure against Black's e-pawn, and at the same time have simplified the game. Here it is seen how failure to comply with the elementary logical reasons, that govern any given position, often brings the player into trouble. I was no doubt influenced in my choice of moves by the fear of J f5, which was a very threatening move. ]

15.Qc4 Ne6 16,b4 Qc7 17.Bxg6 hxg6 18.Qe4 Kf6

19.Rd3

[ 19.h4 to be followed by g2-g4, might have been a more vigorous way to cany on the attack. Black's weak point is unquestionably the pawn at e5, which he is compelled to defend with the King ] | the text move 19.Rd3 aims al doubling the Rooks, with the ultimate object of placing one of them at d6, supported by a pawn at c5. Black could only stop this by playing ...c6-c5, which would create a "hole" at d5; or by playing ...b7-b6, which would tie the Black Queen to the defense of the c-pawn as well as the e-pawn, which she already defends. Black, however, can meet all this by offering the exchange of Rooks, which destroys White's plans. For this

C12

[diagram]
St. Petersburg m 18.12.1913 [Capablanccii J. R.] l.d4 e6 2.e4 d5 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Bb4 [This constitutes the McCutcheon Variation. Il aims al taking the initiative away from While. Instead of defending, Black makes a counter demonstration on the Queenside. It leads to highly interesting games ] S.exdS | At the time this game was played the variation 5.e5 was in vogue, hut I considered then, as I do now, the text move to be the stronger. ]

5.,.Qxd5 |fhis is considered superior to 5...exd5. It has

for its object, as 1 said before, to take the initiative a way from White by disrupting White's Queenside. White, however, has more than ample compensation through his breaking up Black's Ringside, It might laid down as a principle of the opening that the breaking up of the Ringside is of more importance than a similar occurrence on the Queenside. J 6,Bxf6 Bxc3+ 7.bxc3 gxf6 8.NJ3 b6 [The plan ofBIack in this variation is to post his Bishop on the long diagonal so as to be able later on, in conjunction with the action of his Rooks along the open g-file, to make a violent attack against White's King. Il is, of course, expected that White will castle on the Kingside because of the broken- up condition of his Queenside pawns ] 9,Qd2 Bb7

10.Be2 Nd7 !Lc4 Qf5 12.O-O-O [An original idea, I

believe, played for the first lime in a similar position i n a game against Mr. Walter Penn Shipley, of Philadelphia. My idea is that as there is no Black Bishop and because Black's pieces have been developed with a view to an attack on the Ringside, it will be impossible for Black to take advantage of the apparently unprotected position of White's King. Two possibilities must be considered. Firstly: If Black castles on the Queenside, as in this game, it is evident I hat there is no danger of an attack. Secondly: If Black castles on the Ringside, White begins the attack first, taking advantage of the awkward position of the Black Queen. In addition to the attacking probabilities of the text move. White in one move brings his King into safety and brings one of his Rooks into play. Thus he gains several moves, "tempi" as they are called, which will serve him to develop whatever plan he may wish to evolve.] O-O-O 13.Qe3 Rhg8 14.g3 Qa5 [Unquestionably a mistake, overlooking White's fine reply, but a careful examination will show that White already has the better position ] 15.Rd31 Kb8

16.Rhdl Qf5 17.Nh4 [This move has been criticized

because it puts the Knight out of the way for a few moves. But by forcing 17...Rg5, White gains a very important move with 12-14, which not only consolidates his position, but also drives the Queen away, putting it out of the game for the moment. Certain ly the Queen is far more valuable than the Knight, to say nothing of the time gained and the freedom of action obtained thereby for White's more important pieces.] Qg5 18.f4 Qg7 19.Bf3 [In such positions it is generally very advantageous to get rid of the Black Bishop controlling a6 and c6, which form "holes" for White's pieces. The Bishop in such positions is of very great defensive value, hence the advantage of getting rid of it.] Rge8 2O.Bxb7 Kxb7 21.c5! c6 '[White threatened 22.c6+.] 22.Nf3 QC8 [To prevent the Knight from moving to d6 via d2 and e4 or c4. It is self-evident that White has a great ad vantage of position. | 23,Nd2? 11 had considered 23.Rb3 which was the right move, but gave it up because it seemed loo slow, and that in such a position there bad to be some quicker way of winning. ]

23...bxc5 24.Nc4

[24.4je4 or 24.Nb3 would have brought about an ending advantageous to White. ]

24...Nb6 25*Na5+ KaS 26.dxc5 NdS 27.Qd4 Rc8

[If 27.,.Rb8 28.Nxc6 RbcS 29.Nxa7 would win. ]

28.c4

| 28.Nc4 was the right move. 1 was, however, still looking for the "grand combination", and thought that the pawn I would later on have at d6 would win the game. Black deserves great credit for the way in which he conducted this exceedingly difficult defense. He could easily have gone wrong any number of times, but from move 22 onwards he always played the best move. ]

28...e5! 29*Qgl e4 3O.cxd5 exd3 31.d6 Re2 32.d7

Rc2+ 33.Kbl Rb8+ 34.Nb3 Qe7 35.Rxd3 ffhe position is most interesting. 1 believe I lost here my last chance to win the game, and if that is true it would vindicate my judgment when I played 28.c4. The student can find out what would happen if White plays 35.Qd4 at once. I have gone over the variations following Rxli2 (of course if 35...Rxc5

36. 0 winsj 36.Qxd3! Rd8 37.Qa6 Kb8

( best, for if 38,Kal Kb8 39.Rbl\ )

38.Qxc6 and While will al least have a draw. ]

35...Re2 36,Qd4 Rd8 37,Qa4 Qe4 38.Qa6 Kb8

[There is nothing to be done against this simple move ] 39-Kcl | White cannot play 39. Nd4 because Qhl+ mates. |

39...Rxd7 40.Nd4 Rel+ [White resigns. Avery

interesting battle.] 0-1

C68

LI] Lasker,Emanuel

[diagram]
finals St. Petersburg 18.05.1914 [Capablanccii J. R.} I.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Bxc6 [The object of this move is to bring about speedily a middlegame without Queens, in which While has four pawns to three on the Kingside, while Black's superiority of pawns on the other side is somewhat balanced by the fact that one of Black's pawns is doubled. On the other hand. Black has the advantage of remaining with two Bishops while White has only one ] dxcfi 5.d4 exd4

6.Qxd4 Qxd4 7.Nxd4 Bd6 [Black's idea is to castle

on the Kingsidc. His reason is that the King ought to remain on the weaker side to oppose later the advance of White's pawns. Theoretically there is very much to be said in favor of this reasoning, but whether in practice that would be the best system w ould be rather difficult to prove. The student should notice that if now all the pieces were exchanged While would practically be a pawn ahead, and would therefore have a won ending.] 8.Nc3 Ne7 [A perfectly sound form of development. In any other form adopted the Black Knight could not be developed either as quickly or as well. The natural position for the Black Knight is e7 in this variation, in order nol to obstruct Black's pawns, and also, in some eventualities, in order to go to g6. There is also the possibility of its going to d4 via ch af ter ...c6-c5.| 9,O-O O-O 10.f4 [This move I considered weak at the time, and 1 do still. It leaves the e-pawn weak, unless it advances to e5, and it also makes it possible for Black to pin the Knight by ...Jkc5.] Re8 [The text move 10...Re8 is best. It threatens 11.- Be5 12.Be3 Nd5 ] II. Nb3 | It also prevents H.Be3 because of Nd5 or ll...Bc5. ] ll...f6 [Preparatory to ...b7-b6, followed by ...c6-c5 and ..Jib 7 in conjunction with ...4&g6, which would put White in great difficulties to meet the combined attack against the two center pawns.] 12.f5 |It has been wrongly claimed that this wins the game, but I would like nothing better than to have such a position again. It required several mistakes on my pari finally to obtain a lost position.] b6 13.Bf4 Bb7 | Played against my better judgment. The right move of course was 13...Bxf4 Dr. Lasker gives the following variation: 14.Rxf4 c5 15.Rdl Bb7

16.Rf2 RadS (But, as Nimzowitsch pointed out

immediately after the game, 16...Sad8 given in Dr. Lasker's variation, is not the best. If 16...Rac8! then White will have great difficulty in drawing the game, since there is no good way to stop Black from playing ..*Nc6, followed by threatening ... ftc4. And should While attempt to meet this maneuver by w ithdraw ing the Knight at b3, then the Black Knight can go to d4, and the White pawn at e4 w ill be the object of the attack. ) 17.Rxd8 Rxd8

18.Rd2 Rxd2 19.Nxd2 and he claims that White has

the best of it Taking Dr. Lasker's variation, however, whatever advantage there might be disappears at once if Black plays Nc6 threatening 20...Qb4 and also 2O...?ki4. neither of which can be stopped. If White answers 2O.Nd5 then Nd4 for Black will at least draw . In fact, alter 19".$Bc6 Black threatens so many things that it is difficult to see how While can prevent the loss of one or more pawns. ]

14.Bxd6 cxd6 15.Nd4 [It is a curious but true fact

that I did not see this move when I played 13...Ab7, otherwise I would have played the right move 13... J xf4. | Rad8 [The game is yet far from lost, as against the entry of the Knight, Black can later on play ...c6- c5. followed by ...d6-d5.| 16,NQ6 Rd7 17.Radl Nc8 11 now was on the point of playing 17...c5 to be followed by ...d6-d5, which I thought wrould give me a draw, but suddenly I became ambitious and thought that I could play the text move and later on sacrifice the Exchange for the Knight at e6, winning a pawn for it. and leaving White's e-pawn still weaker. I intended to cany this plan either before or after playing ...g7-g5 as the circumstances demanded. Now let us analyze: If A) Again IS.RfZ d5 19.exd5 Bxd5 2().Nxd5 f best, since if 2O.Rfd2 Rxe6 gives Black the advantage j 20...Rxd5 21.Rxd5 Nxd 5 and there is no good reason why Black should lose, ; B) 18+Nd5 Bxd5 19.exd5 b5 and a careful analysis will show that Black has nothing to fear. Black's plan in this case would be to work his Knight around to e5 via c8, b6, and c4 or d7. |

18.Rf2 b5 19.Rfd2 Rde7 2O.b4 Kf7 21.a3 Ba8

[Once more changing my plan and this time without any good reason. Had I now played 21...Rxe6

22.fxe6 t Rxe6 as I intended to do when I went back

w ith the Knight to c8, 1 doubt very much if While would have been able to win the game. At least it would have been extremely difficult. ]

22.KQ Ra7 23.g4 h6 24.Rd3 a5 25.h4 axb4

26.axb4 Rae7

[This, of course, has no object now. Black, with a bad game, flounders around for a move. It would have been better to play 26...Ra3 to keep the open file, and at the same time to threaten to come out w ith the Knight at b6 and c4. ]

27. Kf3 Rg8 28.Kf4 g6

[Again bad. White's last two moves were weak, since the While's King docs nothing here. lie should have played his Rook to g3 on the 27th move. Black now should have played 28...g5 I After missing this chance White has it all his own way, and finishes the game most accurately, and Black becomes more helpless w ith each move. The game needs no further comment, excepting that my play throughout was of an altogether irresolute character. When a plan is made, it must be carried out if at all possible. Regaiding the play of White, I consider his 1 Oth and

12th moves were very weak; he played well after that up to the 27th move, which was bad. as well as his 28th move. The rest of his play was good, probably perfect. ] 29,Rg3 g5+ 30*Kf3 Nb6 3Lhxg5 hxg5 32.Rh3 Rd7 33.Kg3! Ke8 34.Rdhl Bb7 35x5 dxe5

36.Ne4 Nd5 37.N6c5 Bc8 38.Nxd7 Bxd7 39.Rh7

Rf8 40.Rai Kd8 41.Ra8+ Bc8 42.Nc5 [Black resigns.] 1-0

C12

[diagram]
Rice Memorial 08.02.1916 [Capablanccii J. R.] l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Bb4 [Of all the variations of the French Defence I like this best, because it gives Black more chances to obtain the initiative ] 5.e5 [Though I consider 5.exd5 the best move, there is much to be said in favor of this move, but not of the variation as a whole, which White adopted in this game. ]

5...h6 6.Bd2 Bxc3 7.bxc3 Ne4 8.Qg4 KfB

| By the text move Black gives up castling, but gains time for an attack against White's center and Qucensidc. The alternative 8".g6 leaves Black's Ringside very weak. White by playing 9.h4 would force Black to play h5 and later on. White's Bishop by going to d3 would threaten the weakened g-pawn. ]

9.Bel c5 | threatening 10.,.S{a5 and stopping thereby

White's threat of a3. It demonstrates that White's last move was a complete loss of time and merely weakened his position.] 10.Bd3 QaS !LNe2 cxd4

12.O-O dxc3 13.Bxe4 dxe4 14.Qxe4 Nc6

[Black has conic out of the opening with a pawn to the good. His development, however, has suffered somewhat, and there are Bishops of opposite color, so that it cannot be said as yet, that Black has a won game; but lie has certainly the best of the position, because, besides being a pawn to the good, he threatens White's c-pawn, which must of course be defended, and this in turn will give him the opportunity to post his Knight at d5 via e7. When the Black Knight is posted at d5, the Bishop will be developed to c6 via d7, as soon as the opportunity presents itself, and it will be Black that wil 1 then have ibe initiative, and can consequently decide the course of the game.] 15,Rdl [ 15.Rdl was played to prevent Ne7 which would be answered by 16.Nxc3 or still better by 16.Na3. The move, however, is strategically wrong, since by bringing his pieces to the Qucensidc, White loses any chance he might have of making a determined attack on the Kingside before Black is thoroughly prepared for it. ]

15...g6 16,f4 Kg7 17,Be3

[Better w ould have been 17.a4 ]

17...Ne7 18.Bf2 Nd5 [This Knight completely

paralyzes the attack, as it dominates the whole situation, and there is no w ay to dislodge it. Behind it Black can quietly develop his pieces. The game can now be said to be won for Black strategically. ] 19.Rd3 Bd7 2O.Nd4 Rac8 21.Rg3 Kh7 22.h4 Rhg8 23.h5 Qb4 [In order to pin the Knight and be ready to come back to either e7 or f8. Also to prevent 24,Sb I . In reality nearly all these precautions are unnecessary, since White's attack amounts to nothing. Probably Black should have left aside all these considerations, and played 23...Q&4 now, in order to follow it up with ...f7-f5, as he did later, but under less favorable circumstances. ]

24.Rh3 f5

| Not the best, as White w ill soon prove. 24...Qf8 would have avoided every thing, but Black wants to assume the initiative at once and plunges into complications. However, as will soon be seen, the move is not a losing one by any means. ]

25.exf6 Nxf6 26.hxg6+ Rxg6 27.Rxh6+

|This wins the Queen.| Kxh6 28.Nf5+ exf5 29.Qxb4 [The position looks most interesting ] Rcg8 [I thought it would be possible to get up such an attack against the While King as to make it impossible for him to hold out much longer, but I wras wrong, unless it could have been done by playing 29...Bc6 first, forcing 30.g3 and then playing Kh5 I followed a similar plan, but lost a very important move by playing 29...Scg8, which gave While lime to play 3O.Sdl. I am convinced, however, that 29,..Bc6 at once was the right move. White would be forced to play 30.g3, and Black would reply with either 3L..@h5 as already indicated, w hich looks the best (the plan, of course, is to play 32..,iRh8 and follow it up with ... ?g4, threatening male, or some other move according to circumstances. In some cases, of course, it w ill be better to first play T.. ?g4)7 or 3L-4&e4? which will at least give him a draw. There are so many possibilities in this positon that it would be impossible to give them all. It will be worth the reader's time to go carefully through lhe lines of play indicated above. ]

30.g3 Bc6 31 Rdl Kh5

[The plan, of course, as explained above, is to go to g4 in due time and threaten mate at hl, but it is now too late, the White Rook having come in time to prevent the maneuver. Instead of the text move, therefore, Black should have played 31...Ne4 which w ould have given him a drawr at the very least. After the text moves the tables are tin ned. It is now White who has lhe upper hand, and Black who has to right for a draw. ] 32Rd6 Be4 [ 32...Nc4 was still the right move, and probably the last chance Black had to draw against White's best play. ]

33.Qxc3 Nd5 34.Rxg6 Kxg6

| 34...Nxc3 35.Rxg8 Nxa2 was no better, j

35 Qe5 Kf7 36.c4 Re8 37.Qb2 Nf5 38 Bd4 Rh8

39.Qb5 Rhl+ 4O.Kf2 a6 4LQb6 Rh2+ 42.Kel

Nd7 43.Qd6 Bc6 44.g4 fxg4 45.f5 Rhl+ 46.Kd2 Ke8 47.f6 Rh7 48.Qe6+ Kf8 49.Be3 Rf7 5O.Bh6+ Kg8 51.Bg7 [Most players will be wondering, as the spectators did, why I did not resign. 'Hie reason is that while I knew the game to be lost, I was hoping for the

following variation, which Chajes came very near playing: 5i.Qxg4+ Kh7 52,Qh5 Rxf6 53.Bg5+ Kg7 54.Bxf6+ Kxl'6 and while White has a won game it is by no means easy. If the reader does not believe it. let him take the White pieces against a master and see what happens. My opponent, who decided to take no chances, played 51.Jlg7f and finally won a shown below. |

51...g3 52.Ke2 g2 53.Kf2 Nf8 54.Qg4 Nd7

55.Kgl a5 56 a4 Bxa4 57.Qh3 Rxf6 58 Bxf6 Nxf6

59.Qxg2+ KfS 6O.Qxb7 [And after a very few moves

Black resigned. | Beg 6LQb6 Ke7 62,QxaS Nd7

63.Kf2 Bf7 64.Ke3 Kd6 65.KJ4 Kc6 66.Qf5

[A very fine game on Chajes' part from move 25 on, for while Black, having the best of the position, missed several chances. White, on the other hand, missed none. | 1-0

C77

[diagram]
San Sebastian 23.02.1911 [Capablanccii J. R.] l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.d3 [This is a very solid development, to which I was much addicted at the time, because of my ignorance of the multiple variations of the openings.] d6 6x3 Be7 [In this variation there is the alternative of developing this Bishop via g7, after 6...g6 |

7.Nbd2 O-O 8.Nfl b5 9.Bc2 d5 10.Qe2 dxe4

lldbce4 Be5 [Evidently to make room for the Queen at e7? but 1 do not think the move advisable at this stage. 1 l...Be6 is a more natural and effective move. It develops a piece and threatens 12.,.Nc4, which would have to be stopped. ]

12.Bg5 Be6 [Now it is not so effective, because the

White Queen's Bishop is out, and the Knight, in going to c3 to defend the square c4, does not block the Queen's Bishop. | 13.N&3 Re8 14.O-O Qe7 [This is bad. Black's game was already not good. He probably had no choice but to take 14...Bxc3 before making this move. |

15.Nd5 Bxd5 16.exd5 Nb8 [In order to bring it to d7,

to support lire other Knight and also his c-pawn. While, however, does not allow lime for this, and by taking advantage of his superior position is able to win a pawn.] 17.a4 b4 [Since he had no way to prevent the loss of a pawn, he should have given it up where it is, and played

17.. .Nbd7 in order to make his position more solid.

The text move not only loses a pawn, but leaves Black's game very much weakened. ]

18.cxb4 Bxb4 19.Bxf6 Qxf6 2O.Qe4 Bd6

21.Qxh7+ Kf8 [With a pawn more and all his pieces

ready for action, while Black is still backward in development, it only remains for White to drive home his advantage before Black can come out with his pieces, in which case, by using the open h-file. Black might be ahle to start a strong attack against White's King. White is able by his next move to eliminate all danger.! 22.Nh4 Qh6 [This is practically forced. Black could not play

22...g6 because of 23.Bxg6 and White meanwhile

[diagram]
23.Qxh6 gxh6 24.Nf5 h5 25,Bdl Nd7 26.Bxh5

Nf6 27.Be2 Nxd5 28.Rfdl Nf4 29.Be4 Red8

30.h4 a5 [Black must lose lime assuring the safety of

this pawn ] 31 g3 Ne6 32.Bxe6 fxe6 33.Ne3 Rdb8

34.Nc4 Ke7 [Black fights a hopeless battle. He is two

pawns down for all practical purposes, and the pawns he has are isolated and have to be defended by pieces. |

35. Rael Ra7 [White threatened 36.ftxd6, followed by

37.su7+.] 36.Rel Kf6 37.Re4 Rb4 38.g4 Ra6

[If 38...Rxa4 39.Nxd6 of course would win a piece. ]

39.Rc3 Bc5 40.R13+ Kg7 41.b3 Bd4 42.Kg2 Ra8

43.R5 Ra6 44.h5 Rxc4 45,bxc4 Rc6 46.g6

[Black resigns.] 1-0

C22

[diagram]
Berlin 18.1 L 1913 [Capablanccii J. R.] I.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.Qxd4 Nc6 4.Qe3 Nf6 5.Nc3 Bb4 6.Bd2 O-O 7.O-O-O Re8 |ln Ibis position, instead of the text move, 7...d6 is often played in order to develop the Queen's Bishop. My idea was to exert sufficient pressure on the e-pawn to win it, and thus gain a material advantage, which would, at least, compensate whatever slight advantage of position White might have. The plan, I think is quite feasible, my subsequent difficulties being due to faulty execution of the plan. |

8.Qg3 Nxe4 9.Nxe4 Rxe4 10.Bf4 Qf6

[White's threat to regain the pawn was merely with the idea of gaining time to develop his pieces. Black could have played 1O...dti opening the way for his Queen's Bishop, when would have followed 1 l.Bd3 Re8 12.N13 and White would soon start a powerful direct attack against Black's King. With the text move Black aims al taking the initiative away from White in accordance with the principles laid down in this book. ]

II. NB3

| If 11.13xc7 d6 and White's Bishop would be completely shut off, and could only be extricated, if at all, with serious loss of position. The text move aims al quick development to keep the initiative. | ll...d6 [dliis now is not only a developing move, but it also threatens to win a piece by 12... Axli3.] 12.Bd3 Nd4 [Tills complicates the game unnecessarily. 1 2...Re8 was simple, and perfectly safe. ]

13.Be3 Bg4

f this is a serious mistake. 'Ihe position was most interesting, and though in appearance dangerous for Black, not so in reality. The right move would have been 13... Rg4 when we would have 14.Bxd4 Rxd4 I5.c3 Bxc3 I6.bxc3 Rg4 17.Qe3(best) Qxc3+ I8.Bc2 Qxe3+ 19.fxc3 Rxg2 and Black has the best of the game with four pawns for a Knight, besides the fact that all the White pawns are isolated. ]

14.Ng5! Rxe3 [ [here is nothing better. | 15,Qxg41

Ne2+ 16.Bxe2! Rxe2 17.Ne4! Rxe4 18.Qxe4 Qg5-F

19.f4 Qb5 20.c3 Bc5 21.Rhel Qc6 22.Rd5

| 22.Qxc6 would have given White a decided advantage, enough to win with proper play. Mieses, however, feared the difficulties of an ending where, while having the Exchange, he would be a pawn minus, lie preferred to keep the Queens on the board and keep up the attack. At first sight, and even alter careful thought, there seems to be no objection to his plan; but in truth such is not the case. From this point the game will gradually improve in Black's favor until, with the Exchange ahead. White is lost. |

22...Qd7 23T5 c6 24.Rd2 d5 [My plan for the

moment is very simple. It will consist in bringing my Bishop around to f6. Then I shall try to paralyze White's attack against my King by playing ...h7-h6. and also prevent White from ever playing g2-g4-g5. Once my King is safe from attack I shall begin to advance my Queenside pawns, where there arc four to three; and that advantage, coupled w ith the enormous attacking power of my Bishop at f6, will at least assure me an even chance of success ] 25.Qf3 Be7 26.Rde2 Bf6 27.Qh5 h6 28.g4 Kh7! | 28...Kh7 prevents 29. h4 which I would answer with g6 winning the Queen. It can now he considered that my King is safe from attack. White will have to withdraw his Queen via h3, and Black can use the time to begin his advance on the Queenside. ]

29.Kbl Rd8 30,Rdl c5 [Notice that, on assuming the

defensive. White has placed bis Rooks correctly from tlie point of view of strategy. They are both on white squares free from the possible attack of the Black Bishop. | 31.Qh3 Qa4 [This gains time by attacking the Rook and holding the White Queen at h3 for the moment, on account of the g-pawn. Besides, the Queen must be in the middle of the fray now that the attack has to be brought home. White has actually more value in material, and therefore Black must utilize every thing at his command in order to succeed. |

32.Red2 Qe4+ 33.Kal b5 [Threatening ...b5- b4,

which would open the line of action of the Bishop and also secure a passed pawn. | 34,Qg2 Qa4 | 34...Qa4 indirectly defends the d-pawn, which White cannot lake with 35.Rxd5 on account of Qxdl+]

35.Kbl b4 [The attack increases in force as it is

gradually brought home directly against the King. The position now is most interesting and extremely difficult. It is doubtful if there is any valid defense ag ainsl Black's best play. The variations are numerous and difficult.] 36.cxb4 Qxb4 [Black has now a passed pawn, and his Bishop exerts great pressure.] 37,a3 [White cannot very well play now 37.Rxd5 because of RxdS 38.Rxd5 Bxb2 and White could not take 39.Qxb2 because Oe4+ would win the Rook, leaving Black a clear passed pawn ahead. ]

37...Qa4! 38,Rxd5 Rb8 39.Rld2 c4 40,Qg3 Rb3

41.Qd6 c3

[ 41 ,..Bxb2 would also win, which shows that While's game is altogether gone. In these cases, however, it is not the prettiest move that should be played, but the most effective one, the move that will make your opponent resign soonest. ]

42.Rc2 cxb2 43.Rd3 Qe4 44.Rdl Rc3

[Of course after 44...Rc3 White must play 45.Qd2 and then Black plays Rxa3 ] 0-1

D63

[diagram]
Berlin 20.1 L1913 [Capablanccii J. R.] l.d4 d5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.c4 &6 4.Bg5 Be7 5.Nc3 Nbd7 6,e3 O-O 7.Rcl b6 8.cxd5 exd5 9.Bb5 [An invention of my own, I believe. I played it on the spur of the moment simply to change the normal course of the game. Generally the Bishop goes to d3? or a6 after Ra4. Hie text move is in the nature of an ordinary' developing move, and as it violates no principle it cannot be bad.] Bb7 10.O-O ll.Ba4 Rc8 12.Qe2 c5 13.dxc5 Nxc5 | If 13... bxc5 14.Rfd 1 and While would play to win one of Black's center pawns. The drawback to the text move is that it leaves Black's d-pawn isolated, and consequently weak and subject to attack. ]

14. Rfd1 Nxa4

[The alternative would have been 14...b5 !5.Bc2 b4

16.Na4 Ncc4 ]

15.Nxa4 b5 16.Rxc8 Qxc8 17.Nc3 Qc4

[Black aims at the exchange of Queens in order to remain w ith two Bishops for the ending, but in this position such a course is a mistake, because the Bishop at b7 is inactive and cannot come into the game by any means, unless Black gives up the isolated d-pawn which the Bishop must defend. ] 18,Nd4 [Not, of course, 18.Rd4 because of Qxe2 19.Nxe2 Re8 and there is no good way to prevent 2O...Sc2. ]

18..,Qxe2 19.Ncxe2! [Notice the coordination of the

Knights' moves, They are maneuvered chain-like, so to speak, in order to maintain one of them, cither at d4 or ready to go there. Now White threatens to take the open file, and therefore forces Black's next move.] Rc8 [The student should examine this position carefully. There seems to be no particular danger, yet, as White will demonstrate. Black may be said to he lost. If the game is nut altogether lost, the defense is at least oft he most difficult kind: indeed, I must confess that I can see no adequate defense against White's next move. ] 20.Nf5! Kf8 | If 20...Bd8 21.Nd6 Rc7 22.Nxb7 Rxb7 23.Bxf6 Bxf6 24.Rxd5 Rc7 25.Rd2 and White is a pawn ahead. If the Bishop moves anywhere else, then 21. Axf6. doubling the f-pawns and isolating all of Black's Ringside pawns. |

21.Nxe7 Kxe7 22.Nd4 g6 [This is practically forced,

as White threatened 23.4hf5+. Notice that the Black Knight is pinned in such a way that no relief can be afforded except by giving by the h-pawn or abandoning the open file with the Rook, which would be disastrous, as White would immediately sieze it.]

23.£3! h6 | Black could do nothing else except mark

time with his Rook along the open file, since as soon as he moved away White would take it. White, on the other hand, threatens to march up with his King to e5 via f2-g3-f4, after having, of course, prepared the way. Ilence, Black's best chance was to give up a pawn, as in the text, in order to free his Knight.] 24.Bxh6 Nd7

25.h4 Nc5 26.Bf4 Ne6 [Black exchanges Knights to

remain with Bishops of opposite colors, which gives him the best chance to draw.] 27.Nxe6 Kxe6 | 27...fxe6 would be worse, as White would then be able to post his Bishop e5. ]

28.Rd2 Rh8

[Black wants to force Hg3. The text move is weak, however, as will soon be seen. His best chance was to play 28... h4 and follow' it up with ...a6-a5 and ... Ba6. While meanwhile could play 29.g4 and h4-h5, obtaining a passed pawn, which, with proper play, should win. ]

29.Rc2!

| 29.g3 would be bad, on account of d4 which would get the Black Bishop into the game, even though White could answer 30.c4 ]

29...Rc8 3O.Rxc8 Bxc8 [There arc now Bishops of

opposite color, but nevertheless White has an easily won game ] 31.Kf2 d4 [Practically forced. Otherwise the White King would march up to d4 and then to c5 and win Black's Queenside pawns. If Black attempted to stop this by putting his King at c6 then the White King would enter through c5 into Black's Ringside and win just as easily. | 32,exd4 Kd5 33.Ke3 Be6

34.Kd3 Kc6 35.a3 Bc4+ 36.Ke3 Be6 37.B116

[Il is better not to hurry 37.g4 because of 1'5 for although White could win in any case, it would take longer. Now' the White King threatens to help by going in through f4 after posting the Bishop at g7, where it not only protects the d-pawn, but indirectly also the b-pawn. |

37...Kd5 38.Bg7 Black resigns. The student ought to

have realized by this time the enormous importance of playing well every kind of ending. In this game again, practically from the opening. White aimed at nothing but the isolation of Black's d-pawn. Once he obtained that, he tried for and obtained, fortunately, another advantage of position elsewhere which translated itself into the material advantage of a pawn. Then by accurate playing in the ending he gradually forced home his advantage. This ending has the merit of having been played against one of the finest players in the world. | 1-0

C42

[diagram]
finals St. Petersburg 14.05.1914 [Capablanccii J. /?./ I.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nxe5 d6 4.Nf3 Nxe4 5.Qe2 Qe7 6.d3 Nf6 7.Bg5 [Played by Morphy, and a very line move. The point is that should Black exchange Queens he will be a move behind in development and consequently will get a cramped game if White plays accurately. | Be6 | Marshall thought at the time that his was the best move and consequently played it in preference to

7...Qxe2i ]

8.Nc3 h6 9,Bxf6 Qxf6 1044 Be7 U.Qb5+ Nd7

12. Bd3! [It is now time to examine the result of the

opening. On White's side we find the minor pieces well posted and the Queen out in a somewhat odd place, it is true, but safe from attack and actually attac king a pawn. White is also ready to castle. White's position is evidently free from danger and his pieces can easily maneuver. On Black's side the first thing we notice is that he has retained both his Bishops, unquestionably an advantage; but on the other hand we find his pieces bunched together too much, and the Queen in danger of being attacked without having any good square to go to. The Bishop at c7 has no freedom and it blocks the Queen, which. in its turn, blocks the Bishop ] g5 [To make room for his Queen, threatening also ...g5- g4. Besides, Black catmot castle on the Ringside with 12...O-O because 13.Qxb7 RfbS 14.Qe4 tlireatening mate, wins a pawn ] [Nor can he castle on the Queenside with 12...O-O-O because 13.Qa5 would put Black's game in imminent danger, since he cannot play a6 f nor can he play 13...Kb8 because of 14.N65 ) because of I4.1Bxa6 Consequently we must conclude that the opening is all in White's favor. ]

13.h3

[ 13.h3 makes it difficult for Black to find a move, as White threatens -- 14.Ne4 and should Black go Qg7 then 15.d5 Bf5 16. Nxd6+ followed by 17Axf5. ]

13...O-O |Giving up a pawn in an attempt to free his

game and take the initiative.] 14.Qxb7 Rab8 15.Qe4 Qg7 1643 c5 [In order to break up While's center and bring his Knight to c5 and thus lay the foundation for a violent attack against White's King. The plan, however, fails, as it always must in such cases, because Black's development is backward, and consequently his pieces are not properly placed ]

17.O-O cxd4 18.Nd5! [A simple move, which

destorys Black's plan utterly. Black will now have no concerted action of his pieces, and, as his pawns are all weak, he will sooner or later lose them.] Bd8

19.Bc4 Nc5 2O.Qxd4 Qxd4 [The fact that he has to

exchange Queens when he is a paw n behind shows that Black's game is lost ] 21.Nxd4 Bxd5 22.Bxd5 Bf6 23.Radi Bxd4 [ Hie Knight was too threatening. But now the ending brought about is one in which the Bishop is stronger that the Knight; which makes Black's plight a desperate one. The game has no further interest, and it is only because of its value as a study of this variation of the Petroff that 1 have given i t. Black was able to fight it out until the sixtieth move on account of some poor play on White's part. The rest of the moves are given merely as a matter of form ]

24 Rxd4 Kg7 25.Bc4 Rb6 26.Rel Kf6 27.f4 Neb

28.fxg5+ hxg5 29.RH+ Ke7 3O.Rg4 Rg8 31.Rf5

Rc6 32.h4 Rgc8 33.hxg5 Rc5 34.Bxe6 fxe6

35.Rxc5 Rxc5 36.g6 Kf8 37.Rc4 Ra5 38.a4 Kg7

39.Rc6 Rd5 40,Rc7+ Kxg6 41.Rxa7 Rdl+ 42.Kh2

d5 43.aS Rcl 44.Rc7 Rai 4S.b4 Ra4 44 c3 d4

47.Rc6 dxc3 48.Rxc3 Rxb4 49.Ra3 Rb7 50,a6

Ra7 51. Ra5 Kf6 52. g4 Ke7 53. Kg3 Kd6 54. Kf4 Kc7 55. Ke5 Kd7 S6. g5 Ke7 57. g6 Kf8 58. Kxs6 Ke8 59*g7 Rxg7 60+a7 Rg6+ ...

1-0

C68

[diagram]
prelim St. Petersburg 03.05.1914 [Capablanccii J. R.} l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Bxc6 dxc6 5.Nc3 [I played this move alter having discussed it with Alekhine on several occasions. Alekhine considered it, at the time, superior to 5.d4 which is generally played. He played it himself later on in the Tournament, in one of his games against Dr. E.

1.asket\ and obtained the superior game, which he

only lost through a b kinder. ]

5...Bc5

| 5..T6 is probably the best move in this position. I do not like the text move. |

6.d3 Bg4 7.Be3 Bxe3 [Tills opens the f-file for

While, and also reinforces his center, but Black naturally did not want to make a second move with this Bishop.] 8.fxe3 Qe7 9.O-O O-O-O [Bold play, typical of JanowskyJ lO.Qel Nh6 [The problem for White now is to advance his b-pawn to bS as fast as he can.] ll.Rbll [If he plays 1 l.b4 at once, Black simply takes it ] | If he plays first 1 1.a.3 and then b2-b4, he will still have to protect his b-pawn before he can go on and play a3-a4 and b4-b5. As a matter of fact While played a rather unusual move, but one which, under the circumstances, was the best, since after it he could at once play b2-b4 and then a2-a4 and b4-b5. ] lL,,f6 12.b4 Nf7 13.a4 Bxf3 |lie simplifies, hoping to lighten White's attack, which will have to be conducted practically with only the heavy pieces on the board. lie may have also done it in order to play ... #Bf7-g5-e6.J 14.RxB [Taking with 14.gxf3 would have opened a possibility for a counterattack. |

14...b6

[He is forced to this in order to avoid the breaking up of his Queens ide pawns. The only alternative would have been 14...b5 which on the face of it looks bad. ] IS.bS exb5 16,axb5 aS 17.Nd5 Qc5 18x4 [The White Knight is now a tower of strength. Behind it White will be able to prepare an attack, which will begin with d3-d4, to drive away the Black Queen and thus leave himself free to play c4-c5, There is only one thing to take care of and that is to prevent Black from sacrificing the Rook for the Knight and a pawn.] Ng5

19.R12

[Had White played 19.Rfl instead of 19.Rf2, Black could have played Ne6 2O.Qc3 and now Rxd5 ( instead of the text move 20...W7J 21.exd5 Qxe3+ followed by 22... c5 with a winning game. ]

19...Ne6 20 Qc3 Rd7 21.Rdl Kb7

[The text move loses very rapidly. It would have been better for Black to play 21 ...Kd8 ]

22.d4 Qd6 23.Rc2 exd4 24.exd4 Nf4 25x5 Nxd5

26.exd5 Qxd5 27x6+ Kb8 28.cxd7 Qxd7 29.d5

Re8 30.d6 cxd6 3l.Qc6 [Black resigns.] 1-0

[diagram]
goes Qh3 and White will have to face serious difficulties. In this situation White decides that the only course is to bring his King to g3, so as to defend the squares h3 and g4, where the Black Queen might otherwise become a source of annoyance, ] 3S..,Kg8 36,Kfl KfH 37.Kg2 KgS 38,Kg3 KfB | Now that he has completed his march with the King, While is ready lo advance.] 39.h5 gxh5 [ 39...g5 would be answered by 4O.Qf5 w ith a winning game. ]

40.gxh5 Qe7

[Against 40...Kg8 White would play 41.Qg4 practically forcing the exchange of Queens, after which White would have little trouble in winning the ending, since Black's Bishop could not do much damage in the resulting position. [

41.Qf5 Kg8

[Black overlooks the force of 42.ad 7. His best defense was 41...Rd8 against which White could either advance the King or play 42.Nh4 threatening 43Ag6+J

42.Rd7 Bxe5+ [This loses a piece, but Black's

position was altogether hopeless. | 43.Kg4 Qf6

44.Nxe5 Qg7+ 45.Kf4 [The interest of this game

centers mainly on the opening and on the march of the White King during the final stage of the game. It is an instance of the King becoming a fighting piece, even while the Queens arc still on the board.] 1-0

[diagram]
New York {Capablanca* J. R.j l.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bd3 |Not the most favored move, but a perfectly natural developing one, and consequently it cannot be bad.] dxe4 [ 4...c5 is generally play in this case instead of the text move. ]

5.Nxe4 Nbd7 6.Nxf6+ Nxf6 7,Nf3 Be7 8.Qe2

I'fhis is played to prevent ...b7-b6 followed by ",Bb7, which is the general form of development for Black in this variation.] O-O | If Black now plays 8...b6 9.Bb5+ Bd7 lO.NeS and White obtains a considerable advantage in position. ]

9.Bg5 h6

[Of course Black could not play 9...b6 because of

10.Bxf6 followed by Bxf6 1 1.Qe4 ]

10. Bxf6 Bxf6 ll.Qe4 g6

|This weakens Black's Kingside. 1 L..Re8 was the right move. ] 12,h4 e5 | lliis is merely giving up a pawn in order to come out quickly with his Queen's Bishop. But as he does not obtain any compensation for his pawn, the move is bad. He should have played 12...Qd5 and tried to fight the game out that way. It might have continued thus: 13.Qf4 Bg7 14.Qxc7 Bxd4 15.Nxd4 Qxd4

16.O-O-O with considerable advantage of position for

White. The text move might he considered a mild form of suicide. ]

13.dxe5 Bf5 I4.Qf4 Bxd3 15.O-O-O Bg7 16.Rxd3

Qe7 17-Qc4 [In order to keep the Black Queen from coming into the game.] Rad8 IRRhdl | A better plan would have been to play 18.Rel threatening e5-e6. [ 18 .Rxd3 19.Rxd3 Re8 2O.c3 c€ [Black with a pawn minus fights very hard. Of course if 2()...Bxe5 21.Nxe5 Qxe5'22.Re3] [With Black's 20,..c6 the pawn has now to be defended, because alter 21.-- Bxe5 22.Nxe5 Qxc5 23,Re3 Black could play Qb8 defending the Rook. ]

21.Re3 c5 22.Kc2 b6 23.a4 [White's plan now is to

fix the Queenside in order to be able to manocuver freely on the other side, where he has the advantage of material.] Qd7 24.Rd3 Qc8 25.Qe4 Qe6 26.Rd5 Kf8 27.c4 Kg8 [Black sees that he now stands in his best defensive position, and therefore waits for White to show how he intends to break through. He notices, of course, that the White Knight is in the way of the f- pawn, which cannot advance to f4 to defend, or support rather, the pawn at e5. | 28.b3 K£8 29.KJ3 Kg8 3O.Rd6 Qc8 31.RJ5 Qe6 32.g4 Kf8 33.Qf4 Kg8 34.Qe4 Kf8 [Black persists in wailing for developments.] 35.Ke2 [Black sees that if 35.h5 gxh5 36.gxh5 the Queen

C62

[diagram]
New York 03.1 L1918 [CapcManca, J. R.] l.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 d6 4.Nc3 Bd7 5.d4 exd4 6.Nxd4 g6 [In this form of defense of the Ruy Lopez the development of the King's Bishop via g7 is, I think, of great importance, The Bishop at g7 exerts great pressure along the long diagonal- At the same time the position of the Bishop and pawns in front of the King, once it is castled, is one of great defensive st rongth. Therefore, in this form of development, the Bishop? we might say7 exerts its maximum strength. Compare this note with the one in the Capablanca- Burn game at San Sebastian, | 7.Nf3 Bg7 8.Bg5 Nf6 [Of course not 8."Ngc7 because of 9.Nd5 ] [The alternative would have been 8...1'6 to be followed by ... ge7; but in this position it is preferable to have the Knight at f6. ]

9.Qd2 h6 10.BH4

[An error of judgment. White wants to keep the Knight pinned, but it was more important to prevent Black from castling immediately. 10.Bf4 would have done this. |

10...O-O 11.O-O-O [Bold play, but again faulty

judgment, unless he intended to play to win or lose, throwing safety to the winds. The Black Bishop at g7 becomes very powerful attacking piece. The strategical disposition of the Black pieces is now far superior to White's, therefore it will be Black who will take the offensive ! 12.Rhel (White wanted to keep his Queen's Rook on the open file, and consequently brings over his other Rook to the center to defend his c- pawn, which Black threatened to win by 1 2...g5 followed by I3... xe4.] g5! [Now- that the King's Rook is in the center. Black can safely advance, since, in order to attack on the Kingside, White would have to shift his Rooks, which he cannot do so long as Black keeps up the pressure in the center.] 13,Bg3 Nh5 14.Nd5 [By uncovering the Bishop, which now acts along the long diagonal. Black has at the same time prevented 14.e5 w hich would be answered by Nxg3

15.hxg3 Nxe5 etc., winning a pawn. ]

14...a6 [Black drives the Bishop away so as to unpin

his pieces and be able to maneuver freely. ] 15.Bd3 Be6 [Preparing the onslaught. Black's pieces begin to bear against the King's position.] 16.c3 [With the last move While not only blocks the action of the Black King's Bishop, but he also aims at placing his Bishop at bl and his Queen at c2, and then advancing his e- pawn, to check at 117.| f5! | Initiating an attack to which there is no reply, and which has for its ultimate object either the winning of the White Queen's Bishop or cutting it off from the game. Compare this game with the Winter-Capablanca game at Hastings.] 17,h4 f4 [The Bishop is now out of action. White naturally counterattacks violently against the seemingly exposed position of the Black King, and, with very good judgment, even offers the Bishop.] 18,hxg51 hxg51 [Taking the Bishop would be dangerous, if not actually bad. w hile the text move accomplishes Black's object, which is to put the Bishop out of action. | 19.Rhl Bf7 2O.Kbl [This move unquestionably loses time. Since he would have to retire 2O.Bh2 sooner or later, he might have done it immediately. It is doubtful, however, if at this stage of the game it would be possible for White to save the game. |

20...Ne5 21.Nxe5 Rxe5 | It was difficult to decide

which way to retake. I took with the Rook in order to have it prepared for a possible attack against the King. ] 22.Bh2 Nf6 [Now that the White Bishop has been driven back, Black wants to get rid of White's strongly posted Knight at d5, which blocks the attack of the Bishop at 17. It may be said that the Knight al d5 is the key to White's defense.J 23,g3 [White strives not only to have play for his Bishop, but also he wants to break up Black's pawns in order to counterattack. Hie alternative would have been

23.Nxf6 1 Qxf6 and Black would be threatening 24...

Sa5 and also 24...Qc6. The student should notice that Black's drawback in all this is the fact that he is playing minus the services of his Queen's Rook. It is this fact that makes it possible for White to hold out longer, |

23...Nxe4 24,Bxe4 Rxe4 25.gxf4 c6 26.Ne3

[ 26.Nb4 was the alternative, but in any event White could not resist the attack. I leave it to the reader to work this out for himself, as the variations are so numerous that they would take up too much space. ]

26...Qa5 27x4 Qxd2 28.Rxd2 gxf4 29,Ng4 Bg6

[This forces the King to the corner, where he will be in a mating net.] 3O.Kal Rae8 [Now at last the Queen's Rook enters into the game and soon the battle is over. |

31.a3

[If 3LRxd6 Rel+ 32.Rdl R8e2 ]

31...Rel+ 32,Rxel Rxel+ 33.Ka2 Bf7 34,Kb3 d5

['the quickest way to finish the game.] 35.Bxf4 dxc4+

36.Kb4 c3 37,bxc3 Re4+ 38.Ka5 Rxf4 39.Rd8+

Kh7 4O.Rd7 Be6 [White resigns. A very lively game. 1 0-1

D64

[diagram]
New York 0111.1918 [Capablanccii J. R.] l.d4 d5 2.Nf3 Nf5 3.c4 &6 4.Nc3 Nbd7 5.Bg5 Be7 6.e3 O-O 7.Rcl c6 [This is one of the oldest systems of defense against the Queen's Gambit. I had played it before in this tournament against Kostic, and no doubt Marshall expected it. At times I change my defenses, or rather systems of defense; on the other hand, during a tournament, if one of them has given me good results, I generally play it all the time ] SJ rQc2 dxc4 9.Bxc4 Nd5 10.Bxe7 Qxe7 11,O-O Nxc3

12.Qxc3 bN [ lliis is the key to this system of defense.

Having simplified the game considerably by a series of exchanges. Black will now develop his Queen's Bishop along the long diagonal without having created any apparent weakness, llie proper development of the Queen's Bishop is Black's greatest problem in the Queen's Gambit.] 13.e4 Bb7 14.Rfel Rfd8 |The developing stage can now be said to be complete on both sides. The opening is over and the middlegame begins. White, as is generally the case, has obtained the center. Black, on the other hand, is entrenched in his first three ranks, and if given time will post his Que eifs Rook al c8 and his Knight al 1'6, and finally play ... c6-c5, in order to break up While's center and give full action to the Black Bishop posted at b7. In this game White attempts to anticipate that plan by initiating an advance on the center, which, when carefully analysed, is truly an attack against Black's e-pawn. j 15.d5 Nc51 [Against Kostic in a previous game I had played

15...NF8 It was carelessness on my part, but Marshall

believed differently, otherwise he would not have played this variation, since, had he analyzed this move, he would, I think, have realized that Black would obtain an excellent game. Black now threatens not only 16...cxd5. but also 16..* xe4 followed by 17,..cxd5. The position is very interesting and full of possibilities. ]

16.dxe6 Nxe6 17.Bxe6 Qxe6 [Played under the

impression that White had to lose lime in defending his a-pawn. when I could play 18...c5, obtaining a very superior game. But, as will be seen, my opponent had quite a little surprise for me.] 18.Nd4! Qe5! [Of course, if 1 8...Qxa2 1 9. Rai would win the Queen. The text move is probably the only satisfactory move in the position | [The obvious move would have been 18...Qd7 to defend the c-pawn, and then would come 19.Nf5 f6 20.Qg3 (threatening 21.Scdl) Kh8 21.Rcdl Qt7

22.h4 with a tremendous advantage in position. The

text move, on the other hand, assures Black an even game at the very least, as will soon be seen. ]

19.Nxc6 Qxc3 2O.Rxc3 Rd2 2LRbl

[A very serious error of judgment. White is under the impression that he has the better game, because he is a pawn ahead, but that is not so. llie powerful position of the Black Rook at d2 fully compensates Black for the pawn minus. Besides, the Bishop is better with Rooks than the Knight (see Examples 29- 38, where the relative values of the Knight and Bishop are compared), and, as already stated, with paw ns on both sides of the board the Bishop is superior because of its long range. Incidentally, this ending will demonstrate the great power of the Bishop. White's best chance was to take a draw at once, thus: 2LNe7+ Kf8 22.Rc7 Re 8 (not

22...Bxe4 because 23.[3 would give While the best

of it ) 23.Rxb7 (best, and not because of followed by 24.Rxb~ Rxe4 ) 23 -Rxe7

24.Rb84- Re8 25.R.xe8 < Kxe8 and w ith proper play

White w ill draw. It is curious that, although a pawn ahead. White is the one is always in danger. It is only now, after seeing this analysis, that the value of Black's move 18...Qe5 can be fully appreciated. ]

21...Re8 [With this powerful move Black begins,

against White's center, an assault which will soon be shifted against the King itself] 22.e5 | White is afraid to play 22.13 because of f5 |

22...g5 [To prevent f2-f4. The White Knight is

practically pinned, because he does not dare move on account of ,..Kxe5.| 23,h4 ['This is a sequal to the previous move. White expects to disrupts Black's pawns, and thus make them weak.] gxh4 |'though doubled and isolated this pawn exercises enormous pressure. Black now threatens 24...S&6; to be followed by ...2g6 and ,..h3-h2 at the proper time.]

24.Rel [White cannot stand the slow death any longer.

He sees danger everywhere, and wants to avert it by giving up his Queenside pawns, expecting to regain his fortunes later on by taking the initiative on the Kingside.] Re6! [Much better than taking pawns. This forces White to defend the Knight with the Rook at el, because of the threat 25. ..Rg6. | 25.Reel Kg7 | Preparatory' to ...Sg6. 'lhe game is going to be decided on the Kingside, and it is the isolated double pawn that will supply the finishing touch.] 26.b4 b5 [ l o prevent b4-b5, defending the Knight and liberating the Rooks ] 27.a3 Rg6 28.KH Ra2 [Notice the remarkable position of the pieces. While cannot move anything without incurring some loss.) 29.Kgl [His best chance would have been to play 29.e6 but that would only have prolonged the game, which is lost in any case. ]

29...h3 30.g3 a6 [Again forcing White to move and to

lose something thereby, as all his pieces are tied up.]

31.e6 Rxe6 32.g4

[Not even now can White move the Knight because

32.Na5 h2t- 33.Kxh2 Rh6 1 34.Kgl Rhl# ]

32...Rh6 3343

| If 33.g5 h2+ 34.Khl Rxc6 35,Rxc6 Rxf2 winning easily. ]

33...Rd6 34.Ne7 Rdd2 35.Nf5+ Kf6 36.Nh4 Ke5

37.Nf5 Rg2+ 38.Kfl h2 3914+ Kxf4

| White resigns. An ending worth very careful study. | 0-1

<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<BEGIN_TEXT>>>
TITLE: The Amateurs Mind - Jeremy Silman - (2nd ed, 1999)
FILENAME: 4. The Amateurs Mind - Jeremy Silman - (2nd ed, 1999)_CLEAN.txt
ORDER: 3
SHA256: 977897332cbe5108d96bc2da3924bea41e91381b360550d6d6f6b7b04699c5fc
BYTES: 577216
1. Chess.

2. Chess problems.

I. Title. GV1449.5.S52 1999 794.1'2-dc21

ISBN: 1-890085-02-2

Cover design by Heidi Frieder 99-32901 Primed and bound in the United States of America Siles Press

3624 Shannon Road

Los Angeles, CA 90027 To Takako Abe, whose kindness allowed me to see shades of Tokyo that would normally have remained hidden, and to Arrow and Deborah Chan, who turned a quick visit to Singapore into something very special.

CONTENTS

Preface ix Introduction xi The Imbalances 1 The Battle Between Bishops and Knights 9 Acquisition of the Center, Territory, and Space 61 The Confusing Subject of Pawn Structure 10 7 Material 145 Development and Initiative 167 Many Imbalances, One Board 203 How to Play the Opening 229 Using the Rooks 245 Curse of the Mindless King Hunter 259 Which Side of the Board Should You Play On? 277 Developing Mental Toughness 299 Tests 315 Test Solutions 329 Glossary 427

PREFACE

My desire in writing this new edition of 1be Amateur's Mind is to supply tools to the average player that will enable him or her to improve dramatically. Though the general base of the original book still exists, I've simplified the language when I deemed it necessary. The book's layout has been redesigned now it's easier to pick out the key points and assimilate the material presented. Most importantly, I've added twenty-six tests at the end of the book. The answers to these tests, all deep and instruction rich, add more than one hundred pages of highly useful information. The addition of a glossary allows the puzzled student quick and easy access to chess terms, strategies, and concepts. I'm convinced that this original material, combined with the improvements outlined above, will turn any serious student of the game into a strong tournament player. Jeremy Silman April 1999

INTRODUCTION

Every chess student dreams of finding the perfect teacher someone who magically knows what's going on in the student's mind and is able to surgically remove the flaws contained there. Unfortunately, this rarely happens in reality. The well-meaning master, not being a movie character or a psychic, thinks it sufficient to look at the student's games, ask questions and give pat answers to the problems that appear before his eyes. While this is a good technique, I often wondered what would happen if a teacher could really get inside the student's head. To accomplish this, I played games with my students (always starting them off with a good position), had them talk out loud before they made a move and after I made mine, and wrote down their thoughts. To my amazement, I was soon seeing problems that I never imagined they possessed. To add to this, I also had them annotate a series of Grandmas ter games. Their responses to the Grandmaster's moves and plans showed me which concepts they were able to understand and which ones were absent from their make-up. The Amateur's Mind is the result of these sessions. It is a road map of typical thinking errors that turn out to be reflections of your own thoughts as much as they are the thoughts of the people that originally shared them with me. Within these pages you will find much of interest: easy-to understand rules and recommendations, new strategies, surpris ing insights-ail designed to help you eradicate the "chessic" doubts and fears that reside within you. Study this information carefully and spend some •time thinking about it. Hopefully, it will be your first step in turning the chess misconceptions that you've owned for so long into the chess mastery that you have always dreamed of attaining.

IMBALANCES

[diagram]

2 I THE AMATEUR'S MIND

(1) Dzindzichashvili-Yermolinsky, U.S. Championship 1993 White to play Wfot is going on here? Most players would either look at the position in a misty stupor or calculate move after move without really knowing what the respective plans are. However, an acquain tance with the list of imbalances would make things much easier. List o f Imbalan ces >- Minor Pieces - the interplay between Bishops and Knights (trying to make one superior to the other). >- Pawn Structure - a broad subject that encompasses doubled pawns, isolated pawns, backward pawns, passed pawns, etc. >- Space - the annexation of territory on a chess board. >- Material - owning pieces of greater value than the opponent's. >- Files and squares - files, ranks, and diagonals act as pathways for your pieces, while squares act as homes. Whole plans can center around the domination of a file, or the creation of a weak square in the enemy camp . >- Development - a lead in development gives you more force in a specific area of the board. This is a temporary imbalance because the opponent will even tually catch up.

IMBALANCES I J

> Initiative - dictating the tempo of a game. This is also a temporary imbalance. A complete explanation of these factors (and a detailed system of planning) can be found in my book, How to Reassess Your Chess--Third Edition. However, a "planning shortcut" can be created by learning to recognize the imbalances for both sides. Once you can do this, simply list the imbalances you're hoping to utilize and strive to make them better than the imbalances your opponent will be using. This brings us back to the earlier discussion of "reading the board. " Can you "read" the position in diagram 1? Before you get carried away, let me remind you: DON'T look at individual moves! In fact, never calculate until you understand the basic components (imbalances) of the position. With this in mind, it's time for you to list all the imbalances you can find. Write this information down and then compare your work with the positional explanation that follows. Imbalances in diagram 1 > Minor Pieces: Black owns two Bishops. The position is fairly open, and this makes us believe that the Bishops will prove superior to the White Knights. > Pawn Structure: Black has no weaknesses in his pawn structure. The only pawn that can be looked upon as potentially weak is the unit on e5. > Space: White has a spatial plus in the center thanks to his advanced e5-pawn. > Material: Material is even. ' > Files and squares: The d-file is open, but neither side has managed to occupy it with a Rook. The f6-square is potentially weak. > Development: White has a lead in development. > Initiative: It's not clear who, if anyone, has the initiative.

[diagram]
Did you find the imbalances? If you were a bit off, don't let it bother you. Like anything else, it takes practice. Keep searching for imbalances in every position you see and, in a very short time, you'll be adept at picking out every imbalance in any situation. Now let's combine the imbalances from diagram 1 and see if a plan suggests itself. Black owns two Bishops and is also exerting some pressure against White's pawn on e5. Black would love to increase this pressure and make use of the fact that he owns a dark-squared Bishop while White doesn't. White would like to make his Knights active (Knights need advanced posts if they are going to win a battle against Bishops). Two squares that call out to the horses are e4 and f6. White would like to place a Knight on e4 and then (somehow) bash it into the hole on f6. The problem for White is that using e4 as a post blocks the e-file ·and makes e5 harder to defend. White's extra central space, given to him by the e5-pawn, won't prove very useful because he will be too busy defending e5. That leaves us contemplating White's lead in development (will it give him an initiative?). In the present situation Black will be able to castle quickly and the absence of any weakness will make it impossible for White to profit from this temporary plus. The goals of both sides should now be clear: White must defend his e5-pawn and find a way to advance his Knights and make them active. Black will play to keep the enemy Knights at bay (Steinitz said that the way to beat Knights is to take away all their advanced support points) and to tie White's pieces down to the defense of e5. Since Black threatens to place his pieces on ideal squares by . . .Bc6 (eyeing f3, one of the defenders of e5) followed by . . . Nd7 (attacking e5), White lashes out in an effort to prevent Black from carrying out his ideas.

1.Nb5

This places the Knight on an active square and attacks c7. Now

1.. . Na6 would show that Black has lost sight of his goal (putting

pressure on eS)-a Knight on a6 would no longer be able to go after the White pawn. Not wanting to be distracted from his desires against e5, Black simply takes the Knight (selling his two Bishops for a gain in time) and ends White's threats once and for all. 1 ... Bxb51

2.Bxb5+ c6

IMBALANCES I 5

This creates a hole on d6, but White's Knight will be so busy defending e5 that it will never be able to maneuver to this newly created hole.

3.Bc4 Nd7

White hasn't been able to make a dent in the Black position while the second player is still calmly following his original plan (taking aim at e5).

4.Qd4 Qc51

Many people don't like to trade Queens too early; they feel it is a wimpy thing to do. However, Black realizes that his goal is not to attack the enemy King. Nor does it have anything to do with other things that might require the retention of the Queens. By swapping the ladies, Black insures the safety of his own King and gets rid of a White piece that could defend e5.

5.Qxc5 N:xc5

6.Rad1Rd8

7.Rxd8+ Kxd8

8.Rdl+ Ke7

9.h4Rd8

Another point of Black's 1 . . . BxbS can now be seen. By creating Bishops of opposite colors, Black is able to attack e5 with his dark-squared Bishop while White is unable to use his light squared Bishop for defense. IO.Rel Trading on d8 would leave White helpless to prevent (after 10 . . . Kxd8) . . .Nd7 followed by the win of the e5-pawn.

[diagram]
ll.b3 a4

12.g4 Nd7

13.Kg2

Preparing to use the King as a defender of e5.

[diagram]
}3 ... Nb6

14.Kg3

White would be happy to see Black trade off his Knight (which can attack e5) for White's Bishop (which can't play a part in the defense). 14 ...RaS 1S.Nd2 ax:b3 l6.Bxb3 Rd8

17.Nf3 Nd7

18.Kf4 Ra8

19.Re2 RaS and White was completely tied down to the

defense of his e-pawn. Black went on to score a long, tough victory. I would like to end this chapter by discussing a letter I received in the April 1993 issue of Chess Life magazine. An irate subscriber accused me of offering inappropriate information to the readership. He complained that "weak" players in the "E" to "B" categories are not able to understand subtle things about minor pieces and weak pawns, adding that they can hardly see a mate in one! I think this is completely untrue. After giving a student the basic mating patterns and strategies, you must begin feeding him advanced concepts. At first these ideas will not make sense; many players will have a vague idea of what you are talking about but nothing more. However, even a fragmented understanding of these concepts will prove useful, and eventually they will experi ence a marked increase in strength as these lessons are assimilated by repetition and example. To prove this statement, let's allow a six-year old girl to open our eyes. When she was taking lessons from me, her rating was in the 900 range. I would go through her tournament games, offer advice, and occasionally throw her concepts that would seem to be for much older and more sophisticated players. One day we were looking at a game she had played when I noticed that she had reached a complicated Rook and pawn endgame. To my delight, she moved her Rook to the seventh rank and began taking

IMBALANCES I 7

her opponent's pawns. "Rooks are strong on the seventh rank!" she said. A little while later she moved it away from the seventh. "Why did you retreat your Rook?" I asked. Looking at me like I was an idiot, she answered, "I'm putting it behind my opponent's passed pawn before it becomes danger ous. Rooks should always be placed behind passed pawns!" Let the gentleman who wrote me that letter take note. If a six year old girl can make use of such advanced concepts, then why can't adults with much higher ratings do the same?

THE BATTLE

BETWEEN

BISHOPS AND

KNIGHTS

The seemingly insignificant difference between Bishops and Knights is actually one of the most important imbalances on the chessboard. What gives the Bishop versus Knight battle even more weight is the fact that mos t players are entirely oblivious to it, thereby handing a student of the imbalances a huge advantage. Rules of the Min o r Pieces Rules concerning the war between minor pieces are easy to understand and learn. In fact, you should thoroughly familiarize yourself with them: RULE 1 - Bishops and Knights are both worth three points (as far as point count is concerned).

[diagram]
It's up to you to manipulate the position and make whatever piece you own more valuable. Occasionally a book will assign a value of 31/2 points for the Bishop and only 3 for the Knight. Don't buy into this! Either piece is capable of beating the other-it all depends on what you do with them and what you do with the other factors in the position that will influence them. (2) White to play A book can claim that a Bishop is superior to a Knight until the cows come home, but a glance at the diagram will convince anyone of the Black Knight's vast superiority. Though White is a pawn up and has the move, he might as well resign:

1.Kcl Kal

2.Kdl Kb2 and Black wins the c-pawn and quickly turns his

own c-pawn into a Queen. Once again: Bishops and Knights start out as equals. You are the one who will ultimately prove their true value. RULE 2 - Bishops are best in open positions where pawns don't block their diagonals. As a position opens up (i.e., the center pawns get traded), it becomes more and more likely that Bishops will be valued more highly than Knights. For example, the type of central situation

[diagram]
that comes about after 1.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.c3 dxc3 4.Bc4 cxb2

5.Bxb2 graphically illustrates the board-sweeping power that

Bishops can possess. Those wide open diagonals allow the Bishops to reach their full potential. RULE 3 -Bishops are very strong in endgames where both sides have passed pawns that are dash ing to their respective queening squares. In such situations, the long-range capabilities of a Bishop make it far superior to the slow, short-range Knight. (3) White to play This position is way over the top but it illustrates Rule 3 extremely well. White is four pawns up, his h-pawn is more advanced than Black's a-pawn and, to top it off, White also gets to make the first move. Nevertheless, White is dead lost! Black's Bishop on b2, though far from the vicinity of White's pawns, shows its long-range mastery by stopping all of the enemy passers in their tracks. In the meantime, the lone Black pawn on a3 cannot be stopped because the ponderous Knight is unable to get over to the queenside in time. RULE 4-The term "bad Bishop" means that your Bishop is situated on the same color as your center pawns (which block it and limit its activity). If you have such a Bishop you usually want to do one of three things:

l2 I THE AMATEUR'S MIND

>- Trade It for a piece of equal value . . ...Get the pawns off the color of your Bishop. >- Get the Bishop outside the pawn chain. It will still be bad by definition, but it will also be active. A bad Bishop can be a strong piece! (4) White's Bishop on c4 is "bad" but "active" since it resides outside the pawn chain. Even though it has the stigma of "bad" assigned to it, it is still a very strong piece. If it stood on e2 it would be very inactive and fully deserving of the name "bad." The Black Bishop on c6 is considered to be a "good" Bishop but it is not nearly as "active" as its White counterpart. This example shows us that the terms "good" and "bad" are useful for basic definition, but don't take them too literally! In general, if your Bishop is serving a useful function you can happily toss the "good" and "bad" terminology out the window. RULE 5 - A Bishop's weakness is that it is stuck on one color for the whole game; anything resting on the other color is safe from its attention. Two Bishops work together very well because they control both colored diagonals, thereby negating this "one color" weakness.

[diagram]
(5) White to play White is two pawns ahead in diagram 5 but he can't win because his Bishop is useless; it's not capable of chasing the Black King away from e5 or f6 and it can't help the White pawns advance. Give White another Bishop on el and Black another on d7 (creating a two Bishops versus two Bishops situation) and we will see a different result. Now both colors can be controlled and

1.Bh4+ Kg7 2.e5 sets the pawns in motion.

(6) White to play, but Black's Knight dominates the game. RULE 6- Knights love closed positions with locked pawns. Their ability to jump over other pieces makes them very valuable in such situations.

[diagram]
In diagram 6, Black's Knight is strongly posted on cS where it is safe from attack. It also eyes the enemy pawns on b3 and e4. White's Bishop is hampered by all the center pawns which block it and make it a passive piece. RULE 7 - Knights usuall of the board. One old y stand better in the center on the rim is dim." chess adage goes: "A Knight There are two reasons for this: The first is that a Knight on one side's rim must make several moves to reach an endangered area on the other wing. A Knight in the middle can jump to either side at will . The other reason for this distrust of the rim is that a Knight simply controls fewer squares there. (7) In diagram 7, the Knight on a2 only controls three squares (b4, c3, cl) and must make three moves to reach the kingside. The central Knight on d6 controls eight squares and can reach either wing in one hop. RULE B - Since Knights are not long-range pieces, they need to have secure, advanced homes to be effective. These homes are call ed support points. In diagram 6, the Black Knight rested on the c5 support point. Other possible support points (if the Knight could reach them) would be c3 and d4. Note that a square like f4 is not a support point since White could easily chase an intruding Knight away by

[diagram]
g2-g3. In general, a Knight would like to find itself as far up the board as possible.The following points could prove useful: > Knights are not effective on the first rank. Here they act in a purely defensive role. > A Knight stuck on the second rank is also defen sive, and is considered to be inferior to a Bishop. > A Knight on the third rank serves many defen sive functions and is ready to jump further up the board at a moment's notice. > A Knight securely placed on the fourth rank is considered to be fully equal to a Bishop. > A Knight on the fifth is a powerful attacking unit and is usually stronger than a Bishop. > A Knight reaches the zenith of its potential on the sixth rank. Here it eats most other pieces alive and the defender is often happy to sacrifice a Rook for the offending horse and the pawn that protected it. > A Knight on the last two ranks offers diminish ing returns since it does not control as many squares as it does on the sixth. (8) Knight on the 6'h is better than a Knight on the 7rh. In diagram 8, the Knight on c3 attacks eight squares deep in the enemy camp. The Knight on c2 only controls six squares. This

16 I T H E AMATE UR'S MIND

shows how a Knight loses some of its powers once it passes the sixth rank. RULE 9 - Knights are superior to Bishops in an endgame if allthe pawns are on one side of the board. Th.is is because the Bishop's long-range powers no longer have meaning while the Knight's ability to go to either color square means that there is no safe haven for the enemy King or pawns. This is illustrated in diagram 9. (9) White to play, Black wins. The White Bishop cannot come into contract with the Black King, Knight or pawns. In the meantime, the White pawns on e4 and h3 are vulnerable to the combined attack of the enemy King and Knight. RULE 10 - The first official World Chess Cham pion, Wilhehn Steinitz, pioneered work on the minor pieces. He stated that the way to beat Knights was to deprive them of any advanced support points. Then they would be inactive and, as a result, inferior to Bishops. The reverse, of course, is that if you possess Knights, you must strive as hard as you can to create support points for them. • • • • •

[diagram]
Now that we've examined the correct rules for a Bishop versus Knight battle, it's time to see how an amateur puts these bits of wisdom into actual practice. As will quickly become apparent, having access to this knowledge is one thing, actually using it in an over the board struggle is quite another! The first position that we will consider in-depth came about after the moves l.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.g3 d5 4.Bg2 dxc4 5.Qa4+ Bd7 6.Qxc4 Bc6 7.Nf3 Bd5 8.Qd3 Be4 9.Qdl c5 10.Nc3 Bc6

11.0·0 Nbd7 12.Qc2 cxd4 13.Nxd4 Bxg2 14.Kxg2 Bc5 15.Rdl

O-O 16.e4 Qe7 17.Qe2 Bxd4 18.Rxd4 e5 19.Rdl Nb6. This led to the position in diagram 10. (10) Silman-Gross, American Open 1992. White to play. What's going on in this seemingly boring position? The pawn structure is more or less symmetrical, nobody can lay claim to any space advantage, all the pieces are well-defended and neither King is in any trouble. Aside from the fact that White's pieces are more aggressively posted since they are trying to take control of d5 (while Black's Knights are passively trying to defend that square), the one major imbalance is a minor piece difference: White has a Bishop and Knight while Black is stuck with two Knights. Due to the stated imbalances, White will use Steinitz's rule (to make Knights ineffective by taking away their advanced support points). He will do this by restricting the b6-Knight by b2-b3 (if

l& I THE AMATEUR'S MIND

necessary) followed by a2-a4-a5 (kicking it from its perch on b6). He will also place the B ishop on the flexible e3-square and move his Queen to b5 where it eyes the pawns on b7 and e5. All these things may seem small in themselves, but together they add up to unpleasant pressure on the Black position.

20.Be3 Rfd8

On 20 . . . Qb4 White would have played the bothersome 21 .Bg5.

21.Qb51

Making each of his pieces better than their Black counter parts. White's Queen is obviously superior to Black's lady on e7, his c3-Knight (ready to leap into d5 at any moment) is more aggressively posted than either Black jumper, and his Bishop defends d4 and is constantly threatening to chop on b6. 21 ...Qe6

22.b3

Simply keeping the Knight out of c4.

22. ..

h6 Black should have tried the more aggressive 22 ... h5!, intend ing to advance to h4 with some kingside threats.

23.a4 Rxdl

24.Rxdl llc8

25.Rd3 Qc6?

IM jack Peters (chess columnist for the Los Angeles Times) recommended 25 .. . Rc7 26.a5 Nc8. This holds on to his material for the time being, but Black's position still remains quite un pleasant.

26.Qxe5 Re8

27.Qd6 Nxe4

Now Black loses by force.

28.Qxc6 hxc6

29.a51 N:xc3

[diagram]
Black would also lose a pawn after 29 . . . Nd5 30.NxdS. Even worse is 29 . . . Nc8 30.Nxe4 Rxe4 3 1 .Rd8+ picking up a piece.

30.ax:b6 Nd5

31.bxa7, 1-0.

Black's case is hopeless. For example, 31 . . .Ra8 32.RxdS! cxd5

33.b4 followed by b5-b6-b7.

How would an amateur handle White's position from diagram 10? Would a student of mine, trained to recognize the imbalances that exist in any position, see and make use of them, or would he miss everything and just look at random moves? This question interested me, so I asked some of my students to take the White pieces and do their best to "show their stuff." They were told to think out loud, which enabled me to write down their thoughts and see just what, if anything, was wrong with their methods of thinking. Of course, I didn't expect my students to play as I did in the Silman-Gross game. White's play was rather subtle and is not something that a class player would ordinarily come up with. However, I did hope that they would notice the Bishop versus Knight imbalance and try to make something of it. Instead, I found that my students (with one exception), after noting that this imbalance was present, refused to try to turn it into some thing significant. Why? Does the average tournament player think that a simple Bishop versus Knight difference is very little to work with? Do they think that such things are unimportant (even though I constantly tell them that Bishop versus Knight is ex tremely important)? Let's see if the following games can shed some light on these questions.

20 I THE AMATEUR'S MIND

(11) 1000-Silman. White to play. 1000: "White's King is a bit open so I prefer Black's position. Black's e-pawn is potentially weak, though. The main imbalance is Bishop versus Knight and, at the moment, I have control of a file. I would now like to develop my pieces . I'd like to get my Knight to d5, so Bg5 gives me more control of that post. However, his b6-Knight also controls d5 and I don't know if I really want to give up my dark squared Bishop: Maybe a3 followed by b4 and Bb2 is good since that adds new pressure against e5." In our next two games, both White players will not question giving up their Bishop for the enemy Knight. 1 000 deserves praise for thinking that his Bishop should be retained. Unfortu nately, the plan he does come up with is bad because it fails to use the Steinitz rule (take squares away from Knights). Instead, he gives the inactive b6-Knight a wonderful post on c4! Also note his fear concerning the position of the White King. In fact, this fear was so pronounced that he immediately pre ferred his opponent's position! Amateurs tend to panic in the face of any hint of a kingside threat, and his comments show that he suffers from the same "King-safety" disease. King safety is very important! But only worry if the enemy has some pieces aimed in your King's direction. In the present position, the only pieces Black has on the kingside are his f6- Knight and the e7-Queen; this can hardly be construed as a horde of attackers!

[diagram]
A little less worry about his King and a lot more interest in the Bishop versus Knight battle (in other words: pay attention to those imbalances!) would have served him much better. l.a3 Though this was move 20 in the Silman-Gross game, 1000 was given this position cold turkey; for him, it was move one. 1 ... Rfd8 1000: 'Tm not terribly worried about the trade so I'll keep going with my plan."

2.b4 R:xdl

1000: "I don't want to move my Knight backwards so my next move is forced."

3.Qxdl Rc8

1000: "With Qf3 I advance and defend both e4 and c3." He hasn't noticed that Black is jumping on the c4-square. A player should always avoid creating holes in his own position. If he put energy into the Bishop versus Knight battle (which he clearly didn't do) he would have, in theory, been aware of the potential of the enemy Knights. By thinking of other (less impor tant) things, he failed to get the most out of his Bishop and he failed to restrain the enemy horses.

4.Qf3 Qc7

1000: "I will guard the Knight and free my Rook." Something subtle and deadly has occurred. Did you notice it? Poor 1000 has ceased to think of his own ideas and is instead reacting to his opponent's. At first he noted the basic imbalances, and he even came up with a plan (not a good one, but a plan nonetheless). But he failed to ask what Black should try to do, and by failing to pose that important question, he failed to see the weaknesses in his own ideas. thus his plan of placing the Bishop on b2 via a2-a3 and b2-b4 led to a hole on c4. Simultaneously, after he followed his plan for a move or two he suddenly began (not consciously) to bow to the wishes of his opponent. Black makes a threat, White reacts. Black makes

22 I THE AMATEUR'S MIND

another threat, and once again White reacts. Soon, before he knows it, Black's ideas come to fruition while White's are no where to be seen.

5.Bd2 Nc4

1000: "I can't let you take on d2." He tried 6.Qd3 but I pointed out that it loses a piece after 6 . . . Nxd2.

6.Bel Rd8

1000: "I can play 7.NbS to put pressure on his Queen and advance the Knight. It's dumb, though. He's much farther forwa1cl than me and I don't like his c4-Knight. I can go to cl and get ready for a fork or a skewer. Unfortunately, that would bang my a3-pawn. I'll play h4 and hope to chase his Knight on f6 away with a later g4-g5. Then the d5-square might become available." Unable to find a solution to his problems on the queenside, he lashes out on the other side of the board. Emotional decisions like this must be avoided, since they usually have very little to do with what's really happening in the position.

7.h4 Qc<l

1000: "What is he up to? My e4-pawn is well defended. He's protecting f6 again, which means that he might be intending . . .g7-g6. I can't move my Rook due to my a3-pawn so I'll play for more time." Note how White is coming up with all kinds of esoteric rubbish to explain his opponent's moves. He should be able to figure out their true significance by working out their relationship to the positive imbalances in Black's position. Here Black is simply defending the bS and dS squares and putting more pressure on the e4-pawn. I'm also giving my Queen the option of going to e6 in some circumstances. Amateurs often think that a good move must involve a direct threat However, this is way off the mark. A move that tightens some key points while placing pressure on an enemy pawn deserves a lot more respect than White gave it.

[diagram]
8.b5

A one move attack that simply chases the Queen to a good post on e6. 8 ...Qe6 1000:" I'll get my a-pawn to safety by advancing it to a4."

9.a4 Rd4

1000: "Guarding his c4-Knight. I'll play Ne2 and attack his Rook."

10.Ne2??, and I stopped the game since White hung his e-pawn.

I hope the reader won't think me overly harsh for my comments in this game. I am not criticizing the man, just the player and his erroneous thinking processes. He does some things extremely well, but if he wants to advance in the rating system he will have to accept my literary lashings and iron out these problems. Our next example features a player several hundred points higher rated than the previous one. Strangely enough, his break down of the imbalances turns out to be worse than his lower rated predecessor, but his moves turn out to be better! How can this be? The main reason centers around the nature of White's moves: though he hasn't bothered to completely understand the position (by breaking down the imbalances), he still plays dy namic moves that always try to achieve some positive goal. In the previous example, White was aware of the Bishop versus Knight imbalance, but he never really made use of it. Simply put: dynamic moves based on ignorance tend to be better than passive moves based on fear.

[diagram]
(12) 1600-Silman. White to play. 1600: " I like 1 . Nd5. If he takes, I get a strong passed pawn. I have to get my Bishop into play. So f2-f4 is a possibility and if he takes I go Bxf4. However, my King would then be open. I could also play QbS to support the d5-square and then NdS. I could also pin by BgS to control dS more." I told him that he was not breaking the position down into imbalances. Instead he is just looking at a bunch of moves.

1.Bg5

1600: "This also connects my Rooks and develops my Bishop." He never recognized his Bishop for Knight advantage so it's not possible for him to try and make use of it. However, he noticed the d5-square and he's trying to do everything in his power to grab it! 1 ... Rfd8

2.Rxd.8+ Rxd.8

1600: "Now Rdl to trade Rooks allows me to continue my fight for the d5-square." Though he hasn't followed the best plan, he's still sticking to a clear idea (domination of d5 or the creation of a passed pawn) with energy and admirable determination. White deserves a lot of credit for the way he's playing.

3.Rdl h6

4.Rxd8+ Qxd8

[diagram]
1600: "I will exchange so I can have d5 and the center."

5.Bxf6Qxf6

1600: "Now I'll try to get a passed pawn."

6.Nd5 Qd6

1600: "Now I will support my Knight and eye e8."

7.Qb51Kf8

8.Nxb6

1600: "This gives him doubled pawns." At the moment his Knight is superior to Black's, so why should he swap it without getting the passed pawn that he so desperately wanted? One must avoid dumping a plan for baubles lying on the side of the road. 8 ... axb6 1600: "Now I will trade Queens since he has a doubled pawn and my King is closer to the center. " I don't know why he thought that his King was closer to the center. It's clear that the opposite is true.

9.Qd5??

White has played a reasonable game and the correct result would have been a draw. Instead he rushes into a lost King and pawn endgame. He didn't realize that a passed pawn can be a target if it doesn't have support. 9 . .. Qxd5

10.exd5 Ke7

11.Kf3 f5

12.g4 g6, and White lost the d5-pawn and the game.

[diagram]

1.Bg5

1200: "I really like this move." Why did he like it? True, it does pin the Knight, but trading the Bishop instantly gets rid of your Bishop versus Knight advantage . Don't like a move just because it appears to be aggressive. 1 ... h6 1200: "Putting the question to my Bishop. If I take his Knight and play Rael , I could grab both files. I think that this is a good idea. After Bxf6 he won't want to take with the pawn due to a check on g4."

[diagram]
playHede should have decided o n capturing the Knight before he Bg5. Don't stick your Bishops on b5 or g5 and act shocked if the opponent "tickles" it with . . .a6 or ... h6. Only play a Bishop to those squares if the exchange is good for you or if the opponent can't break the pin. In the present case, Black can easily break the pin. Also, the exchange makes Black happy because he gets rid of White's Bishop versus Knight advantage.

2.Bxf6 Qxf6

1200: " Now I'll advance to dS and attack his Queen." Notice the word "attack." He's not too concerned with the state of the position after Black captures on d5. Instead, all he cares about is the obvious threat to Black's Queen, which apparently gives him an odd sense of power.

3.Nd5 Nxd5

1200: " Now I'll take with the Rook and double up on the open d-file." Notice how he is jumping back and forth between a few ideas. One moment he's trying to control both the c- and d-files. Then he's hoping to control d5. Finally he is going to double on the d-file and try to dominate that. His thoughts are scattered and things only work out because he started with a solid position; trading a bunch of pieces can't hurt his game.

4.Rxd5 Qe6

1200: "Black is piling up on my Rook. Now I can place all three of my pieces on that d-file." Black intentionally plays a planless, passive game (a suicidal act in a serious game, of course) so he can see how White will react.

5.Radl f6

1200: " Now he's lined up his Queen and King on the a2-g8 diagonal, which is alarming. If 6.Qc4 I don't have any threats. How can I get to that King? I can play Rd6 and chase the Queen; this will give me a check on c4 if the Queen moves off the diagonal. However, he has . . .Qf7 when the

28 /· THE AMATEUR'S MIND

diagonal is still defended. My original plan was to place all my pieces on the file. He could challenge me with . . .Rd8 while [ do this. I'm looking at Qh5 followed by Rd6; he can't push the g-pawn so my Queen would be safe there. If

6. QhS Qf7 7 . Qxf7+ Rxf7 I've only created an even ex

change, but it does weaken his back rank." White suffers from three illusions. The first is his desire to get at the Black King. Why do amateurs always try for mate? Why not continue to restrict Black's pieces and simply leave the opponent helpless? Yes, the win would take time, but a chessplayer is nothing without patience. The second illusion is White's worry that Black will place a Rook on d8 and exchange some more pieces. It doesn't take a strong player to see that any Rook move to d8 would simply hang a Rook! The final illusion is based on the a2-pawn. White seems unaware that any move of the d5-Rook would hang a pawn to .. . Qxa2 . It seems clear to me that White's confusion is due to the lack of threats in the position. If he can't make a concrete threat, he feels that something must be going wrong. He won't be able to make any real chess advances if he doesn't mend this flaw in his thinking processes.

6.Qh5 Rac8

1200: "Now he's threatening to bring his Rook down to the seventh rank and attack my pawn. So, 7.Rd6 Q t7 8. Qxt7+ Rxf7. If I could only get his Rook off of f8 and my Rook on to d7." We had just discussed double attacks so I was secretly creating a situation where the possibility for such an attack would exist.

7.Rd6 Qxa2

1200: "I saw that but I didn't think he would take it. I guess I thought he had to defend with . . . Qf7. Now I have to worry about my b2-pawn. Ifl move my Rook to d7 then .. . Qxb2 is mec by Qg6 and I may mate him."

[diagram]
8.Rd7

1200: "This gives me a double attack on g7 and b7."

8...

b6 1 200: "Protecting his pawns. I'll follow through with my plan."

9.Qg6?

A quick move usually means a missed opportunity. He missed the winning 9.Qg4! with a double attack on g7 and c8. If 9 . . . Rf7 10.Rxf7 picks up the c8-Rook. 9 . . .g5 would also lose to

10.Qf5.

9 ... Rf7 1200: I'm in a bad endgame so Rxf7 is no help since his other Rook gets into play after 10.Rxf7 Qxf7 1 1 .Qxf?+ Kxf7 1 2.Rd7+ Kg6

13.Rxa7 Rc2.

10.Rd8+ Rxd8

ll.Rxd8+ Rf8 1 200: "If 12.Rxf8+ Kxf8 then Black stands better. I've got a lost endgame but what can I do about it?"

12. RxtlH??

What a strange move! He just said this was bad and then he does it anyway. I suspect this was due to too much respect for his opponent (or it could have been that he simply gave up due to depression). Natural, obvious, and best is 12.Rd7 Rf7 13.Rd8+ Rf8

14.Rd7 with a draw.

If his opponent were lower rated then he would almost certainly look for a better move. If you suffer from this "fear of the opponent" syndrome, you should refrain from looking at your opponent's rating until after the game. 12 . .. KxfS, and I stopped the game.

[diagram]
Tips * The imbalance of Bishop versus Knight is of vital importance. If you have the Bishop you must strive to take away all the advanced posts from the enemy Knight. If you have the Knight you must fight to create a good home for the horse and to create situations where the Bishop is not particularly useful. * Bishop versus Knight does not necessarily favor one piece or the other; you must plant the seeds which allow your piece to prosper. The same holds true for all the other imbalances. If you don't recognize and use it, you will find that this so-called advantage won't do you any good. * You must take your opponent's possibilities into account! * Don't ever play a quick, thoughtless move. That will usually turn out to be the move that ruins your game.

[diagram]
As interesting as I found the position that arose in Silman-Gross, I realize that some may find it dull. It is a quiet position and it does require a subtle understanding to make anything of White 's chances. Perhaps this type of chess does not allow us to fairly assess the Bishop versus Knight acumen of the average class player. Perhaps a more dynamic situation would show other aspects of the amateur's mind that we have not yet seen. (14) •·· •

[diagram]
.1 a: ,

A· 1:1

[diagram]

[diagram]
must give u p the h4-pawn (not wasting time on its defense) and tum his queenside majority into a powerful passed pawn.

1.c51

Making use of the pin on the b-file. 1 ... Rxh4+

2.Kgl Rb4

3.Rxb41

Sharon Burtman pointed out the interesting possibility of

3.Rb3!? Rxb3 4.Rxb3 Nd7 5 .c6 Nc5 6.Rxb6! Rxb6 7.c7 and Black

cannot stop the pawn from queening. I found this most enlight ening. Her rating at the time was 2 175 (she eventually made master and became the U.S. Women's Champion), but she saw the "importance of time over material (i.e. giving up the h-pawn so her majority could make itself felt) and even found a pretty alternative to Fischer's method of play. Does this mean that most experts would find all these moves? No, I think that the majority would not come close. Sharon, though, had been well-versed in the imbalances (we had many sessions where I would yell, moan, and foam at the mouth. She quickly realized that the only way to shut me up was to learn these things!) and understood that her Bishop and majority had to take precedence over every other consideration. 3 ... axb4

4.Rc4 bxc5

5.Rxc5

The point of Fischer's play. The passed a-pawn is impossible to stop since the Bishop covers its Queening square. 5 . . . Kg7

6.a5 Res

7.Rcll

Rooks belong behind passed pawns so White hastens to place his Rook on al. Note that Black wanted to do the same thing-he threatened to play . . .Rel + followed by . . .Ral . 7 ... Re5

8.Ral Re7

9.Kf2 Ne8

10.a6 Ra7

11.Ke3 Nc7

12.Bb7

[diagram]
Now the Black Rook is permanently locked out of the game.

12. ..

Ne6

13.Ra5 Kf6

14.Kd3 Ke7

15.Kc4 Kd6

16.Rd5+ Kc7

17.Kb5!, 1-0.

This example showed us how positional considerations (ma jority and Bishop versus Knight) often need to be supported by tactics. When I gave this position to a 1700 student of mine, I hoped for nothing more from him than the realization that quiet play might allow my Knight to cS, when White's majority would be stopped and turned into a possible target (the cS-Knight would attack a4). (15) 1700-Silman. White to play.

34 / THE AMATEUR'S MIND

1700: "My h4-pawn is hanging with check. The imbalances are three versus two majorities for both sides. The Bishop is better than the Knight. Black has a weakness on b6 while White has a hanging pawn on h4. What to do? What is my idea? King on g3, pawn on b3, and then the c4-c5 advance. What is the ideal square for the Black Knight so I can stop it from getting there? Where would it like to be? The hole on cS seems best, blocking my c-pawn and attacking a4. I have to prevent this. My Bishop stops . . .Rdl+, my c3-Rook must stay put and defend c4. All this must wait, though, since my h4-pawn needs to be attended to!"

1.g3?

He noced that the c4-c5 advance was important for him but he wanted to do it only after the preparatory moves g3 and b3. Why so, slow to pull the trigger? He also pointed out that Black wanted to place his Knight on c5, and that he wanted to stop this from happening. Unfortunately, though he read the position well, he couldn't detach himself from the fact that his h4-pawn was hanging with check. Yes, m a perfect world he would have liked to play b3, defending both c4 and a4. In a perfect world he would like to guard h4. But Black has ideas too, and sometimes it's a race between you and your opponent actualizing your respective concepts. When such a race for positional mastery appears, you must play quickly to achieve your goals, even if you have to make positional or even material sacrifices to do so! 1 . . . Nd7 1700: "I will place my Bishop on d5 where it attacks f7 and defends c4. This frees my Rook." Black could have played . . . Ne4 but I wanted to see if he would try to punish me with 2.c5 bxc5 3.Rxb8+ Nxb8 4.Rxc5, though 4 . . . Rb4 allows Black to put up a fight. As it turned out, White never even considered it.

2.Bd5

Played instantly. He was so concerned with making his Bishop good that he ignored the movements of the Black Knight.

[diagram]
Don't forget: you must not only follow your own plan, you must also take the opponent's ideas into serious consideration. 2 ... Nc5 1700: "He is attacking my a4-pawn. I will start a counterat tack." Why did White feel that this was the moment to start a counterattack? Why not earlier, when he could have made use of his advantages? The answer, I think, resides in wishful thinking. Earlier, White felt he could guard his h-pawn and still push through with his other plans (without seriously looking at what Black was going to do). Now he sees that his plans have ground to a halt, and with the dawning of reality comes a panic-sparked need for counterplay.

3.Rf3 Nxa4

[diagram]

4.Bxf7+

1700:" I almost fell for 4.Rxf7?? RxdS!."

4...Kg7

1700: "I will play Rf2 and guard b2 and my second rank.' White is still playing a game of reaction and defense. Now this poor attitude turns fatal.

5.Rf2 Rf8, and here I stopped the game.

[diagram]
This game showed u s that you must make use of your positive imbalances or they will turn into negatives. It also demonstrated what happens when you play a game of reaction: you end up playing defensive moves that do nothing but guard against the opponent's threats (but fail to stop his overall strat egy). Such tactics inevitably lead to a deterioration in your position that results in a slow and painful death or an eventual game-stopping blunder. In our next example of an amateur's approach to a Bishop versus Knight situation, I showed the moves from a game between "C" players to ::i student of mine who had a rating of about 1 100. He was required to comment on these moves and tell me what was going on. Jt would be beneficial to the student to play through these moves without looking at the notes. Make your own comments in a notebook When you have completed this exercise, go over my notes and compare them to your own. Kaletski-Samalii, Los Angeles 1993.

1.d4 Nf6

2.Nf3 e6

3.Bg5 c5

4.c3

1 lOJ: "This keeps a center pawn in the middle and lets the Queen out." The other way to insure that White will retain a pawn on d4 is

4.e3, a move that frees the Bishop and, if Black captures on d4,

allows White to recapture with exd4 and open the e-file. 4 • . . Nc6

5.e4

1 1GO: "Grabbing the center, but the pawn is not defended. It lets out the fl-Bishop. It looks all right. 5.e3 also lets the Bishop out but it defends the center better, though it doesn't grab as much territory. He could also have brought his Knight out with Nbd2."

[diagram]
White grabs some space in the center but lets Black grab the Bishop pair. Which are better in this position, the Knights or Bishops? At the moment that question has no clear answer, it is up to both players to shape the pawn structure to suit their individual minor pieces. 5 . . . d5 1100: " Looks like a French Defense. This should be fine for Black. " A sharp but risky move. The simple 5 . . .h6 forces White to give up his Bishop with 6.Bxf6 since 6.Bh4? g5 picks up the e4- pawn. After 5 . . . h6 6.Bxf6 Qxf6 Black would attempt to show that his Bishops are superior to the White Knights. It is important to be on the lookout for ways to create imbalances right in the opening.

6.e5

[diagram]
8.Nbd2. Instead of allowing this type of irrationality to consume

him, a player must calm himself down after unexpected moves. Don't accept that you have made an error without a fight! An objective look at the position may show that you have a good reply. 6 ... h6 The only good move.

7.Bxf6?

And White makes an error. He should have played 7.Bh4 g5

8.Nxg5! with complications that are by no means bad for the first

player. Notice how White played what he thought was a winning move (6.e5) but got flustered as soon as Black fought back

[diagram]
(6 . . . h6). Instead of looking for a way to keep the pressure on his opponent (7.Bh4 g5 8.Nxg5!), he meekly accepted his fate and made the lame capture in the game. 7 . . . gxf6

8.Bb5

1 100: "White has knocked a hole in the kingside. Both are fighting for the center. Black can start taking in the middle and, at the moment, Black's Bishops are locked in. I like White's position since he has Knights and more space. If 8 . . . c4 the center gets locked and Black does not want this to happen since he owns Bishops. 8 . . . a6 is good since the trade is no big deal. I like 8 . . .Bd7 best." If both sides are fighting for the center (as 1 100 wisely said) then why consider passive moves like . . .Bd7 or . . .a6? Black should take the fight to his opponent with 8 . . .Qb6! with an immediate attack on b5 and pressure against b2 and d4. After 8 . . . Qb6 9 .Bxc6+ bxc6 Black has gained another center pawn (which he can use to hit the center with . . . cxd4 followed by . . . c6-c5). Also, after 9.Bxc6+ bxc6, Black's light-squared Bishop can come strongly into play via . . .Ba6. It's also interesting that 1100 likes the White position. This must surely come from the spatial plus offered by the pawn on eS and, more importantly, from Black's cracked kingside. All this is illusion, though-Black is the one with the advantage! White's e pawn and d-pawn are under pressure. As for the "cracked" kingside, Black enjoys an open g-file for his Rook and the potential lord of the dark-squares sitting on f8 (it cost White his dark-squared Bishop to rupture Black's kingside pawns. The price was too high). Nevertheless, I understand l lOO's trepidation. Most amateurs have an unholy dread of kingside attacks. This means that any opening up of the kingside structure tends to send them into a panic. 8 ...Bd7 This creates a little trap: 9.O-O Nxe5! nets a pawn. This is a nice trap to know, and it occurs in many different situations. One

[diagram]
might think that Black's move is good since it breaks the pin, develops a piece and sets a trap. But you must expect your opponent to see your threat: Don't fall in love with traps! The main problem with 8 . . . Bd7 is that it's basically a bit passive. It fails to put any pressure on White. This allows the first player to create a plan of his own (based on the imbalances): he will try to dominate the Black Bishops with his Knights!

9.Bxc6 Bxc6

1 100: "I think White did Black a favor and I like Black's position more and more. Black can take on d4 and play his Bishop to b4, or . . . Rg8 puts pressure on the g-file." The Bishop doesn't do anything on c6. I would still prefer 9 . . .bxc6 with an open b-file and one more pawn that can attack the White center and blow things open for the two Bishops. To address l l OO's previous comments, . . .Rg8 puts a Rook on the file but such attacks need the support of several more pieces if they expect to draw success. Also lacking in sting is a later . . . Bb4. What will the Bishop do on that square? Black's target should have been the White center (which restricts the Black Bishops), but he has not gone about this duty with sufficient energy.

10.O-O Bg7

1 1 00: " Putting more pressure on e5, but I don't see the value of it since e5 is easily defended." Black has been floating for the last several moves and he continues to play without an active plan. Small wonder that the White Knights soon take over the game.

11.Rel

[diagram]
12.Nbd2 f5

Really horrible. Aside from hanging a pawn, this completely closes the center and makes the Knights much stronger than

[diagram]
either Black Bishop. Black lost the thread of the game when he didn't notice that the battle was one of Bishops versus Knights. As soon as that came about he should have tried to blast open the center and activate those Bishops.

13.dxc5 Rg8

14.Nd4 Qg5

15.N2f3 Qg6

1 100: "I like Black's position. He has a lot of power on the g-file." 1 100 likes the Black position because he has an "attack" on the g-file. This is very attractive to the amateur. However, a realistic look at this position would show that White can easily d�fend the g2-point, when he is left with an extra pawn and two strong Knights versus two poor Bishops. These factors add up to a winning position for White. For example, White can now simply defend with 16.g3 or he can switch over to a counterattack with 16.Nxc6 bxc6 17.Qa4 when Black's only hope is the mate on g2-something White will never allow! Ti p s * If the integrity of your position is based on a one mover like . . . Qxg2 mate, then you are dead meat since such an obvious threat is usually easy to parry. Jnstead, you should nurture long-range plusses like material, superior minor pieces, etc. * When you find yourself crossing your fingers and hoping he won't see it, you know that you are in desperate trouble! * Once a minor piece imbalance is established, you must play with great energy to make that imbalance favor you.

[diagram]
(17) a .i_ I

[diagram]

2.Na b6

Defending the very important c5-pawn. If this pawn were lost then the White Knight could return to d4.

3.Ne5

Trying to find another home.

3. . .Qe6

4.Qf3 Ba6

Defending the a8-Rook and attacking White's Rook at the same time.

5.Rfel f6

The poor Knight is deprived of yet another square!

6.Ng4

[diagram]
The actlve 6.Nc6 fails to 6 .. .Rdc8! 7.Radl Bb7! (not 7 ... Qxc6??

8.Rd8+1) when White loses material.

6 . . .h5 Forcing it back to permanent inactivity on the second rank.

7.Nfl Qfi

A multipurpose move. The Queen gets off the line of the Rook, defends g6 and covers b7. This allows the light-squared Bishop to rest on b7 and take control of the wonderful a8-hl diagonal.

8.f5?

The pawn will be weak here. 8 . . . gS

9.Radl Bb7

White has nothing to compare with the strength of this Bishop. The minor piece battle has clearly swung in Black's favor.

10.Qg3 Rd5!

Staying central and eyeing fS. 10 . . . Qxa2 would give White counterplay after 11.Qc7.

11.Rxd5 Qxd5

12.Rdl Qxf5

A pawn has been won and the central Black Queen will be able to deal with any temporary activity that White may get.

13.Qc7 Bd5

14.b3 Re8

Black doesn't worry about his a-pawn since he knows that White will never have the time to take it. Instead, the second player places all his pieces in the middle and starts his own counterattack.

15.c4 Bfi

16.Bcl Re2

17.Rfl Qc2

[diagram]
Threatening 18 . . . Rxf2 19.Rxf2 Qxcl + with two pieces for a Rook. Since two pieces are almost always better than a Rook (and usually superior to a Rook and pawn), White is compelled to retreat his Queen and accept the fact that he is doomed.

18.Qg3 Qxa2, and Black went on to win the game.

I am always raving about how a Knight must be deprived of advanced support points, so I was curious to see if two of my junior students (aged six with a 900 rating and nine with a 1200 rating) would catch on to this idea in the game we just looked at. (18) .. .i. :1 ·l • 'A • • •• • • • 900 and 1200-Silman. Black to play. 900: "White is better." 1200: "No, Black is better because he has the two Bishops." 900: " r still like White but I don't exactly know why." 1200: "I'd go 1 . .. c5 to attack the Knight and chase it to a bad place." I suppose 900 liked White since a glance gives the impression that White has the more active position; his Knight just looks better than everything else. However, a few pawn moves will show that this is just an illusion. 1 ... c5

2.Nf3

[diagram]

3.Ne5

1 200 & 900: "The Queen is attacked and we both like 3 . . Qe4." 3 . . . Qe4 The first deviation from the Steinitz game! So far the kids have played very well.

4.Rael

[diagram]
5.Qf3

900: "I like . . . Bf5! with the idea of . . .Be4." 1200: "I like . . .Be6 to recapture with the Bishop and threaten the a-pawn." 900 got her way on this one. Note how they are uncon sciously trying to make their Bishops better than the · Knight, though J would have been even happier if they had verbalized it for me. 5 . . . :Bf5

6.Nc6

[diagram]
1200 & 900: "We both want to go . . .Be4. If he goes Nxd8 then . . .Bxf3 wins for us. It looks like White blundered!" A very interesting moment, and one that demonstrates how many types of blunders are created. The attack on d8 made them focus their attention to that square. Thus the other threat, that of Ne7+, was completely missed. How does a player avoid this pitfall? One way is to write your move down first and then ask yourself, "After we play 6 . . . Be4, can he take anything (yes, the Rook on d8 is hanging!) . . . does he have any checks?" At this point you would notice Ne7+ and, if such a move were really a threat, you would erase your move and look for some thing else. 6 .. . Be4

7.Ne7+

1200 & 900: "We didn't see this but it's still okay." like the fact that they didn't panic. Many older players would lose their composure when this oversight hit them in the face. 7 ... Kf8

8.Nxd5 Bxf3

9.Rxf3 Rxd5

The game was stopped. The kids did excellently! The previous example showed us how important it is to deprive enemy Knights of advanced support points. It also showed us how a fixation on one threat or square can lead to an unfortunate oversight. I should point out that any kind of fixation in chess is bad since it blinds you to other possibilities. No rule is correct all the time! For example, what if you have to make the following decision: You have two Bishops versus a Bishop and Knight. Should you take a square away from a Knight but close the position as you do so, or should you open the position and leave the Knight on its post?

[diagram]

[diagram]
Now White cannot prevent the center-rending . . .e6-e5.

2.h4 e5

3.dxe5 fxe5

4.h5 Rd3

[diagram]
The game is already decided. The opening of the center has led to the activation of both Black Bishops and the Rooks. It is true that the White Knight is still on e4, but the fact that it is stuck there and needs constant defense ties down all the White forces and gives Black a free hand everywhere else.

5.b5

Trying to draw the Black Queen off the a8-hl diagonal. 5 ...axb5

6.axb5 Qe61

Heading for the kingside. Now . . . Qg4 is a threat.

7.Nf2 Qd5

8.hxg6+ Kg8

9.Ne4 exf4

10.Bxf4 Qh5+

11.Kgl Qxg6

[diagram]

13.Qc2 Rf81

This was the only Black piece that was not helping out. Now the threat is . . .Rxf4.

14.Qcl Bxc31

Drawing the Knight away from its defensive location on e4. White resigned since 15.Rfl hangs the Knight on e4 and 15.Nxc3 Rxg3+ 16.Kfl Rgl+ 17.Kf2 Qg3 is mate. Would an amateur be tempted by . . . f7-f5 (from diagram 19 and 20)? I thought he might, especially if he recalled my insisting that

[diagram]

[diagram]
The question must be asked: will White allow such a mate on the light-squares? Can Black force it? Naturally, White will do everything in his power to prevent this one move knockout. 1700 must make the following adjustments in his thinking processes if he wants to improve his playing strength: >- Always expect the opponent to see your threat(s). >- Always expect him to make the best move! When you find yourself crossing your fingers and hoping that he won't see it, you are making a big mental mistake and are embracing very bad mental habits. >- Playing for a tactical shot (. . .Qhl mate or . . . Qg2 mate) is fine if you can force it. If not, take your time, keep your eyes on the tactics, get the rest of your army into the battle, and pay lots of attention to the positional features on the board! You're never going to go anywhere if you can't blend positional and tactical considerations together. 1 ...f5

2.Nd2

1700: "So I have forced the Knight back but now I must make an enemy Rook give up control of g2 or hl since the White Queen is no longer defending g2. Unfortunately, I can't find a way to get his Rooks to move. If I could make his Knight move to fl , it's still mate (via . . . Qhl). How can I accomplish this? How about 2 . . .Bxd4 3.cxd4 and now 3 . . .Rxd4 or 3 . . .c3. Both give play but I can't see a clear continuation. It's interesting, though. I need to find some plan if there is no mate. I'll sacrifice with . . .e5." Lusting after a quick, violent conclusion (even though his two Bishops give Black a long-range plus), Black finally throws himself over a cliff. Why the hurry? Why the need to give up material? What is this guy doing? 2 ... e5??

3.fxe5

1700: "My idea is now to play . . . Re7, . . . Bxe5 and . . . Rxe5. Then, if he takes my Rook on e5, it will be mate on g2."

[diagram]
Still living in the world of "He won't see it." I have tried hard to break 1700 of this habit but he clutches to it like life itself. By beating lots of lower rated players in this manner, he's convinced himself that he' s doing something profound. That's why I recom mend seeking players who are better than you. Yes, you might lose lots of games, but you will certainly get stronger and learn lots about chess that those weaker victims would never be able to show you. 3 . . .Re7

4.Rf2

1700: "This allows me to . continue with my idea after 4 . . . Bxe5 5.dxe5 Rxe5 and he can't take due to . . .Qhl mate. Wait a moment! Aren't I down a Bishop if he doesn't take? My Rook does get to d3 with pressure for the piece so it deserves consideration. Let's calculate: 4 . . . Bxe5 5.dxe5 Rxe5 and now he just moves his Rook and I lose-it doesn't work. I don't see how I can get his Rooks out of the way. I can also consider a different idea, namely 4 . . . h5 and 5 . . .Bh6. However, it's very slow since his Knight will come to f3 and block everything. I can't mate him! White is well protected here. I think that White had the better position all along; there is no question about it. I gave up a pawn to try to rip open the middle and fight it out but it was all in vain." Notice that when reality hit him he began to blame the position. His problem is that he wants instant gratification. Trying to make use of one's advantages in a slow, controlled manner is an alien concept to him. He only speaks of kingside attacks and mate. At this point I stopped the game in disgust. Tips * Always expect the best move from the opponent. That way you will insist your moves accomplish some positive goal, no matter what the response might be. * If you have two Bishops, take note of that fact and try to open up the position! This takes precedence

[diagram]
over chasing an enemy Knight from an advanced support point (you can do this at a later time). * Rules and guidelines are useful, but every rule was made to be broken. If you own the Bishop pair and they are already active (or the position is already open), then you must concentrate on limiting the range of the enemy Knight. Our next diagram shows a rather exaggerated case. (21) Hort-Ciocaltea, Budapest 1973. White to play. Hort saw that Black's Knight had no future on the queenside, so all he had to do was deprive it of any kingside squares and it would be a useless slab of meat. Once he killed the Knight, he could take his time and torture his opponent, secure in the knowledge that Black would be quite helpless.

1.g51

Turning f6 into poison. 1 . . . Bc8

2.g41

[diagram]
The Knight can't go to f6, and now Black's pieces are also deprived of h5 and f5. Grabbing my trusty old 1700 student, I set up the initial position from Hort-Ciocaltea (diagram 21) and had him give it a try (he took the White pieces). 1700: "First I must look for an imbalance for both sides. White has two Bishops but his pawns are doubled. How ever, g5 limits the Knight and h4 to follow up gets the pawns going. Black has a weak pawn on a6-it's not really passed since the White Bishop stops it. Black has backward pawns on d6 and h7. White's Bishops are active. White also has more space. As White, I must decide which side of the board to attack. I also want to limit his Knight and control f6. However, if he comes to f6 it's just a waste of time since e4 is not available. Black's plan is to get his Knight to c5, so I must prevent that." He saw that Black wanted to get his Knight to c5 but he evidently overlooked that the way to that square was from f6-d7- c5. He also mentioned that White has two Bishops and that the scope of the Black Knight should be limited. However, once he said this he promptly forgot to do anything about it! Because 1700 gave so many confusing messages in his initial statement, I feel it would be to the readers' benefit to examine some of them iri greater depth: > He said that g5 followed by h4 gets his pawns going. What does this mean? Does gS followed by h4-h5 threaten anything at all? I'm not saying that the advance of the h-pawn is a bad idea, but I don't think he realized what this advance would really do. > He said that Black has backward pawns on d6 and h7. Those are not backward pawns! A pawn is only backward if it stands on an open file (which these don't) and if it doesn't have a brother pawn behind it or directly to the side of it. The d6-pawn would be backward if White's dS-pawn were gone. > He said that Black's a6-pawn wasn't really passed. Wrong again. The a6-pawn is indeed passed. It

[diagram]
might not be going anywhere, but that doesn't mean that it's not a passed pawn.

1.Ba5

Missing his opportunity to restrict the enemy Knight. The concept of restriction seems a hard one for amateurs. 1 .. . Nf6 1700: "He's going to d7 and cS so I will attack d6 and slow him down."

2.Bb4

A purely reactionary move that just forces the Black King towards the center. Why play Bb4? Is the opponent going to hang the d6-pawn? I suspect not (especially when you're playing an International Master who is listening to your every thought!). Then why attack it in the first place? Remember: only attack something if the move improves your position even after he defends the attacked object. 2 . . .Ke7 1700: "I must activate my King." In an endgame it is always a good idea to bring one's King towards the center. However, he doesn't seem to have any clear plan in mind. One reason for this is that he missed his chance to come up with an easy plan (dominate the Knight) and now the increased difficulty has left him completely confused. If you are lazy or careless early, the chances are that matters will become much worse later on.

3.Kfl Nd7

1700: "Black wants to go to b6 and attack c4. From there he can also jump into a4. If I play Bd3 I give up control of a4. I will bring my King closer." Black had no intention of playing . . . Nb6. The amateur often thinks that a move with a threat is something to covet, when in reality a simple threat is usually easy to parry. The real quest is to find a square where the piece is happy, active, and secure. Avoid squares where it makes a one move threat and then gets chased away.

[diagram]
4.Ke3 Nc5

1700: "This is a bad move. Now he has lots of weak points when I chop it off."

5.BxcS dxc5

White has gained a passed pawn and Black's pawns on a6, cS and eS are all isolated. However, these factors don't carry any weight at all. Why? First, to accomplish these things White had to give . up his Bishop pair. Now he is left with a bad Bishop (his center pawns are on the same color as his Bishop) versus Black's good one. Though the pawns on a6, cS and eS are all isolated, none of them are in any danger-Black's King will block White's passed pawn (via . . .Kd6) and defend both c5 and eS. The White King, however, will not be able to get close to the pawn on a6. We should also not forget that the pawns on e5 and a6 are also passed; that's two passed pawns for Black and only one for White.

6.g5

1700: "This takes away f6 from his King and fixes his pawns on white." The best thing he's said all game! It is always good to fix enemy pawns on the same color as your Bishop since then they are vulnerable to the Bishop's later attentions. 6 ... Bc8

7.g4

[diagram]

8.Kd3 Kd6

9.Kc3 e4??

1700: "What's the meaning of that? What's going on? Does he want to resign?"

[diagram]
Black could have drawn the game by doing nothing since the White King cannot penetrate into the queenside. However, I decided to add some life to the game and see how he would respond.

10.Bxe4 Ke5

11.Bc2 Kf4

1700: "He is coming into f4 and hoping to use the passed a pawn. I don't care if he wins my doubled pawn."

12.Kb3

1700: 'Tm going to trade Bishops with Ka3 and Ba4 and then promote my d-pawn. " Excellent! The way to make use of a passed pawn is to destroy the blockader (in this case my Bishop on d7 is the only thing blocking the White passer). White has suddenly begun to play good chess.

12...Ke3

13.Ka3 Kd4

14.Bb3

1700: "I don't want to lose both pawns, which would happen after 14.Ba4 Kxc4 15.Bxd7 Kxd5."

[diagram]
1700: "Now I should have something good. 15.d6 is very tempting and it doesn't look like I can move anything else anyway. If I exchange too early I might even lose since he will get lots of pawns. After 15 .d6 Ke5 16.Ba4 Kxd6 17.Bxd7 Kxd7 18.Ka4 I think I win!" Wow! He appears to be on a hot streak. To complete his variation, 18.Ka4 Kd6 19.Kxa5 Ke5 20.Kb6 Kd4 21.Kb5 is indeed a win for White. J5.d6 Kc3 1700: "What is this? He's gone crazy again!"

16.Ba4 Kxc4

1700: "What did he do that for?"

[diagram]
17 .B:xd7 Kd5 1700: "I'm up a Bishop for a pawn! This must be winning for me."

18.Kb3?

1700: ''The idea is to stop his queenside pawns. Then I can sacrifice my Bishop for a kingside pawn and promote a pawn to a Queen over there." This turns out to be a waste of time. Correct was 18.Be8 Kxd6 19 .Bf7.

18. .. Kxd6

19.'BeS Ke5

1700: "He's lost."

20.Kc4 Kf4

21.Kxc5 Kxg5

1700: "I thought he was going to g3. If 22.Bf7 Kh4 draws."

22.Kb5

1700: "It looks like a draw." Draw Agreed. Tip * Create a plan right away or you may float without a goal for the rest of the game.

[diagram]

[diagram]
hopelessly confused. However, when you have the luxury of knowing the previously stated rule then you might as well make use of it. Instead of this, another rule (almost a joke rule actually, but there is still a lot of truth in it) says, "All Rook endgames are drawn." Following this, we can accept that 1 . . .Nxe4 2.Rxe4 fS gives Black .good chances to hold the game. The swap of Knight for Bishop also makes a lot of sense; Black should see a pawn race coming and, knowing that Bishops are strong in such situations, he should hasten to hack the White Bishop off the board. Evidently, it is not enough to know the rules and guide lines-you must also make use of them!

2.Rxd4 exd4

So we now have a situation where the Black Knight will not be able to cope with the White passed pawn. On the other hand, the White Bishop will easily stop any passed pawn that Black can create.

3.Ed5

1850: "Why do this? He is losing the h-pawn!" 3 . • . Nf5 I don't know why, but Kaplan also made the wrong decision in this game (and he was a very strong player who most definitely knew better!). That contest was decided after 3 . . .h6 4.Kd2 hxgS

5.hxg5 f6 6.Kd3 NfS 7.b4 fxgS 8.bS Ne7 9.Bg2 Nc8 1 0.Kxd4 Kf6

1 1 .Kc5 KeS 1 2.c4, 1-0. Note how slow and ponderous the Knight was.

4.b4 Ne3

1850: "Uh oh. If I take that pawn I won't be able to stop the guy on the b-file."

5.Bb3

1850: "My Knight is dominated." s ...f5 G.b5 f4

[diagram]
7.Kd2 f3

8.Kel

1850: "He stopped my pawn but I can't stop his." We ended the game here. Ti p * Bishops really are better than Knights in pawn-race situations. It was demonstrated to Kaplan and then 1850 found out also. Don't let it happen to you!

AOUISITION OF

'"""-"

THE CENTER,

TERRITORY,

AND SPACE

Every chess player is attracted to beautiful combinations and razor-sharp kingside attacks. This attraction makes us want to emulate the great attacking masters and, as a result, we study games by Kasparov, Alekhine, and Tai. Though this ability to calculate is invaluable-and at least a basic understanding of the mechanics of attack is imperative-the positional elements of chess tend to be ignored by the legions of amateurs that love the game. Why? Do amateur players think that subjects such as territory and the center are boring? Or could it be that the literature on these subjects simply presents the informa tion in a dull manner? Whatever the reason for this relative ignorance might be, most amateurs don't have a clue about the proper use of a space advantage or a full pawn center. Instead they constantly look for 6 1

[diagram]
forcing continuatiol'l:s aimed at the enemy King and, once they give themselves the green light, they will start a completely unjustified attack or, even worse, just sit tight and do nothing at all. Personally, I like nothing more than tq create a large pawn center and squeeze my opponent to death in its space-gaining coils. After the game the poor victim often has a glazed look in his eyes; he knows he lost badly but he is not quite sure why. Ru l es of the Center O ft he three areas of a chess board (kingside, center and queenside), the center is by far the most important. The reason for this is that your forces can move to either side with minimum effort and maximum speed. Thus, it is usually an excellent idea to play in the middle if you have the option to do so. Unfortunately, most amateurs seem to have "wing vision," they are always looking to play on one wing or the other. The following rules concerning play in the center and on the wings may prove beneficial: RULE 1 - A fullpawn center gives its owner terri tory and control over key central squares. (23) White's full pawn center (diagram 23) is well protected by other pawns and pieces. This center gives him strong control over c5, d5, e5 and f5. This will, in turn, assure White of an advantage in territory.

[diagram]
RULE 2 - OWning a full pawn center is a responsi bility! Once you create it you must strive to make it indestructible. If you achieve this goal, then your center will cramp and restrict your opponent for the rest of the game. RULE 3 - Don't advance the center too early! Every pawn move leaves weak squares in its wake. (24) Advancing the e-pawn weakens both d5 and f5. Notice (diagram 24) how the Black Knight cannot advance to the fourth rank due to the White center's influence. Even after . . . Nc6 or . . .Ng6, the Knight would still be unable to find an advanced central post. However, if White were to advance his center with e4-e5, then the d5 and f5-squares are suddenly available to the tormented horse. RULE 4 - If your opponent has created a fullpawn center, you must strive to attack it. This creates a battle of philosophies: He is telling you it is strong, you are telling him that it is a target. One of the most common cases of allowing a "strong" center in order to attack it comes about in the Alekhine's Defense.

1.e4 Nf6

Daring the e-pawn to advance.

2.e5 Nd5

[diagram]
3.d4 d6

Black immediately begins to chip away in the middle.

4.c4 Nb6

5.f4

White grabs all the central space he can! 5 . . . dxe5

6.fxe5 Nc6

Developing and hitting d4.

7.Be3

The immediate 7.Nf3 would have allowed Black to intensify the pressure with 7 . . .Bg4. ' 7 . . . Bf5 Black wants to play . . . e7-e6 but he doesn't want to block in his light-squared Bishop.

[diagram]
9.Nf3 Be7

10.Be2 O-O

11.O-O f6

Striking at e5 and forcing White to trade off his most cramp ing pawn.

12.e:xf6 Bxf6

Training his sights on the d4-pawn. White claims this pawn is strong, Black claims that it's weak. 1 3.Qd2 Preparing to bring the Rook to dl and give d4 more support.

13. . .Qe7

Preparing to place more pressure against d4 via . . .Rad8.

14.Radl Rads with a certain status quo: White is doing

everything he can to defend his center, Black is doing everything he can to attack it. RULE 5 - If the center pawns get traded, then open f"tles exist that make it easy to get one's Rooks into play.

[diagram]
After 1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.exd5 exd5 it doesn't take a genius to see that the open e-file will be a nice place to stick a Rook (following the rule that Rooks belong on open files). RULE 6 - If the center becomes locked, then the play switches to the wings. After 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e5 4.Nc3 d6 5.e4 it's easy to see that the center is a dead zone. All the play will have to take place on the sides of the board. RULE 7 - With a closed center, you know which wing to play on by noting the direction that your pawns point. The pawns point to the area where you have more space and that is the side that you want to control.

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
by side with his most advanced pawn: the guy on d5. This means that c4-c5 (White should avoid f2-f4 because, after . . .exf4, Black would gain access to the e5-square, his g7-Bishop would become very active, and White's e-pawn would be backward) is our goal (gaining queenside space and preparing to rip open files on that side of the board).

RULE 8 - A

wide open center all ows you to attack with pieces. A closed center generally means that you must attack with pawns (this enables you to grab space and open files for your Rooks). R u l e s of S p a c e In general, having more territory is a very positive thing. You get more room for movement and your pieces experience superior coordination. However, as your pawns advance (your extra territory is mapped out by pawns in much the same way that a fence demonstrates the land you own) certain squares may become weak, and it is possible-like ancient Rome-to expand too far too quickly. For this reason, you must only annex extra space if you think you can control the territory behind your pawns. Also helpful are the following rules: RULE 1 - When you have more space, it is usually a good idea to avoid exchanges. (26) All cramped up with nowhere to go.

[diagram]
Black can quietly resign in diagram 2 6 because his minor pieces are so cramped that none of them have useful moves. However, if we were to remove all .the pieces and only leave the pawns and Kings, Black would be fine simply because the cramping effect of the White pawns no longer has anything to cramp! RULE 2 - If you have less space, an exchange or two will give the rest of your pieces more room to move about in. RULE 3 - A spatial plus is a permanent, long-term advantage. You don't have to be in any hurry to utilize it. Take your time and let the opponent stew in his own juices. • • • • • In our first game, White comes out of the opening with an advantage in space but becomes worried about imaginary threats and ceases to think about an active plan for himself. Later, after some errors, White can still get some play in the center but he never even considers this and instead concentrates solely on the wings. (27) 1750-Silman. White to play.

[diagram]
The first moves were 1.c4 Nf6 2.Nc3 c5 3.Nf3 e6 4.g3 b6

5.Bg2 Bb7 6.O-O Be7 7.d4 cxd4 8.Qxd4 d6. 1750 had never

faced a hedgehog formation before (he's an e2-e4 player) and so he was completely unfamiliar with the positions that result. 1750: "White has space and has more pieces out. The Black Bishop on e7 is temporarily bad but this is no big deal. Nobody has any real advantage. Since Black can attack my Queen by . . . Nc6, I would be wise to retreat it to a safer square." was happy that he noted the advantage in space and development, but was disappointed that he didn't make any effort to use these plusses. A lead in development (especially if the enemy King is still in the center) is most useful if the game i:;an be opened up. In this case Black can castle inunediately, so the development issue cannot be used in the traditional manner (e.g., attacking the King). However, if White had noted Black's sole weakness on d6, he might have hit upon a plan that called for an immediate attack on this target by Rdl, b3 and Ba3. More fuel can be added to this fire by NgS and, after the trade of light-squared Bishops, Nge4. In this case the better developed side's attack is difficult to parry since Black is not fully mobilized yet and his pieces are not ready to rush to the d-pawn's aid. Theory has shown that Black can defend against these ideas, but I am always delighted to hear a student talk of "targets." Remember that one doesn't just attack a King; you must also attack squares and pawns. If you have such a target, and also have an advantage in development, you must make instant use of this weapon before it disappears (a lead in development is temporary since the opponent will eventually catch up!). Another plan White has is to make use of his space edge by increasing it whenever possible and playing to stifle Black's counterplay (based on the . . . b6-b5 and . . .d6-d5 advances). Instead of dealing with these issues, White cops out and starts to worry about his Queen being attacked. Keep in mind that an attack on your Queen is no big deal since you can simply move it to safety. The opponent doesn't gain points for screaming, "Check to your Queen!" The moral is: Don't fear checks or one

[diagram]
move attacks. Just make sure that they are ineffective in the given position and go ahead with your own plans.

9.Qd3?

This wastes a tempo and places the Queen on another vulner able square since . . . Nbd7-c5 will be uncomfortable. Since he did mention his edge in space, I would have been very happy if he tried to increase that advantage by 9.e4. Fearing every possible threat that the opponent can throw at you turns you into a timid player who reacts to ghosts. Avoid this label and make sure that every move you make does something positive!

9 .. . O-O

1750: "Since I have more space, I want to increase it by moving up in the center with e2-e4." That's more like it! To repeat: Every move you make should have a positive base and be geared to increasing the advantages that you already possess.

10.e4 Nbd7

1750: "He threatens to put a Knight on c5. IfI stop that by b4 then my c4-pawn is without potential support. So I'll stop it by Be3. " This illustrates a typical problem with the amateur's thinking. Seeing a threat to win material (via . . . NcS, hitting the Queen and e4-pawn), White notes that he can protect himself and develop a piece with 1 l .Be3. However, he fails to take into account the resultant position after he loses his dark-squared Bishop for the enemy Knight. Don't make positional concessions to pre vent a threat unless you have no other means of defense. ll.Be3? Better was ll.Nd4 (the immediate 11.Qe2 is also fine) which allows the Bishop on g2 to help in the defense of the e-pawn. Then 1 1 . . . NcS or 11 . . . NeS can be met with 12.Qe2 followed by b2-b3, when White would still have a solid position and a spatial plus. It's clear that White didn't want to move his Queen again, preferring to give up a permanent imbalance (the dark-squared

[diagram]
Bishop) in. order to hold on to a temporary thing (the tempo that the Queen move would lose). ll. . . Nc5 1750: "He's attacking e4 with three pieces so I have to capture him." The sins of his ninth move (9.Qd3) plus the laziness of his eleventh (11 .Be3) have come back to haunt him. Note how he keeps making concessions. First 9.Qd3 to stop a Knight from making a harmless attack on his Queen (this cost him a tempo and placed the Queen on an even more vulnerable square), and then l l.Be3, a move that gives up the two Bishops and the dark squares.

12.Bxc5 bxc5

1750: "I was considering 13.h3 but I'm not worried about him going to g4 with his Knight. I'll move my Rook to el to give my pawn some added support." Since the player with less territory should strive to exchange pieces (and thus relieve his cramp), Black can be happy with his acquisition of Bishop for Knight. White is still making a big error by not formulating an active plan. Instead, he keeps guarding his e-pawn and worries about various harmless Knight jumps. Instead, something like 13.e5 clxe5 14.Nxe5 Qxd3 15.Nxd3 Bxg2 16.Kxg2 is sensible since it gets rid of Black's Bishop pair by swapping one off. By isolating Black's c-pawn, White can now entertain thoughts of pressuring it with a later Na4. I'm not saying that this plan is good for White, but it would have shown a good mental attitude in that White would have been actively attempting to devalue Black's Bishops and trying to create a target on cS.

13.Rfel Qb6

1750: "He's attacking my b2-pawn. I'll simply defend it." White doesn't realize it, but he has allowed Black to take the initiative. This is shown by White's readiness to keep making defensive moves.

14.b3 Rfd8

[diagram]
1750: "Defending d6 and perhaps threatening to play a . . .d5 advance. If he pushes his pawn to d5 I'll go e4-e5 and attack his Knight. It's still basically even. I'll play Radl and strengthen my control of the center." White is playing reasonable looking moves but he is slowly but surely running out of constructive ideas. By this I mean that he lacks a clear object of attack. It's not enough to just move your pieces into the center and hope that something good happens. It's your job to turn that amorphous "something" into a solid entity. To accomplish this, you must make all your pieces work towards a single goal. In our present game, White does not have a clear goal in mind. Note that the d6-pawn, though technically backward, is so solidly defended that White cannot hope to put any real pressure on it.

15.Radl Bc6

1750: "He's preventing me from attacking his Queen by Na4. He's also preparing to play . . . Qb7 and increase the pressure in the center. If he does that I will play Nd2 and back that pawn up. Now I can play Qe3, which prepares to redirect it to the kingside via Qf4, etc." Every time your opponent moves, you should ask, "Why did he do that?" It's very important to understand what the other side is trying to accomplish. Though White has paid attention to his opponent's plans throughout this game, he has not put enough energy into his own ideas. Now he seems to be leaning towards a kingside attack, but is this a realistic hope or a plan born out of the frustration caused by his earlier inactivity?

16.Qe3 a5

1750: "Starting a wing attack via . . .a5-a4. I can move my Knight to d2 and defend both e4 and b3 now or later. Another idea is to play Rbl . I'll first move my Queen to the kingside, defend on the queenside as I need to, and start an attack by g3-g4-g5." White finally realizes that he has to do something aggressive. However, a kingside attack is not a very realistic goal since Black has no weaknesses on that side of the board and White's army aims more at the center than at the kingside. White should have been playing for an e4-e5 advance.

[diagram]
17.Qf4 a4

17 50: " Now I'll play Rbl, which makes his Queen a bit uncomfortable." The Black Queen is not a bit uncomfortable since if White ever plays bxa4 Black would simply move his Queen to safety and start to chew up the weak White pawns on a4, a2 and c4. Unlike White's earlier display, Black has no fear of one-move attacks.

18.Rb l e5

1750: "Forcing me to move my Queen. I can consider Qh4 but my Knight on c3 is undefended and my Queen is in a risky place. I'll move it back to the safe e3-square." Black's last move (18 .. .e5) fixes the center and takes away ,White's chances for counterplay based on a e4-e5 advance. Though some players might be horrified by the apparent weak nesses on d6 (backward pawn) and d5 (weak square), these tum out to be illusions. The d6-pawn is firmly defended and if a Knight jumps into d5 then Black would capture it. This would lead to a White pawn going to d5, which would cover up the hole and the backward pawn.

19.Qe3 axb3

1750: "If I play Rxb3 he has to move his Queen. If . . .Qa6 is played, I can easily defend my attacked c4-pawn. It's still even." White gets surge of confidence by attacking the Black Queen. Why? Does White really believe that Black will hang his Queen? I hope not. Then what makes an obvious one move attack so deadly (White fears such attacks from the opponent, and feels empowered when making them himself)? Nothing! They are not deadly in the least; in fact, they are more often than not Icno mpletely useless. the present case, White will take on b3 with his Rook and attack Black's Queen. However, once the Queen moves to safety, White's pawns on a2 and c4 will be extremely weak.

20.Rxb3?

An "active" move that worsens his position. Correct was

20.axb3 (leaving himself with only one target on b3 to worry

[diagram]
about instead of two-one on a2 and one on c4) followed by Nd2, when his position would still be very hard to crack. White's statement claiming equality is way off the mark. He has no play and it's only a matter of time before White's two queenside targets lead to his demise. 20 .. . Qa6 1750: "Attacking c4. I can protect my pawn by Qe2, Qd3 or Nd2. The Knight move seems best since it also defends e4. "

21.Nd2 Rd7

1750: "He intends to double his Rooks. He can also play . . . Rb7 but since he could have played this right away ( . . . Rdb8) he must intend ro double on the a-file. Now I could move my Knight to d5 when it's attacked by two pieces and defended by three. Unfortunately, I need this Knight on c3 to defend my a2-pawn so I can't do that. I can attack his d7-Rook by playing Bh3." Still lacking a plan, White resorts to a series of one move attacks (20.Rxb3 and 22.Bh3). This is a typical amateur mistake. A one move attack is fine if it contributes to the overall improvement of your position. If it has no other point, then the move is simply a waste of time (your opponent will move his piece to safety!). If you look closely at White's next move, you'll see that he's just forcing Black to make a good move.

22.Bh3 Rda7

(28) White to play.

[diagram]
1750: "Tripling on the a-file, but who cares? It doesn't do him any good at all. Now I can continue to attack his kingside by g4-g5 and chase his Knight away." White is feeling pretty good right now but this is completely unjustified. Nevertheless, many people go into depressions and play badly when they get such poor positions so his positive attitude may serve him in the game. Actually, 1750 is quite a fighter and has saved many hopeless positions by refusing to acknowledge that ail is lost. He always thinks there's a chance (this attitude is worth its weight in gold since even strong Grandmasters have been known to lose their vigilance and make bad errors in winning positions).

23.g4 Bd8

1750: "Intending . . .Ba5, attacking c3 and a2 in tum. I can push up my pawn to a3 after . . .Ba5 so I'm not worried about that. I'll continue my attack on the kingside." The Knight on c3 eyes the d5- and b5-squares and also defends the a2- and e4-pawns. Black would be happy to trade his bad Bishop for such a useful Knight.

24.g5?

An unfortunate decision. White has weakened his King, the g-pawn and the f4-square. Now he allows the Black Knight to take up residence there. Don't create weaknesses in your own camp. When you see a hole like f4 being created, a danger signal should go off in your head! 24 . . . Nh5 1750: "Heading for f4. Now I can move into d5 and protect the f4-poinr. Unfortunately, he will capture and move into f4 anyway. If 25.Nd5 Bxd5 26.exd5 Nf4 27.Bf5 and Qe4 still gives me an attack on h7 and his King. Whoops! I forgot that if I move my Knight I lose my pawn on a2. I must first guard my pawn and then Ne2 or NdS guards f4."

25.Rb2?

Much too passive (though a good recommendation is hard to find). He should have accepted the loss of the a-pawn and tried

[diagram]
to find some way to bring his b3-Rook over to the kingside along the third rank. If you're getting positionally squashed and mate rial loss is also looming, don't curl into a ball and wait to die. Give up some ballast (material) and attack the opponent for all you are worth. Put a scare into him and try to upset his equilibrium. 25 . . .Nf4 1750: "Now he threatens to win my g5-pawn. I have to guard it. On Qg3 the e2- and d3-squares are covered. "

26.Qg3 Bxg5

1750: "If 27.Qxg5 Nxh3+ wins my Queen by a fork. I better get my Bishop out of there." Now Black has won material, enjoys a safe King and has retained the initiative. It's all over.

27.Bfl Bd8

1750: "I've lost a pawn but I'm not lost since I'm still firm on the queenside. I have to get rid of his Knight." He could admit he's lost and give up but instead he lies to himself and fights on. I can't criticize him for following the edict, "No one ever won a game by resigning."

28.Ne2 Ne6

1750: "Heading for d4 so I must maintain my Knight on e2. I'll attack his pawn on d6. "

29.Qd3 Bc7

1750: "I'll head my passive d2-Knight to f3, h4 and f5. Also possible is Bh3, attacking the e6-Knight. Advancing f2-f4 can also be considered."

30.Bh3 Qc8

1750: "Now his Knight is pinned, but he's threatening my pawn on a2."

31.Ral Ra3

1750: "Attacking my Queen. I'd like to play Nc3 and head for d5 but it would be pinned. It's still good, though. I'd just have to move my Queen out of the way first."

[diagram]
32.Nc3 Nf4

Here the game was stopped since 33.Bxc8 Nxd3 leads to a further loss of material for White. Ti ps * . Try and appraise your position honestly. * Never give up hope! A positive fighter's attitude will bring you points even from the most hopeless looking situation. * Look to the center for play. Chess is not just a bunch of battles on the wings. * Passive, planless play will lead to a loss every time. * Know what the opponent is planning at all times but don't allow yourself to become mesmerized by his ideas. Ultimately, your plans should prove to be stronger than his. * Don't make pointless one-move attacks. If you are crossing your fingers and hoping he doesn't see it, you are making the wrong move (you are also building bad mental habits). Always expect your opponent to see your threats! You want to play a move that improves your position no matter what he does. I tend to repeat this a lot, but I find it's a mistake that the amateur makes over and over again.

[diagram]
In our next three games we see Black allowing White to build up a very imposing center. Would the amateurs (all playing White) be able to make use of this central space advantage? Would they even notice that space was the advantage they possessed? These are important questions-if you can't ascertain what kind of imbal ances exist, you won't be able to make use of them. (29) a a .t. 'ii'

[diagram]
2000-Silman. Modern Defense. White to play. The first moves were 1.e4 d6 2.d4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.f4 e6

5.Nf3 Ne7.

White reacted with scorn to Black's choice of opening. It's certainly ugly-looking, but it turns out to be a tough nut to crack! 2000: "6.Bd3 with the idea of eventually smashing him with f4-f5 is the obvious move." His attitude shows some positive and negative features. The positive side is his confidence; he knows Black has played something fishy and he wants to punish his opponent for the insulting choice of opening. The negative part of White's reaction is the speed taken for his decision and the fact that he ignored the imbalances. When someone does something unusual, you must take extra titne to measure its plusses and minuses. This doesn't mean that there is anything wrong with 6.Bd3. I just expect the student to

[diagram]
demonstrate a greater understanding of the position before a move is chosen!

6.Bd3 b6

[diagram]

7.O-O O-O

8.Be3

2000: " Strengthening my center." Finally mentioning his center, but not going any deeper into the position. While 8.Be3 is clearly a good move, this shouldn't disguise the fact that White is exhibiting signs of laziness. Instead of taking a long think and becoming master of this particular situation, he sits back, flicks out a developing move and hopes that positive things will just happen. 8 ...c5 2000: "I can consider 9.dxc5 but 9 . . . dxc5 looks boring. So my options are 9.dS, 9.eS and 9.Ne2. Pushing my d-pawn by

9.d5 seems bad because it leaves me with a weakness on

d5. The Knight retreat to e2 looks too passive for my tastes. Though 9.e5 gives up the f5- and d5-squares, it opens things up and leads to a tactical battle that would suit my style. "

9.e5?

A very poor move. Black has just initiated a central counterat tack, so what does White do? He goes along with his opponent's

[diagram]
plans by allowing his center to be ripped apart! I would have preferred either to maintain the center with 9.Ne2 Bb7 10.c3 or to start a central tussle (after all, White is ahead in development) with 9.dxc5 bxc5 (9 . . . dxc5 leaves White with a space advantage, a solid pawn on e4 and a potential strong point on d6 after an e4- e5 advance) 10.e5!? (trying to leave Black with a weakness on c5 and also attempting to create a strong point on d6) 10 . . .dxe5 1 1.fxe5 Nd7 12.Bf4 with Ne4 to follow. 9 . . . cxd4

10.Bxd4

2000: "Otherwise I lose a pawn."

10. . .

Nbc6 2000: "Now I'm considering Be4, which may be a tad slow. However, l l .exd6 is possible. Also, 1 1 .Nb5 is a serious thought. So it's a choice between these two moves. Since NbS misplaces the Knight on the side, I'll go for exd6." White is still playing without any kind of plan. He is not reasoning things out and he is not analyzing any variations. This type of "move by move" existence is often employed by players from the beginning level right up to the revered ranking of master. No matter what your rating may be, it is the wrong way to play chess!

11.exd6 Nxd4

12.dxe7 Qx.e7

2000: "Now I have to make some decisions. I don't like his well-placed Knight, so 12.Be4 Nxf3+ 13.Qxf3 Rb8 1 4.Radl playing on the file looks good." White has completely failed to evaluate the position. If he had. taken some time to do so, he might have realized that opening up the center and giving Black two Bishops is not a logical course of action. He should have envisioned this several moves ago (before he allowed it to happen), since now all the trumps rest in Black's hands and it is too late for White to do anything about it.

13.Be4 Ba611

[diagram]
(30) White to play. 2000: "An active move that may not be sound. I have to be careful not to exchange a bunch of pieces and end up in an inferior Bishop versus Knight endgame. Since 14.Nxd4 Rad8 runs into several pins (15.Nc6?? Qc5+ and 15.Nce2 Bxe2 are both bad for me) and 13.Rf2 Rad8 also looks terrible, I must challenge his idea and chop off his material!" Shocked into action, 2000 finally looks at a few variations and takes the correct mental stand: If you see a way to win material and don't see how your Wgher rated opponent can escape, you must go into the line and keep Wm honest. I have to point out that the variation he gave on his 12th move via 13 . . . Nxf3+ (instead of Black's 13 . . .Ba6!!) 14.Qxf3 Rb8 1 5.Radl also favors Black because the Bishop on g7 is better than any other minor piece on the board.

14.BxaS Rxa8?

The most accurate order was 14 . . . Bxfl 15.Nxd4 Rxa8. The text was played to see how White would react to a greater range of choice. 2000: "I could keep the Exchange with 1 5.Rf2 but 15 . . .Rd8 gives him tempos and is passive. The main move is 1 5.Nxd4, when 15 . . . Bxfl 16.Kxfl consolidates. So on 15.Nxd4 he will pin with . . .Rd8 or . . .Qc5 when 16.Ne2 Bxe2 17.Qxe2 Bxd4+ 18.Khl favors me." 15 .Nxd4 Rd8?! 2000: "Since 1 5.Rf3 Bxd4+ and . . .Bxc3 wins for him, I have to block with my c3-Knight. "

[diagram]
More accurate was 1 5. . . Bxfl .

16.Nce2 Bxd4+

17.Nxd4 Bxfl

2000: "Now 18.Nc6 still loses to 18 .. .Qc5+. What's wrong with the obvious 18.Kxfl? Am I falling for a trap; what am I missing? It looks like I'm winning."

18.Kxfl?

He had to play 18.c3 here (maintaining the powerful Knight on d4) or on the next move. His failure to do so leads to a speedy demise. 18 . . .Qf6 2000: "Oh! He intends . . .e6-e5; that's what he had in mind! Any smart ideas? If 19.Kgl Rxd4 picks up my f4-pawn and 1 9.c3 e5 doesn't change anything. So I'll hold onto f4 with

19.g3."

Notice how White never started any ideas of his own. Instead, he just developed his pieces and reacted to Black's play. This type of descent into the opponent's world happens quickly and quietly and must be avoided at all costs. Naturally, the only way to avoid this is to impose your will on the game before the opponent does!

19.g3??

Missing his last chance: 19.c3! e5 20.Qd3! exd4 2 1 .Rdl! Qxf4+

22.Kgl keeps White firmly in the game.

19. .. Rxd4

2000: "19.Qf3 allows 19 . . .Rd2. "

20.Qe2 Qd8

White's position is lost and we stopped the game at this point. T i p s * Even a seemingly bad opening will have some positive points. If you don't take what your oppo nent is doing seriously, then these positive points will end up beating you.

[diagram]
* A plan comes before development. * When you accept laziness into your mental pro cesses, it becomes a habit that's hard to break. Work hard from the very first moves! * Jf you think you see a win, but are worried about falling into a trap, you must be courageous and make him prove his point. Never let fear talk you out of a course of action. · Our next game arises from the identical opening. In this case, a !Duch lower rated player is able to come up with a reasonable antidote. 1600-Silman. Modern Defense.

1.e4 d6 2.d4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.f4 e6 5.Nf3 Ne7 (see diagram 29)

1600: "I have good central control and a kingside space advantage. I want to continue my development and keep an eye aimed at the kingside. I would also like to maintain the e7-Knight's lack of mobility. Though this position looks good for me, Black is not just going to roll over; there is plenty of opportunity for him to get play in the center." Not at all bad! He's making a determined effort to break down the position. This effort was lacking in the previous game, even though 1600 is much the weaker of the two. What nobody mentions is that a kingside attack can only succeed if you control the center or if the center is locked. Because of this, and his extra central territory, White should strive to make his center indestruc tible and to restrict Black's counterplay. Once this is achieved, White can turn his attention towards one of the wings.

6.Be2

1600: "Develops the Bishop and prepares to castle and activate the Rook." Is the Bishop better on d3 or e2? Though d3 enables White to envision an eventual f4-f5 break, I must ask how real this

[diagram]
possibility is. Ifi t turns out to be just a pipe-dream, then e2 makes sense since it allows White to place a Rook on the d-file and discourage Black's . . . c5 break. 6 . .. b6 1600: "He's going to play . . .Bb7 and put pressure on the e4- pawn."

7.O-O

1600: "Looking at it afterwards, I think my O-O was a poor move. If the center closes up, my white Bishop would be good and his is a bad one that he could exchange by . . .Ba6. With my Rook on fl this exchange would be forced." This type of thinking just takes up time and makes a player paranoid. At the moment the center is not closed (meaning that White does want to be castled) and Black's light-squared Bishop is far from being bad. Besides, the first player can't really stop . . . Ba6 anyway. If Black wants to take three moves ( . . .b6, . . . Ba6 and . . . Bxe2) to trade a piece that's moved only once then White should rejoice. Don't allow yourself to get in a state of mind where everything your opponent does has some lurking threat behind it.

7 . . • O-O

1600: 'Tm looking at the center and whether it makes sense to close it up with 8.e5 when Black can take or play . . . d5. If

8.e5 dxe5 9.fxe5 my f-file is opened and my dark-squared

Bishop is freed but my d-pawn is weak. If he closes with . . .d5 then a later . . .c5 makes it like a French-type opening. It also gives him use of the f5-square. So I don't like the e5 advance. I'm also looking at a fantasy plan of Knight on g5 and Rook on h3 with a kingside attack but that's easily defended against. His threat is to attack d4 with . . .c5 and . . .Nbc6 with pressure so Be3 looks good." It must be kept in mind that pawns on e4 and d4 control all the critical central squares. As soon as you push one of them you give up some of this control! After 8.e5? Black would not activate White's fl-Rook and cl-Bishop with 8 . . . dxe5?. Instead, he would simply play 8 . . . Bb7 when White has given up control of the f5- and d5-squares. Then an eventual . . . c7-c5 would blast the once-proud

[diagram]
center apart. Don't thlnk that moving forward means that you are automaticall y improving your position!

8.Be3

The game was stopped because the student's time had ex pired. Black's position is not easy. White intends to play Qd2 and Radl when a . . . c7-c5 advance would allow White the opportunity to rip open the d-file whenever it was favorable to do so (White would only play dxc5 in answer to . . . c5 after he got his heavy pieces on the d-file). Also note that . . . c7-c5 followed by . . . cxd4 leaves Black with a backward pawn on d6. Because of this potential weakness along the d-file, Black's plan of . . . c7-c5 is not very effective. Unfortunately, Black doesn't have any other meth ods of counterplay and White can lay claim to an advantage. All this comes from White's extra space and Black's lack of active play. Ti ps * If you're going to worry about something, make sure it is worth worrying about! * Games are often won by simply taking space and restricting the opponent's options. You don't have to attack like a wild man to score a point. In our final example with this favorable White opening, the first player (a man with a solid A rating) tries hard to defend his center right from the start. 1950-Silman. Modern Defense. The first moves were: 1.d4 g6 2.e4 Bg7 3.Nc3 d6 4.f4 e6

5.Nf3 Ne7.

1950: "White has a broad center. The Silman school says that White has an· obligation to maintain the center and, once this is done, he can switch to some sort of action on the wings. So how to develop and maintain the center?

[diagram]
"I can find moves that protect my center, but is that enough? I'm looking at Bc4. 6.Bd3 doesn't seem bad either. Also reasonable is 6.e5, gaining space, but I can do that at any time. That's why Bd3 is all right since e5 frees it. "Black must attack the center. He can do this with any one of four pawns but the most likely is the c-pawn. There is something to be said for placing the c3-Knight on e2 and bolstering my center with c3. I'll go for Bd3." I was very happy that he seemed to remember the content of our lesson on the center. I looked forward to him defending his center with everything he had. The fact that some of his moves were incorrect didn't bother me (for example, his idea of 6.Bc4 is poor since it walks into a . . .d6-d5 advance). Far more important than moves are ideas, and his first big think showed that he was trying hard to use every idea he had been exposed to.

6.Bd3 b6

1950: "Preparing to fianchetto."

7.Ne2

1950: "The troubling thing about my move is that I'm moving a piece twice in the opening but, since it's a semi closed game, this is not terribly important. At least, I hope it's not!" 7 ... Bb7 1950: "There is no reason to rush the center-guarding c2- c3--I can do this whenever I need to. There are more important moves to play. Ordinarily you don't want to castle where a fianchettoed Bishop is bearing down but, in this case, he has fianchettoes on both sides! However, my pawn center is blunting both of them. "I can't help but be tempted to play g4 with the idea of Ng3 but it leaves my King open. Kingside castling also looks natural since it placed the Rook on the someday-to-be opened f-file. I'll go for the restrained approach." What's this about not castling in the direction of a fianchettoed Bishop? Is this some sort of chessic urban legend? Just because a Bishop aims at your King doesn't mean it's mate!

[diagram]
8.O-O O·O

1950: "Now I feel that his King is stuck on the kingside and I'd like to play there. I'll try either c3 or Be3. By defending d4 with c2-c3, my e2-Knight is free to move to g3 and threaten f4-f5. To stop this Black will be tempted to play . . .t7-f5. Then exf5 . . .gxf5 opens his King. However, if he answers 9.c3 f5 10.exf5 with 10 . . .exf5 then I feel that I have given up my good central pawn. So perhaps the immediate

9.g4 is the right way to go.

He was so careful to defend his center and then he suddenly abandoned the idea and went charging the kingside. Why? The simple 9.c3 (or 9.Be3 with c3 to come) would give him a fine game with no weaknesses. Only after making his center inde structible should he entertain ideas concerning attacks against my King.· ·

9.g4

Here we ran out of time and the game was stopped. His play was logical and impressive up to his 9'11 turn. Then he tossed all his lessons out the window and gave in to emotion and desire. Ti p s * Once you start a plan, make sure you finish it. Don't allow yourself to get sidetracked. * If you own the center and are killing all the opponent's counterplay, there is no hurry to start an attack on the wing. Continue to take your time, gain more space and take away the enemy's options. The next example is a fine game played by Fischer against the Romanian Grandmaster Florin Gheorghiu. I showed this to a student who owned a 1600 rating (though he was 1900 in postal) and asked him to annotate it as we went.

[diagram]
Fischer-Gheorghiu, Buenos Aires 1970. Petroff Defense.

1.e4 e5

2.Nf3 Nf6

3.Nxe5 d6

4.Nf3 Nxe4

5.d4 Be7

1600: "! like 6.Bc4. It attacks t7, threatens NgS and allows me to castle. He could push to dS but then I play Bb3 followed by Nc3 when it's equal. Another interesting move is 6.c4 when 6 . . . dS 7.Nc3 Nf6 8.cxdS Nxd5 9.Bc4 Be6 10.0- 0 is promising." This incoherent litany really shows why he doesn't do so well in tournaments. He never tried to figure out what he had that his opponent didn't. Due to this, he began to look at moves in a complete state of ignorance. Not seeing (or caring) that he had a slight advantage in space, he first looked at 6.Bc4, saying that

7.Ng5 would then be a threat. Why? Would Black just sit around

and allow White to capture on f7? At the moment, the g5-square is covered by three Black pieces, making Ng5 impossible. How ever, even if White did manage to play Ng5, Black could toss in . . .d6-d5 and end White's one-move threat instantly. He also mentioned 6.Bc4 d5 7.Bb3 followed by Nc3 (he proudly claimed equality for White. Why is early equality desir able for the White pieces?). However, 7 . . .c6 leaves the Bishop on b3 hitting granite while the c3-Knight would also find itself doing nothing (can't go to e4 and is putting no pressure on the well defended d5-square). Finally, his claim that 6.c4 d5 7.Nc3 Nf6 8.cxd5 Nxd5 9.Bc4 Be6 10.O-O?? (10.Qb3 is strong) is promising falls on its face after 10 . . . Nxc3 when Black has won a piece! It's clear that he is just trying to develop his pieces, but you must only develop pieces to posts where they do something, preferably in relation to the imbalances (in this case, space).

6.Bd3

1600: "Logical, but it doesn't seem very aggressive to me. It's solid but rather boring. Black should play . . . Nf6."

[diagram]
Why let the Black Knight remain on the active e4-square? With 6. Bd3 White develops the Bishop to a safe but important post and gains time by hitting the enemy Knight. 6 . . .Nf6 1600: .. White is slightly better because he has space and his dark-squared Bishop is better than Black's. White should gain more space. How to do this? 7.c4, 7.O-O and 7.BgS are all good. Even 7.h3 is possible which keeps Black's Bishop . back. l'd go for 7.h3." He finally began to take note of White's spatial plus and, as a result, he got one right. 7.h3 is an excellent move because it restricts the enemy pieces-the player with an edge in space should be choking the opponent's army at every opportunity. 7:h31 O-O

8.O-O Re8

1600: "White can play 9.Bf4, 9.BgS, 9.Rel, 9.Nc3 and 9.c4. I'd probably play 9.Rel ."

9.c4

White's plan consists of increasing his advantage in space and, at the same time, in taking away squares from the enemy pieces. The advance of the c-pawn fits in nicely with these ideas: White grabs more space and takes the d5-square away from the Black pieces. 9 . . .Nc6 1600: "Fighting for the squares on dS and e4 by 10.Nc3 is correct. This also keep a flexible position." The Knight-move to c3 is very natural and good. Some of my students have recommended 10.a3, preventing . . .Nb4. However, this Knight sally is nothing to fear since Bbl saves the Bishop. Then White, by a2-a3, could chase the Knight back to where it came from . Don't go out of your way to prevent things that cause no real harm!

10.Nc3 h6

[diagram]
1600: "I like 1 1 .Qc2 when a later Bxh6 may be possible. Another idea after ll.Qc2 is Ne4, getting rid of a kingside defender. I don't like 1 1.Bf4 but I I .Rel looks good." White's pieces do aim at the kingside, but I don't see how Qc2 helps make Bxh6 a threat.

11.Rel Bf8

1600: " 1 2.Be3!? is best, since I don't like exchanges." While I don't like his 12.Be3, which just clogs up the White army, I do like his statement that exchanges are not what White wants. It appears that 1600 is well aware that the side with more territory should avoid unnecessary exchanges since that just helps to relieve Black's cramp.

12.RxeS

The trade of one Rook won't do any harm to White's cause. 12 . . . QxeS 1600: "Now 13.Bd2 followed by Qc2 and Rel is indicated. It's still just a bit better for White because Black is veiy solid."

13.Bf4

The Bishop is obviously more active here than it would be on d2.

13. ..Bd7

Note how the lack of space prevents Black from posting his pieces on active squares. 1600: "I don't like Qc2 anymore. 14.Qd2 gives potential for sacrifices and a kingside attack." So he finally realizes that his Qc2 had no real point (aside from allowing potential forks by . . . Nb4). This is why one should make the Queen one of the last pieces to be moved; you often don't know where it belongs until most of the other pieces are out.

14.Qd2

[diagram]

14. . . QcS

1600: "Does this threaten to sacrifice? Looks scary since 15 . . Bxh3 16.gxh3 Qxh3 and, if Black can get rid of the Bishop on f4, . . .Ng4 would create a strong threat of . . . Qh2+. Perhaps 1 5.Nd5!? which threatens Nxf6+ and ties his Queen to the defense of c7 is worth trying. If . . . Bxh3 wasn't a threat, I'd love to play 15.Rel ." When someone makes a threat, it is very important to deter mine if this threat is real or imagined. In the present case, White thinks tha1 Black is threatening to sacrifice on h3. If Black's sacrifice ultimately fails, then why would you go out of your way to prevent it? In this case Fischer sees that . . .Bxh3 is nothing to worry about so he happily continues with his space-eating ways.

15.d5

1600: "This cramps Black's game more and forces him back. White is attacking on the kingside while Black should play . . . \!e7 and play for a queenside attack." How does . . .Ne7 help Black create a queenside attack? 15 . . . Nb4 lEOO: " White could play 16.Be4 when 16 . . . Nxe4 17.Nxe4 is fine for White."

[diagram]
White does not wish to give u p the two Bishops here. He also sees that 16.Bbl allows soothing exchanges after 16 . . . Bf5. t6.Ne41 1600: "Black must play . . .Nxd3 but then 17.Nxf6+ is strong." Why must Black allow his pawns to be shattered by Nxf6+? If 1600 was Black, would he actually play . . . Nxd3 and let this happen? Clearly, 1600 is suffering from some kind of panic reaction, though what that might be is anyone's guess. 16 ... Nxe4

17.Bxe4 Na6

1600: "Were is the killer? 18.Bxh6 fails. White probably has to start a pawn attack via 18.Kh2, g4 and gS. Another way is

18.h4-h5, Kh2, Rgl and g4-g5. Here Black would have big

[diagram]

18.Nd4 Nc5

19.Bc2 a5

1600: "White is still better but has no big attack. White must get his Rook into the attack. I like 20.Kh2 with the idea of g4. White must play for a kingside attack. 20.a3 with b4 to follow doesn't work, and 20.a4 is horrible. 20.Rel is not as strong as a g4 and Rgl idea." First 1600 says that White doesn't have any real attack. Then he says that White must attack. What's going on here? It's clear to me that quiet play in the middle and slow build-ups are alien to

1600. In his mind, you must attack even if your chances for

success are not good. Ultimately, a simple question must be asked: why weaken one's King when you can play quietly in the middle with no risk?

20.Rel

[diagram]
1600: "Going to e3 and g3." 20 . . . QdS

21.Re3 b6

22.Rg3

This threatens the simple Bxh6. Notice how White's chosen method of attack has left his kingside pawns safe and sound. 22 ... Kh8 1600: "White should have something crushing since he has too much over on the kingside. 23.Qc3 Qf6 24.Rf3 Re8 is not so clear but I know that something good is hiding from me."

23.Nf3!

White does not want to allow Black to defend with . . .Qf6. Now Qd4 is a huge threat and 23 . . . Qf6 is met by 24.Be3! followed by 25.Bd4. 23 . . .Qe7

24.Qd4

Here we ran out of time and stopped the game. White threatens Bxh6 and the only way to stop this is by 24 . . .f6 (which weakens the light-squares and allows Nh4 followed by Ng6) or by 24 . . .Qf6 (this was played in the game) 25.Qxf6 gxf6 26.Nd4 (heading for the hole on fS) 26 . . . Re8 27.Re3 (White feels that his superior pawn structure is enough to win so he carefully prevents Black from gaining any counterplay) 27 . . . Rb8 28.b3 b5 29.cxbS BxbS 30.Nf5 Bd7 31.Nxh6 with material gain and a win on the 35'11 move. Ti p s * You can win games just by increasing your edge in territory bit by bit. * If you own a space advantage, play to restrict the enemy pieces. * Tr.e side with more space should not trade too many pieces.

[diagram]
* The side with less space should strive to exchange whenever possible. * Don't be in a rush to force things. A slow squeeze is quite enough to torture the opponent and force his eventual capitulation. Our next example shows a position where the center is dead and the space advantage lies on the kingside.

[diagram]

1.Nc31

Avoiding exchanges and bringing the Knight to the active d5- post. 1 ... Rh8

2.Rh3!

Of course, since White has a space advantage on the kingside, that is where he directs his play. The text follows an instructive but common idea. White will play on the h-file but, seeing that

[diagram]
2. hxg5 hxg5 allows exchanges, he will only open it when he

triples by Rh3, Rbh l and Qh2. Since Black has far less territory on that file, he will be unable to copy White's movements there. 2 . . .Rbg8

3.Rbh1 Qd8

4.Nd5!

Threatening Kg3, Qh2, hxg5 and Rh7+. 4 . . . gxh4

5.Rxh4 Kt7

6.Kf2 Qf8

7.Rxh6 Rxh6

8.Rxh6 Qg7

9.Qa5!, 1-0.

Mate follows l 0.Qc7+. Reti made this look easy, but good things happen if you play where your favorable imbalances reside. Could an amateur with a 1700 rating handle things so well? Would he recognize his chances on the h-file? I decided to allow my student the chance to walk in Reti's shoes. (33) 1700-Silman White to play. 1 700: "First we must look at the imbalances. Black has an imbalance on the queenside and on d5, e6, g6, and h5.

[diagram]
Black's position is a big hole . . . i t's bad. "White doesn't have any imbalances. Well, that's not quite true, he has one on f4 (though it's guarded by the Knight). White has space everywhere while the open file for Black means nothing. The best place for the White Knight is e6. White does not want to trade Knights because his is more mobile than the Black one. White can also cramp Black some more by h5." This is just terrible! After several weeks of lessons, 1700 thinks that imbalances are weaknesses. I must have failed badly to let him believe this, but let's stop you, the reader, from thinking the same thing! Imbalances are differences in the position! One person can have a Knight and the other a Bishop. That is an imbalance! One can have space while the other player has the superior pawn structure. That is also an imbalance (note that it's sometimes not clear who the imbalances will ultimately favor). While imbalances can be weak pawns or weak squares, they can also be many other things (and can be positive, negative or neutral). For the most part, everything 1700 said was off the deep end. In fact, if this is how he actually thinks, I'm amazed that he keeps a rating as high as 1700!

1.h5??

I almost had a heart attack when he played this positional blunder! In many ways, this move is far worse than hanging a piece. Why? Because everyone, even Grandmasters, hangs pieces from time to time. Hanging a piece is a moment of blindness. But playing a move like 1 .h5 shows a horrible lack of understanding about chess. Clearly, this is far more serious. When you have an spatial advantage in some area of the board (and White's resides on the kingside), it won't mean anything if you can't find a way to break into the enemy position. White had a clear route into the kingside via the h-file, but closing it by 1 .h5 permanently closes that road. White has gone from a clear advantage to a disadvantage in only one move! 1 . . . Rb4

2.b3 Rtb8

9 6 I T H E A M A T E U t ' S M l N D The center is closed and the kingside is also locked up. This means that Black is free to devote his full attention to the queenside. 1700: "Black is t1ying to pile up on the queenside; he's hoping to take the pawn on c4 (by . . . R8b6, . . .Qb7 and . . . Rxc4) and pick off the Rook on bl. This is permanently prevented by Nc3."

3.Nc3 Qb7

1700: "He's pinning my e-pawn to my King. What happens if I play Nd5 and attack his Rook?" Black is targeting all of White's potential weaknesses. These are the pawns on b3, c4 and e4. It's clear that Black has all the play.

4.Nd5 Qc6

1 700 "Why does he want to give me a Rook for a Knight? I don't understand this. Do I take his Rook or do I double on the b-file? Ahhh . . . if 5.Nxb4 Qxe4+. What does that do? It does not look so bad for me. For example, 5.Nxb4 Qxe4+

6.Kh3 when White's not winning, but Black might have a

draw. "Actually, he might get my Knight and two pawns for that Rook. This is good for him so I can't do that. I'm also worried about 5 . . . Nxb3 6.axb3 Rxb3 but that's not so dangerous. I better protect my e-pawn." He doesn't realize it yet, but White's no longer following a plan of his own. Instead, he's just reacting to Black's ideas (in other words, Black has the initiative).

5.Rel R4b7

1700: "Black has queenside space but his pieces are inac tive . How good is space if your pieces are not doing anything? So I must take the fight to him even if I lose a pawn: 6.b4 cxb4 7.Nxb4. However, then 7 . . . Qxc4 is pos sible. I'm nor worried because I will take with the Rook." 1700 is a frisky guy, but if you have less space . than your opponent -you should not go out of your way to open things up. 1700's desire to win at all costs often clouds his judgment.

[diagram]
Remember: desire mixed with the cold light o f reason is something you want to nurture in chess. But emotion and wishful thinking are enemies of every player.

6.b4??

You should always be able to list the great things your moves do for your position. In the present case, 6.b4 only helps Black's cause. Notice how this move opens the b-file for Black's Rooks and creates a self-inflicted weak pawn on c4. 6 ...cxb4

7.Rxb4 Rxb4

8.Nxb4 Qxc4

1700: "If 9.Rcl Qxb4 then I win his Queen by 10.Rc7+ Kg8 l l .Rc8+! The other move is 9.a3, but what do I do about 9 . . . a5? So 9.Rcl looks veiy good."

9.Rcl Qxb4

There's nothing sweeter than "falling" for the opponent's (unsound) trap. In doing so, you break his confidence and allow him to use his own errors to beat himself.

10.Rc7+ Kf8

11.RcS+ Ke7

1700:" So my sacrifices didn't work." We stopped the game and discussed the horrible 1 .h5. To this day the sight of l.h5 raises my blood pressure and makes me cringe with horror. Ti ps * A space advantage means little if there is no way to penetrate into the enemy position. * Open files are precious things. Don't close off the very roads that you so desperately need!

[diagram]
!S

[diagram]

34. Normally the first player might try to add to this by b2-b4 and

a3-a4, followed by an eventual b4-b5. Hovvever, it is not enough to look at your own plans to the exclusion of the opponent's. Just what is Black going to do? Apparently, he will attempt to advance in the center with . . . Bf8 and . . . e6-e5 (thus annexing territory of his own). Why should White allow this? Why not take space everywhere and leave Black vvith little or no counterplay? This is the reasoning White employed when deciding on his next move.

1.e4!

Grabbing a spatial plus in the center. Now White would welcome 1 . . . dxe4 since 2.Nxe4 would allow him to make use of the d6-square and, once White castles and places a Rook on el, the backward pawn on e6. This move shows us that it is not enough to simply recognize a space advantage. You must also be able to create extra territory; don't expect it to magically appear.

1. ..Ef8

2.O-O Bh6

3.Rc2 Kh8

4.Rcl Nf4

5.Bfl Rg8

6.b4

[diagram]
White's last few moves are easy to understand. He has gotten his King to safety, placed a Rook on the e-file (which can be opened whenever White decides to play exd5), and solidified his position on the queenside. 6 . . . Nf8

7.a4 g5

Since Black is clearly worse on the queenside and in the center, he goes for his last shot on the kingside. Normally central play (which White has) will prove to be more valuable than this type of desperado attack on the wing. However, White comes up with a very greedy idea: he decides to take control of the kingside also! If successful, White will gain an advantage in all three areas of the board.

8.Bxf4 gxf4

9.Nh21

Preparing to bring the Queen over to h5. Black can't prevent this by 9 . . .Qe8? since 10.exd5 cxd5 1 1 .Nxd5 would prove to be more than bothersome. 9 . . . Ng6

10.Qh5 Bf8

u.exd5 cxd5

12.Bd3

White has an enormous advantage. His pieces aim at the kingside and dominate the center. White also has a powerful queenside pawn majority that gives him excellent chances in any endgame. 12 ...f5

13.Nf3 Be7

14.Rce2 Bf6

Trying to cover the weakened e5- and g5-squares.

15.Rxe6!

Decisive. The White army bursts into the Black position, picking up pawns as it goes.

[diagram]
Bxe6

16.Rxe6 Be7

Stopping Rd6.

17.Bxf5 Nt'8

18.Ne51 Qe8

19.Nf7+ Kg7

20.Nxd51

(35) •

[diagram]
;@ Black is doomed.

20. . .

Nxe6 Or 20 . . . Qxf7 21 .Rxe7.

21.Qh6+ Kxf7

22.Bxe6 mate.

Though White started with his space advantage on the queenside, he went out of his way to conquer territory in other areas also. Can the amateur copy this mind-set and create a space advantage where none seems to initially exist? This is the prob lem that I set before a couple of my students.

[diagram]

1.b4 BfS

1500: "Black's trying to get his Bishop active by playing it to h6. Another possibility is to play it to g7 and go for a push in the center. I would like to get to his backward pawn on b7 if I can. I am debating whether to castle or not to castle right now." He's doing reasonably well. This time he noticed some Black ideas, but he didn't bother trying to prevent them. In fact, it never occurred to him to strike in the center first. Why make it a battle between one person's queenside attack versus another person's center or kingside attack when you can have it all?

2.O-O e5

[diagram]
1500 : "He's playing to open up the center and activate his Bishops. His options are to take or push. I eventually need to play a4 and b5 but I'm not quite sure where to place my pieces on that side. I'll forge ahead."

3.a4 e4

1500 "Grabbing more space in the center. I'll move my Knight over to the queenside." All of a sudden Black has a space advantage in the center that aims at the kingside. This translates to active kingside play for Black, compared to the passive stance that Black was forced to endure in the Silman-Barkan game.

4.Nd2 Ng7

1 500: "Black is playing for a kingside pawn storm by pushing his pawns there. So I should push on with what I want to do since it's now a race." He wisely states that you should play quickly on your respective side in an race situation. However, why did 1500 let Black map out central and kingside space in the first place?

5.b5 fS

1500: "He is continuing to put pressure over there. I don't think Black has any immediate threat so I must make my attack faster."

6.bxc6 bxc6

7.Rbl Ne6

1 500: "Black's trying to get his pieces over to the queenside so he can defend. I will push my a-pawn so I can sink soruething into b6." I played . . . QxaS (after he played 8.aS??) so he took it back. 1 5Ci0: "I will play Na2-b4 and put pressure on c6 and a6."

8.Na2 a5

1500: "I'm starting to panic. Every entry point is defended by his minor pieces and pawns."

9.Qc2 Bh6

10.Bd.6

[diagram]
1500: "The point of Qc2 was to play Bd6 even if his Bishop was on f8. Then, if he took, I could open the c-file with cxd4. Unfortunately, with my wandering, your attack has gotten more serious."

[diagram]
11.Rb3 Qh4

1500: "My Bishops are still better but I think Black's position is now superior since it's easier for his pieces to get through to me." The game was stopped at this point. (37) 1650-Silrnan. White to play. 1650: "White has more space on the queenside. He also has two developed Bishops. White's Knights have better central positions. Black should be breaking in the center with . . .eS which frees his Bishops and other pieces. White should prevent Black from attacking the center." Excellent! White not only notes his own queenside play but also sees that he should prevent Black from getting his own stuff in the middle.

1.e4 Bf8

1650: "I don't want to capture since it opens the e-fi.le. I will build pressure on e4 with Qc2."

[diagram]
2.Qc2

Not a terrible move, but pretty much unnecessary. The e4- pawn was already well defended so an extra defender is sort of pointless. Instead, he should have castled since you don't want your King sitting in the middle when the center is opening up. 2 .. . Bh6

3.Rbl

1650: "Bring it to bl so I can play b4 and gain more space on the queenside." 3 . . .Bf4 1650: "I have a space advantage so I don't want to trade since that will give him more room. Instead I will force him to retreat."

4.g3?

Absolutely terrible. It is good that he knew that exchanges should be avoided if you have a space advantage, but don't prevent trades if it results in an entombed, useless piece. 4 . . . Bc7 1650: "Now I will try to gain an attack on the kingside since his pawns are kind of weak. First I will activate my e2- Bishop by getting my Knight out of the way."

5.Nh4

1650 has sort of lost his mind around here. First he plays the excellent e3-e4, but then he kills off one of his own pieces with g2-g3 and next he sticks his Knight away from the center on h4. 5 . . .Ng7 1650 : "Now I will gain more space."

6.f4

It's wonderful that he wants to gain more space, but why weaken his kingside and leave the poor King stuck in the center?

6. . . dxe4

7.Nxe4 Nf5

[diagram]
1650: " I don't want to trade since I have the space edge." He's stuck on that rule. In this case, he doesn't want to trade since it allows Black to open the e-file to the White centralized King.

8.Nf3 Ne3

1650: "My Queen is being attacked but I want to keep her as close to the center as possible by Qd3. If he checks me on g2, his Knight is trapped."

9.Qd3 Nd5

1650: "Now your Knight is in the center on a strong square. I will continue to eye his kingside and activate my Bishop." I don't know why White wants to avoid castling so badly (not to mention the fact that he keeps sticking his Knight on the rim). Evidently he doesn't realize that a centralized King stops the Rooks from connecting and will come under attack if the enemy can open up the center.

10.Nh4 f5

Threatening . . . Nxf4. 1650: "I will bring my Knight to the nice g5-square."

11.Ng5 e51

Taking advantage of the fact that White's Knight on g5 is only defended by the pawn on f4. 1650: "He is trying to open up the file for the Rook. I have to capture it."

12.dxe5 Nxe5

1650: "He is giving up a piece to get an attack on my King with his Rook."

13.fxe5

1650: "Oh, he's getting a piece back! I've really blown it." 13 ...Qxg5. Here the game was stopped.

[diagram]
Ti p s * Feel free to grab lots of space as long as you aren't creating serious weaknesses in your position. * Don't allow a race (both sides attacking on opposite wings) if you don't have to. * tIhteis rarely good to leave your King in the middle of board.

CONFUSING

SUBJECT OF

PAWN

STRUCTURE

If you ask an amateur player what he thinks of when you say hanging, doubled, backward, or isolated pawns, the most likely response will be "a weakness." Unfortunately, most amateurs don't really know how to go after pawn weaknesses, much preferring the thrill of a King-hunt. The other side of the story follows the same pattern. If the amateur gets these so called weaknesses, he usually panics because he is not aware of the dynamic potential inherent in all these structures. The simple truth is, it's impossible to label anything in chess as always being weak. The examples that follow show when to punish the existence of these pawns, and when to welcome them into your own position.

[diagram]
Dou b l ed Paw n s

(38) I.

White to play. NEGATIVE - The doubling of pawns reduces their flexibility and, at times, leaves one or both of them vulnerable to attack (though it's usually the lead pawn that is the weaker). White's c-pawns are doubled in diagram 38. Though the pawn on c3 is very safe, the guy on c4 is further advanced and thus vulnerable to attack by the enemy pieces. Black will torment this pawn by . . . Nc6-a5 (when his Bishop and Knight both attack it) followed by . . . c7-c5, . . . Rc8 and, if necessary, . . .Ne8-d6. POSITIVE - The doubling of pawns leads to extra open files for your Rooks and increased square control. After 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bc4 Bc5 5.O-O O-O 6.d3 d6 White can play the silly-looking 7.Be3 (see diagram 39). Is it wise for White to allow his pawns to be doubled? Actually, White would love Black to capture on e3! After 7 . . . . Bxe3

8.fxe3 White gets increased control of the d4- and f4-squares and

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
1st NEGATIVE - An isolated pawn cann ot be de fended by another pawn and is very vulnerable to attack if it: stands on an open tile. In diagram 40, White can bring his whole army to bear on the poor c6-pawn by Rael , Nd4 or NeS and, if necessary, Qa4 or Qc2. 1st POSITIVE - The creation of an isolated pawn may bestow upon its owner the use of a half-open file.

[diagram]

[diagram]
(42) • A 'ii' A

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
NEGATIVE - A backward pawn is only weak if it is sitting on an open file and if it is unable to advance. The side playing against the backward pawn should strive to control the square directly in front of it (turning it into an immobile target), since this square cannot be defended by a pawn. One way to do this is to exchange allthe pieces that defend this square. In diagram 45, White will play to increase his control over the dS-square by NdS, c2-c3, Na3-c2-e3 and, if necessary, g2-g3 followed by Bg2. If White could exchange off Black's c8-Bishop and Knight (the only two pieces with potential influence on dS), the first player would have permanent control over dS . POSmvE - A backward pawn acts as a guard to a more advanced pawn to the side of it. This ad vanced pawn can block enemy pieces and control important squares. The backward pawn cannot be considered a bad thing if the square in front of it is well-defended. (46) White to play has nothing. In diagram 46, White can play 1 .NdS but after 1 . . . NxdS

2.exdS the dS-square is covered up by a pawn. In this position

the d6-pawn (which defends the important eS-pawn) is well defended and is not really a weakness at all. In fact, Black's active pieces and pressure on e4 give the second player the advantage.

[diagram]
H angi n g Paw n s NEGATIVE - This kind of structure can be weak if the other side is able to circumvent any dynamic advance of the pawn duo and, since the pawns would then be immobile, train the power of allhis pieces against them. (47) In diagram 47, White has created strong pressure against the d5-pawn and there is nothing Black can do to save it. 1 ... Ne4 fails to 2.Nxd51 Bxd5 3.Bxe4. POSITIVE - The traditional hanging pawns on c5 and d5 (or c4 and d4 if White has them) control many important central squares, give their owner an advantage in territory and also offer play on the half-open b-file and e-file.

[diagram]
(48) Bertok-Fischer, Stockholm 1962. White to play. In diagram 48, Black's hanging pawns are well defended and give him extra space, control of the center and strong play down the b-file. Since Black threatens to play 1 . . . Qb4, White takes steps to prevent this.

1.Nd3

This covers b4, threatens the pawn on cS and prepares for Nf4 with pressure on d5. 1 .. . c41 This creates a weakness on d4 that White will not have time to use. With 1 . . .c4!, Black fixes the enemy pawn on b2 and turns it into an immobile target.

2.Nf4 Rfb8 and White was in great difficulties. After 3.Rabl?

Bf5 4.Rbdl Nf6 5.Rd2 g51 White gave up a piece and the game with 6.Nxd5? Nxd5 rather than face 6.Nh5 Ne4 7.Rc2 Qb4.

[diagram]

[diagram]
Pas s e d Paw n s NEGATIVE - A protected passed pawn is not al ways an advantage, though most players thlnk it is. If the square in front of the pawn can be controlled by the other side, then the Jlawn is stopped in its tracks and becomes a non-factor for a long time. Even worse, if this square fallsto a Knight, then the horse will radiate power on the neighboring squares and pawns. (49)

I. .

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
As can be seen, when a passed pawn exists, the square in front of it becomes the most important square on the board. Whoever owns this square dominates the game, so great energy and imagina tion must be demonstrated by both sides if they want to wrest control of this critical point.

(50) .I

[diagram]

[diagram]
After giving my students several lessons concerning strong and weak pawns, I usually wait a few weeks and then give them the chance to show me what they remember about our discussions. The first game revolves around the proper use of hanging pawns. 1600-Silman. Queen's Indian Defense.

1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6 4.e3 Bb7 5.Bd3 d5 6.b3 Nbd7

7.O-O Be7 8.Nbd2 O-O 9.Bb2 c5 10.Qe2 cxd4 ll.exd4 dxc4

12.bxc4 Rc8.

[diagram]

13.Racl Re8

[diagram]
1600: "There is a possible discovered attack on my Queen on the e-file. But there are two pieces in the way at the moment so I will continue to back up my pawns with my Rooks, which also gives my Queen more room to move." There is an old saying that goes: "When in doubt, place your Rook opposite the opponent's Queen, it's bound to prove useful." Though this is partly said in jest, the truth is that a quick d4-d5 advance can now be thrown out the window since it opens up the e-file and brings the dormant Rook to life. However, even if Black's Rook did not stand on e8, this advance, which does activate the b2-Bishop, also gives Black's Knights access to c5 and is usually only played if there is some sort of tactical justification to backOift up. course, it turns out that . . . Re8 has a more substantial purpose than some hazy hope of a future attack against White's Queen. That purpose will become clear after Black's next move.

14.Rfdl BfS

1600: "If I go back to fl with my Queen then . . .Bb4 might be good for him. There is also a possibility that he will play an . . . eS advance. I don't need to worry about . . .Bb4 because I can defend by Bc3." White was showing signs of early laziness in placing his Rooks behind the pawns without a detailed plan of action. Now that he has moved his Rooks, he becomes hopelessly passive and doesn't even try to find further ways to improve his position. The problem White is facing is the very common fear of ghosts-a fear of things that may or may not be real. It is the job of the player to decide whether a threat is real or not, but you can't ever decide one way or the other without proof. This means you must analyze and come to a final and clear assess ment of the situation. Is the White Queen really in enough danger to warrant its retreat to the passive fl-square? No, of course it isn't. Is . . .e6-e5 a threat? No again. So it seems that White went out of his way to place his Queen on a bad square for absolutely no reason at all . If you find yourself in this kind of mind-set, you will never come up with dynamic ways to put pressure on your adversary.

[diagram]
More aggressive (and constructive) ideas are 15.NeS NxeS (if Black does not do this then White will follow up with 16.Ndf3 with a very nice game) 16.dxeS Nd7 17 .Ne4 and though White has a weak pawn on c4 his control of d6, pressure down the newly opened d-file and chances of attack against the Black King give him many attractive possibilities.

15.Qfl?

1600: "So my Queen is safe if he plays . . .eS." Black never came close to threatening . . . e6-e5 so White has found himself in a frame of mind that will come up often in this book-the overwhelming desire to respond to every possible threat (real or imagined). This is the bane of most amateurs and must be avoided at all costs. In this case, White has used a precious tempo to move his Queen from a fine square to a poor one. 15 . . .g6 1600: "He's going to put his Bishop on g7. I can move my Bishop back to bl and then swing my Knight over to b3." This shows the main idea behind Black's 13•h move. The Bishop will go to g7 where it will defend the King and eye the target on d4. Notice how Black is improving his position with every move while White is floundering about in a panic.

16.Bbl Bg7

1600: "I can now swing over to b3 . . .wait! He'll go . . .Bxf3 and open me up on the kingside. I can move my Queen to d3 before I play Nb3, then f3 is defended." White is still reacting to every Black possibility. At least he realizes that his Queen was not participating in the game on fl , but the original e2-square is where it really belongs.

17.Qd3 Qc7

1600: "Putting more pressure on c4. I can put pressure on the e-file by Rel followed by NeS. At the moment, my Knight is not doing much. "

[diagram]
White continues to flit about from one idea to another, but at least his ideas are becoming more aggressive! The intended

18.Nb3 would have been well met by 18 . . .Ba6.

18.Rel Red.8

1600: "Now he's putting pressure on d4. I'll play Nb3 and guard it. "

19.Nb3 Qf4

Tempting was 19 . . . Ba6 while 19 . . . Ng4! with the threat of 20 . . . Bxf3 was extremely strong. However, I wanted to give him a bit more room to come up with his own ideas. 1600: "Now he's attacking my f3-Knight and also threatening to move his Bishop to e4. If I move my Knight to eS he still can play . . .Be4. It's better to move my Knight back to d2."

20.Nfd2?

[diagram]

22.gxf3 is not necessarily the end of the world for White. Finally,

20.Ne5?? would have lost to 20 . . .

Nxe5 21.Rxe5 Ng4. A bad or lazy attitude will always lead to the worst possible results. Never give up hope and even if things have not been going well you must fight to the bitter end. You will be surprised how often you can turn a game around! Instead of this passive and useless retreat (remember: 20 . . .Be4 didn't work. Don't take time out to stop your opponent from blundering!), White should have remained calm and played the simple 20.Qe3. 20 ...Ng4 1600: "Threatens to check me. I have to move my Queen to g3."

21.Qg3 Qxg3

1600: "I will capture towards the center."

[diagram]
Still defending and following the basic rules (always capture towards the center). This is simply not good enough! You must strive to come up with creative ideas that challenge your oppo nent! Putting your arms up, closing your eyes and fending off blows isn't going to get the job done.

22.hxg3 Nb8

This Knight is coming to c6 where it will chew on the d4- pawn. 1600: "He has two pieces against d4 and one Rook against c4. I must chase his Knight away."

23.f3 Nf6

1600: "I want to keep his Knight from moving to hS." Why? A Black Knight on h5 would not have helped the second player in his battle against the weak pawns on d4 and c4. Since . . . Nh5 could always be answered by Kf2, White should have taken the opportunity to play a more useful move. Superior was either 24.Kf2 or the more assertive 24.a4! (intending to create a weakness on b6 by a4-a5xb6) 24 . . .a5 25.c5! when the Black pawns are also turning out to be in need of defense. Remember: Be aggressive-create pawn weaknesses, fight for squares and space, do something positive! Just because you have some weak pawns doesn't mean you can't create some in the opponent's camp as well.

24.g4?! Ne8

Eyeing d4 with the g7-Bishop and giving himself the possibil ity of . . .Nd6 with more pressure against c4. 1600: "c4 is adequately guarded by the cl-Rook so I'll centralize my Knight."

25.Ne4 a5

1600: "He's threatening . . .a4 and a capture on d4 so I have to guard d4."

26.Redl

[diagram]
Black would now meet 26.a4 with 26 . . .Bc6 27.c5 Bxa4 and the Knight on b3 is no longer defended by its twin.

[diagram]
27.Nal Nc6

1600: "Putting another piece on d4. I have to defend it."

28.Nc2 Na5

1600: " Now he has two attacking c4. I can still defend, though."

29.Ne3

The game was stopped here since both 29 . . . Bh6 30 .gS Bxe4 and 29 . . . Bxe4 followed by 30 . . . Bh6 would win material. So the pawns eventually fell (a case of use them or lose them!). This occurred, however, due to inactivity on White's p art. If he had made use of his advantages in space and piece activity then the hanging pawns might well have been heroes instead of goats. Ti ps * Always play to improve your position. Don't panic and retreat from good squares. * Owning hanging pawns means that you must play dynamically. Passive play will lead to your hanging pawns turning into weaknesses. * If you are playing against hanging pawns, you must attack them with everything you've got.

[diagram]
In the next example, we see hanging pawns in a better light. Black is able to advance them and demonstrate their dynamic potential. The starting moves were 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 c5 4.cxd5 exd5 5.Nf3 Nc6 6.g3 Nf6 7.Bg2 Be7 8.O-O O-O 9.Bg5 cxd4

10.Nxd4 h6 11.Be3 Re8 12.Rcl BfS 13.Nxc6 bxc6.

[diagram]

14.Qa4

[diagram]

[diagram]
1800: "Now his d-pawn is extremely weak. I don't see how he can defend everything." He has a positive attitude but it's somewhat lacking in realism. Note that White did not fall for 15.Nxd5 Nxd5 16.BxdS Qxd5

17.Qxe8 Bb7.

Now the question is raised: Are Black's pawns wimpy targets or towers of strength? They do control the e4-, d4-, c4- and b4- squares so they can't be all bad! The battle lines are drawn White will try to either win a pawn or force one to advance which will (hopefully) create a weak square on c4 or d4. Black will defend his dynamic duo and try to create counterplay on the half-open b file and e-file.

15.Rfdl Be6

16.Nb5?

1800: "Attacking a7 and cS simultaneously." This move does uncover an attack on c5 but White seems unaware that Black is allowed to play a move too! Don't get so full of your own plans that you forget that you have an opponent. Much better was 16.Bf4 which takes away the b8-square from Black's Rook, threatens Be5 in many situations and creates the possibility of e2-e4.

16. . .Qb6

1800: "Now both his pawns are pinned. There must be a way to pounce on them!" Black was easily able to defend his c-pawn and now threatens something that White misses entirely. However, Black's position was already very good since the White Knight can be chased back, the hanging pawns can be solidly defended by . . .Red8 and . . .Rac8, and White must constantly worry about threats along the b-file and pawn advances like . . .d5-d4.

17.b4?? Bd7

[diagram]
1800: "My Knight's in a little trouble." The game ended at this point. We went back to the starting position in the previous diagram and I made him play the correct

14.Na4 (instead of the previously tried 14.Qa4).

(53)

14. . .Qa5

[diagram]

[diagram]
been in the right place. Even 15.a3 followed by 16.b4 would have shown that he wanted to control c5.

15.Bd2? Qb5

1800: "He's attacking e2 but this is no big deal; I can push it or guard it with my Rook." White is looking at direct threats and moves but is not looking at a long-range plan. Because of this, he soon ends up in a passive position.

16.e3

Black also gets active play after 16.Rel Bg4.

16. . .Bf5

Here we stopped the game due to lack of time. Black's well placed pieces clearly outgun their passive counterparts. Ti ps * Any kind of weak pawn must first be contained (blocked) before it is attacked. * No pawn structure is always good or bad. Look for the potential plusses in any given structure and make sure the opponent doesn't achieve them. * Though I repeat this in every chapter, I will take time to do so again: Don't just react to the opponent's plans. Find an active idea and follow it with as much energy as you can muster. On the other hand, don't get carried away with your own ideas and forget that you have an opponent. Take his plans into account and make adjustments when necessary. The game that follows, played in a weekend tournament by a student of mine, made a deep impression on me. It takes on.e of

[diagram]
the most maligned of structures, the dreaded tripled pawns, and shows that they are not necessarily bad-even in an endgame! (54) •••• •

[diagram]
n @. Black to play. The position in the diagram was reached after 15 moves. Black, though a pawn down, undoubtedly thought that he stood well; after all, White's pawns hardly inspire confidence. However, Harold (my student) realized that these pawns gained space, tied up the enemy pieces and allowed him to generate play against the opponent's remaining queenside pawns by moves like Rbl and Na5.

16.Radl

Harold challenges the d-file and tells the opponent that he can only castle if he is willing to give that file up. 16 . . . Rc7

17.f4!

Following Steinitz's important rule: The way to beat Knights is to take away all their support points.

17 . . .O-O

18.Rd3 Rd8

19.RxdS+ Bxd8

20.Rdl Bf6

21.Rd3

White is playing this game in a remarkably calm manner. Since

IK D>

[diagram]
Black has no real counterplay, White is able to slowly strengthen his position.

21... NfS

22.Bd4 Be7

23.Be5 Rd7

24.Bd6

The White Bishop has taken up a powerful post. I love the way he methodically brought his Bishop to this nice square. 24 ... h6

25.g3 g6

26.Bxe7

Harold sees that his exchange will allow his Rook to penetrate into the hostile position.

26...

Rxe7

27.Rd.8 Rd7

And now, instead of the hasty 28.Rxd7?? (which trades a very active Rook for its passive counterpart), White could have achieved a winning position with 28.Ra8! a6 29.c6 bxc6 30.Rxa6. I suspected that most amateurs would take one look at those tripled pawns and proclaim their dislike of the White position. Is this view correct or was I giving the chess playing masses less credit then they deserve? I set the same position up and gave a student the chance to prove me wrong. (55) i i 1500-Silman White to play.

[diagram]
1 500: "Three isolated pawns on one file is bad, but on the other hand White is better developed, has an open b-file and is a pawn up. Also Black has no pressure on White's game. White has the chance to sacrifice one of his isolated pawns with c6 and isolate Black's pawns, but first I would like to play my Knight to a5. I like this move but I want to concentrate on my development-I must use this before it goes away. I will play l.Rfdl and activate my Rooks." So I stand humbled-1500 also liked the White position! Is this because isolated pawns don't bother the average amateur, or are my students so well-schooled that they are able to see beyond typical forms of chess bigotry that color most people's perception? I was delighted when 1 500 pointed out that he had to play fast if he was going to take advantage of his lead in development. Actually, just about all of 1500's comments were right on the money. Perhaps I am breeding a race of super-players!

1.Rfdl Rc7

1500: "So I have taken control of the d-file. Now the Knight can go to a5." White's lead in development will soon be gone but he has managed to convert it into a long-lasting control of the important d-file.

2.Na5

The b7-pawn is an excellent target but he is now rushing his position a bit. Harold's treatment, which held onto the c5-pawn and took squares away from the enemy pieces, was much better.

2 .. . O-O

1500: "I want to concentrate on the b-file and the b7-pawn."

3.Rabl Bxc5

4.Bxc5?

White thinks he is getting good value by trading off two of his tripled pawns for the healthy one on b7. This is quite wrong. Instead, White has freed the Black pieces from their prison and from the necessity of defending b7. The patience that I praised Harold for is quite lacking in this game. 4 . . . Rxc5

5.Nxh7 Rxc3

[diagram]
1 500: " I would like to play Rd7 and take the seventh r:i.nk but I don't want to sacrifice my passed pawn. On the other hand, I don't want to play too defensively. I would like to trade one Rook, defend c2, and bring my Knight back so it can defend my pawns. The b4-square is good for this a.nd can be reached via c6 or a6. White was better at t:he beginning and he still is. I should place a Rook behind my passed pawn."

6.Rdcl

1500: "This Rook was chosen so I can follow up with Rb3." 6 . . .Rb8 Here I stopped the game since White's advantage has com pletely disappeared. Ti ps * A so-called weak pawn is only weak if it can be attacked! Each individual pawn has its own plusses and minuses and must be judged accordingly. * Patience is a real virtue in chess. If your opponent has little or no counterplay, then why should you feel compelled to force the issue? It is much better to take your time and add a host of little advantages to the plusses you already possess.

[diagram]
A backward pawn is a potential weakness because no other pawn an defend it, but its main problem is not so much the pawn itself but the square in front of it. The game that follows shows what happens if you ignore this simple fact. (56) Smyslov-Rudakovsky, Moscow 1945. Black to play. Black must move his threatened Bishop. Since 1 . . .Bc8 seems wrong, that only leaves 1 . . . Bd7 or 1 . . .Bc4. Most players don't like having to retreat and prefer the more aggressive 1 . . .Bc4. Indeed, that is what Black chose in the actual game. 1 . . .Bc4?? Would you believe that this natural move leads to a postionally lost game? It does! As hard as it is to accept, 1 . . . Bc4 is a positional blunder. To understand the position, we have to look at the backward pawn on d6. Is this pawn weak or in danger? No, it is well defended. However, the square in front of it (d5) only has two defenders-the light-squared Bishop and the Knight. Black's error with 1 . . . Bc4 was that he traded one of the critical defenders of d5 for a piece that had virtually nothing to do with that square. Smysiov was quick to jump on this mistake.

2.Bxc4 Qxc4

3.Bg5!

Immediately chopping off d5's final defender. 3 ...Rfe8

4.Bxf6 Bxf6

5.Nd51 Bd8

[diagram]
Black would lose the Exchange after 5 . . . Qxc2 6.Rf2 Qc5 7.Rcl followed by Nc7.

6.c3 and White's domination of d5 (and the superior minor

piece that came with it) gave him a huge advantage that vvas confidently converted into a win after 6..b5 7.b3 Qc5+ 8.Khl Rc8 9.Rf3 Kh8 10.f6 gxf6 ll.Qh4 Rg8 12.Nxf6 Rg7 13.Rg3 B:xf6 14.Qxf6 Regs 15.Rdl d5 16.Rxg7, 1-0, since 16 . . .Rxg7

17.Rxd5 leaves Black with no answer to Rd8+.

All right, Smyslov played well, but could a student of mine do the same? I gave this task to 1330. First I gave him a lecture on strong and weak pawns. Then we spent a few weeks on other topics. Once I was sure that he'd forgotten everything we had spoken about earlier, I threw this position at him. Silman-1330. Black to play. 1330: "Well, I have to move my Bishop to either c8, d7 or c4. At the moment White's Bishop is better than mine. I could force a trade on c4 but he would chase my Queen all over the board. Possible is . . . Bd7 but I hate to retreat, and c8 is even worse. I like d7 since my Queen is safe and I keep pressure on fS."

[diagram]
I began to search for the cattle prod. He didn't even mention the fact that Black was saddled with a backward d-pawn! As for his comment about his Queen being chased around, is this reality or laziness? Let's take a look: 1 . . .Bc4 2.Bxc4 Qxc4 3.b3? Qc6 and the c3-square has been weakened (which in tum weakens c2) by White's thoughtless one-move attack (b2-b3). From White's point of view, we must ask if Black would leave his Queen on c4 after b2-b3? It's clear that a sane person wouldn't. So White is left with the following question: "Did b2-b3 improve White's game in other ways?" Not at all. It just weakened squares and had no purpose other than the obvious attack on the Queen. This shows us that White shouldn't even consider b2-b3 after 1 . . . Bc4 2.Bxc4 Qxc4, and Black shouldn't fear it (in fact, he would happily pay White to play it!). Don't make moves that have no purpose other than some obvious threat that can easily be parried. 1 . . . Bd7! So 1330 played the right move for the wrong reason. 1 . . . Bd7 is correct since it will go to c6 where it attacks White's e4-pawn and defends the delicate d5-square. Then Black can play . . .a6, . . .b5, . . .Qb7 and . . .b5-b4, undermining both d5 and e4.

2.g4

1330: "He is starting a horrifying kingside attack. I'm con cerned about g4-g5 when my Knight has no good squares. I could block that by . . .h6 but this would weaken my kingside. However, I like my Knight's position since it attacks e4 and defends dS." He mentioned the d5-square and the e4-pawn! Thank good ness for that. I would have been even happier if he had first played 2 . . . Bc6 (bringing another piece to bear against d5 and e4), since I was sure that he was not aware of the proper followup to 2 . . . h6. 2 . . . h6

3.h4

1330: "He still has the same threat. Is this the time for 3 . . . dS? I lose a pawn. I could go to h7 and defend gS." 3 ... Nh7

[diagram]
Better was 3 . . . Bc6, attacking e4 and guarding d5, and only then . . .Nh7.

4.Qg3?

4.Nd5 was stronger (a move that could have been prevented

by an earlier . . . Bc6) but I wanted to give him the chance to find an all-star defensive idea. 4 ...Bc6?? Too late. If White can successfully get g4-g5 in, he will have a winning attack. Black could have punished White for his last move by the retreating 4 . . .Qd8!, a move that attacks h4 and covers g5. If White answered this by 5.h5 then Black would be free from the worry of g4-g5. If White played 5.Bf2, then the g5-square wou:d still be in Black's hands and 5 . . .Bc6 would be an intelligent move. Just because a piece moves backwards doesn't mean that it's retreating.

5.g5 hxg5

6.hxg5

1330: "What is the threat? My Bishop is practically worthless. I might be able to hole it up with 6 . . . f6. If 7.g6 NgS 8.Bxg5 fxgS." Driving a stake through his own heart. However, his game was already very bad. If you keep playing on the side where yo.Jr opponent dominates, then you will almost certainly lose. 6 ...f6??

7.g6 Ng5

8.Bxg5 fxg5

9.Bc4+ and Black wisely resigned. Of course, 9.Qh3 was al:;o

promising. Black lost this game because he reacted to the White attack and he never got his own play started.

[diagram]

4.Nbd2 O-O 5.e4 d6 6.c3 Bg4 7.Be2 Re8 8.h3 Bxf3 9.Bxf3 e5.

1650: "Though the Black pawns point towards the kingside, I should still castle on that side of the board. Black's Bishop is hitting granite and his b7-pawn might hang if he's not careful. After 10.O-O, if he plays 10 . . .Nc6 then 1 1 .d5 gains time and drives the Knight away. After I castle, White will continue Rel and Nc4 and then he can initiate the capture

[diagram]
on e5. I f Black takes the time to play . . . h6, then White will take on f6. However, after 10.O-O Nc6 l l .d5 Ne7 he breaks the pin on the h4-d8 diagonal, so closing the center with d5 may not be very good. Back to my plan of O-O, Rel and Nc4. I'm not sure where my Queen goes, but after an eventual Rdl his center will fall." When 1650 refers to the pawns pointing in a certain direction, he is trying to make use of my rule of pointing pawns: In closed or semi-closed positions you willusually attack in the direc tion where your pawns point. In other words, the pawns on c7, d6 and e5 are aiming at the kingside-they act as a finger pointing the way. Why does this work? Because that is the direction where you have the most space, and you should usually play where you own more territory. Though it's a good sign to see 1650 thinking about this rule, he's forgetting that the center is still in a state of flux and the pawn-pointing rule only applies to a closed or semi-closed position. If you keep the center open and play in that sector, then the pawn-pointing rule has less validity. This is because the center is the most important place to play on the board and play there usually take precedence over play on the wings. Another interesting but incorrect statement is that "10 . . .Nc6 can be answered by 1 1.d5 with a gain of time." I often notice that amateurs love to attack enemy pieces with a pawn. The reasons for this are: 1) They are attacking something and this threatening gesture gives them a certain sense of security. 2) They think that they are gaining time. Let's look at the flaws in this reasoning. Keep in mind that when you attack something it willmove to safety (I am constantly surprised by the amount of players who harbor secret hopes that the attacked piece will stay put and die!). It is also important to understand that a pawn move only gains time if it chases a piece to an inferior square or places the pawn on a better post than where it started. In the present case, 10 . . . Nc6 ll .d5 Ne7 does not gain time for White because he's closing the position (something that favors the person with Knights), making his f3-Bishop a poor piece and taking away his central play. White should not crow about any of these accomplishments.

[diagram]
Other things that were stated or ignored b y 1650: 1) He's ignoring the important imbalance of the two Bishops. Since Bishop like open positions, an acknowledgment of this imbalance would tell him that closing the center with d4-d5 might not be a good idea. 2) Black's Bishop is not hitting granite! It's a good piece and can easily become active after an eventual . . .exd4. Admit tedly, the center-closing d4-d5 makes Black's Bishop bad but this would also devalue White's two Bishops. 3) He says that after a certain series of moves, Black's center will fall. Why should this be true? After a move like . . .Nbd7 or . . .Nc6 Black has a firm grip on his e5-pawn. What is really going on? At some point Black can pressure White's e4 and d4 pawns with . . . exd4 (this also frees the g7- Bishop). White should try to kill off this counterplay and activate his tWo Bishops with 10.dxe5! dxe5 (10 . . . Rxe5 11.Bf4) 1 1 .O-O. White would then gain space on the queenside with a4 and b4 and get his light-squared Bishop into the game with Bf3-e2-c4. This plan would give the first player a small but safe edge because Black would have no points of attack and the Black Knights would have no advanced support points. On the other hand, White's Bishops w'ould take up active posts on e3 and c4.

10.O-O Nc6

1650: "If I play 11.d5, then l l . . . Na5 is bad since b3 takes away all his squares. After 1 1 .dS, the center is locked with his pawns pointing towards the kingside while mine aim at the queenside. I don't want to play d5 but I'm tempted because it drives the Knight and gains time. If I do that, where does my Knight go then? My light-squared Bishop also seems poor. I'll tour my Knight to d5 via c4 and e3 instead of closing things." The comment about 11.d5 Na5 12.b3 (he's missing 12.b4, which picks up the poor beast) taking away all the Knight's squares is based on the lesson that the best way to deal with Knights is to take away all their advanced support points. However, why would Black want to place his Knight on the side where it is cut off from the rest of its army? Since he states that d5 leads to queenside chances for White and kingside play for Black, wouldn't it be more logical to bring the Knight to the side where Black intends to pursue

[diagram]
his play? Thus 1 1.d5 Ne7 is much more sensible. Always make the pieces and pawn structures work together, whether you're looking at your moves or your opponent's possible replies.

11.Nc4 h6

1650: "If I go to h4 then 12 .. . g5 13.Bg3 gives me pressure on e5." He tried to go to h4 but I warned him that something was wrong with the move. After a few moments he noticed that he would lose his e4-pawn to 1 1 . . .exd4 12.cxd4 g5 so he panicked and blitzed out a few moves. Let's devote a few lines to the subject of panic. Everyone has been unpleasantly surprised or has had the experience of notic ing-usually at the last moment-that their intended move is bad. If this happens, you must not make any hasty decisions. Instead, forget about the game and take a few moments to calm yourself down. Once this is done, you can reassess the situation and avoid making a decision based solely on emotion.

12.Bxf6 Qxf6

13.d5

Sti)l riding high on emotion, White has ceased to think about his moves. The quiet 13.dxe5 keeps a very safe position. 13 . . .Ne7 Now that the center is closed, the pawn-pointing rule comes into effect. Black will play for a kingside attack with . . . f7-f5 while White should try to create a breakthrough on the opposite wing. Why? The center is closed so the wings are the only places where play can be initiated. Since most of Black's space is located on the kingside (his most advanced pawn is on e5), he should try to add to this with . . . f7-f5 when his space advantage in that area is more apparent. In closed situations, you must play on the side where you have more freedom of movement and try to annex as much space as possible. Note that this is done with pawns advances since that allows files to be opened and the Rooks to enter the fray.

[diagram]
14.a4

1650: "This stops him from chasing my Knight with . . . b5." At the beginning of this game, White did what he was taught and tried to break the position down into its component parts. Unfortunately, he failed to correctly assess matters because his thinking was vague and disjointed. After the shock of hanging material (see the note on the 1 1m move), he played a few hasty moves and from now to the end of the game he does nothing but play one-move attacks or defend against specific threats. In other words, he has been reduced to a purely reactionary role. To be fair, the move that 1650 played (14.a4) is actually quite a good one. My criticism is that he only played it for a defensive purpose (to keep his Knight on c4). He should have been thinking in a more aggressive vein about gaining space on the queenside and trying to drum up an initiative there. 14 ... Qh4

15.Ne3

1650: "I don't like his Queen being there so I'll harass her." Very interesting! A moment ago White was intent about keeping his Knight on c4. However, Black's move upset him-his King is being attacked and he feels the need to defend. Sadly, his statement about harassing Black's Queen is not based on accurate calculation. Instead, he's bringing some pieces to the vicinity of the kingside and hoping that something positive happens for him. Never play moves with your fingers crossed! Never hope that he misses your threat or that things willsomehow work out. All chess players should get rid of words like maybe and somehow. Clarify what's going on to the best of your ability; perhaps you won't get it right but at least you will be creating some good habits. 1650 has gotten lazy and is no longer putting his full energy into the game. 15 ... f5

16.exf5

1650: "I like his pawn structure but I feel my King is safer than his."

[diagram]
Another lazy and erroneous thought. Don't think tl:at a King without a full pawn cover is necessarily in danger. A King is only in danger if the enemy pieces can get to it. I don't mind incorrect analysis or incorrect thinking-people can only perform at what ever level they have reached. Laziness, though, is a preventable disease that makes improvement impossible. The capture on fS is bad because it opens the g-file for Black's Rooks and makes Black's pawns on eS and fS mobile. 16 . . . gxf5

17.a5

1650: "A trap. I intend 18.Ra4." Why is this a trap? The one-move attack White gets on Black's Queen is hardly fatal. Notice how White is going more and more towards the reactionary role I discussed earlier? 17 ... Khs

18.Ra4 Qf6

19.Bh5

White's last two moves have been simple one-move attacks (please keep in mind that my criticisms usually refer to the thought behind the moves rather than the moves themselves). He is playing without any kind of plan. 19 . .. RgS 1650: "We are both building up. I want to weaken the fS pawn and put pressure on him." Finally some words of wisdom. White has identified a target. Now he should play 20.f4! when he holds back Black's pawns and threatens to initiate an attack on fS with fxeS at some point. The comment about "building up" is less astute:You must first identify a target and only then build up your forces to attack it.

20.Qf3?

Rather than stopping the advance of Black's central pawns, White places his Queen in a vulnerable position and makes the advance of the e-pawn all the more tempting.

[diagram]
20 . . . RafS 1650: "He has a pretty good buildup. I'm not sure how to respond. I like Black's game now. It looks like the tables have turned. " This new bout of depression comes with the realization that the f5-pawn is solidly defended. The rest of White's moves are all on the kingside. This is something that the attacker loves to see because that means White is reacting to what you are doing. Instead of this, he should have been creating counterthreats on the opposite wing (the b7- and c7-pawns are undefended).

21.g3 e4

1 650: "I need to find a good location for my Queen. I would like to play it to g2 for defense but e2 is also tempting because it guards my Bishop on h5." All thoughts of a counterattack are gone. White is only thinking about ways to hold things together.

22.Qg2 Qg5

1650: "I made the wrong choice. The e2-square was supe rior."

23.Be2 Be5

1650: "I'm busted. "

24.Khl f4

Black, who is dominating the game on the kingside (note that White never got his queenside counterplay going), easily won. White's position is a real mess after 25.gxf4 Qh4. Ti ps * The pawn-pointing rule is useful to know in closed or semi-closed positions. If the center is locked, you must attack on the wings with pawns. This increases your control of space and opens files for your Rooks. The pawn-pointing rule enables you to tell

[diagram]
which wing you are supposed to play on by "point ing" the way. See the note to Black's 9t11move for a more detailed explanation. * Don't attack something for no reason! Attacking an enemy piece has no value in itself. You must alvvays expect your opponent to play the best move, so he will(and you have to believe this!) see the transpar ent attack and move away to safety. If you have gained something valuable, even if he sees your threat, then the attack is useful. If there is nothing to be gained after his best reply, then restrain yourself and leave his pieces alone! Remember: you are trying to follow a plan that benefits your whole army and takes advantage of the weaknesses in his camp. One-move attacks are only useful if they do something to benefit your plan. * Avoid vague thoughts. Concentrate on one or two important features of the position and go as far with them as you can. This will enable you to stay on track. If you find yourself saying things like, "I'll somehow attack his King," you are being too vague. You must only attack the King (or anything else, for that matter) for a specific reason and you must be very clear with yourself on how you intend to go about doing it. * Don't allow surprise or depression to influence your moves. lf something unexpected or bad happens, you must sit on your hands until you regain you r equilibrium. When this is done, reassess the situa tion as if the game were starting over again and calmly figure out what the position needs. * Don't just react to the opponent's threats. At times, defensive moves are called for. However, if you find that you have lost track of your own plans and are just reacting to your opponent's blows, you must realize that you are on the road to defeat. Chess is a

[diagram]
game where the opponent tries to impose his will on yours. He wants you to do what he tells you to hdios. Fight like a madman and refuse to go along with agenda!

MATERIAL

0 f all the imbalances in chess, a material plus carries more

weight than anything else. An extra Bishop, or-in top-flight events--e ven an extra pawn, is often more than enough to give you a victory. For this reason, you must be very careful not to give away your units without just cause. Unfortunately, holding on to your pieces is not always so easy. I have noticed that the vast majority of games between amateurs are decided by some gross blunder of material. This means that if you can simply not give anything away (no deep strategy here!) you will see hundreds of points pad your rating. How can we avoid this type of gross blunder? One u1>eful method is to write your move down before you play it. Don't just scribble it, make the written move a work of art! The reason for 1 4 5

[diagram]
this is that, as w e look deeply into a position, our mind goes off on tangents that often take us far afield of the reality of the moment. Writing the move down in this fashion brings us back to the here and now. Once you have written the move down, you should ask, "When I play this move, does my opponent have any checks? Can he capture or threaten any of my pieces?" You will be surprised how often you will suddenly notice that your intended move, the move you placed so much hope in, is in reality a game-losing mistake. Instead of losing the game, though, you can now scratch out or erase your blunder and think of something new. Even though so much importance is placed on material, we must remember that it is an imbalance, just like any other imbalance. Don't win a pawn if it gives the opponent an advan tage in development, space, pawn structure or several other things. Remember that a material plus is a static advantage; don't allow yourself to be beaten by the enemy's dynamics or by a combination of other static factors. If you're lucky enough to find yourself with an advantage in material, you should follow these rules: RULE 1 - Material beats the initiative if you can neutralize the opponent's plusses and equalize the game (this might take quite a few moves to achieve, so you have to ask if you have the time). Then your extra material will , slowly but surely, bring him down. RULE 2 - Material gives you an extra unit of force. If you make this unit an active participant in the game,_ you willhave your opponent outnumbered. RULE 3 - Material edges like the Exchange (Bishop or Knight for a Rook-three points for five) are only useful if you can give the Rook an open file to fly on. An advanced, centralized Knight can easily beat an inactive, useless Rook. This means that you must be careful not to allow simple point count

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
will attempt to advance his pawns to b6 and c5 and then he will swing his Bishop around to the powerful d3 post via b5. Armed with this knowledge, White's plan should be easier to find since you must always strive to prevent the opponent fron-1 succeeding in his plans at the same time as you fight to bring your own to fruition.

1.Qc31

A simple, but very fine move. White prepares to centralize his Queen on d4 and also covers b4 so that he can continue with b2- b4. This advance stops Black from advancing his own pawn to cS and also prepares to force a file open with an eventual b5. 1 . . .Bd7

2.b4 a6

3.Qd4 h6

4.Rfdl

Threatening to win a pawn with 5.Qxe4. 4 ...Qe7

5.a4 Kh7

6.b51

White is happy to sacrifice a pawn if that allows his Rooks to break into the enemy position. 6 . . .axb5

7.axb5 Ra8

8.bxc6 Bxc6

9.Ral

White lays claim to the open a-file. 9 . . .Ra3

10.Rxa3 Qxa3

11.Ral Qb3

12.h3

White has succeeded in most of his aims and now takes a moment to see to the safety of his King.

12. . .Qd3

13.Qc5

[diagram]
White sees no reason to give Black a passed pawn on d 3 with

13.Qxd3 exd3. Besides, the combined attack of White's Queen

and Rook will soon lay waste to the Black King. 13 . .. Kg6

1145..Ra8 Kh5

Kh2! This allows the White Queen to move without having to fear a check on e3.

15. .. Qe2

16.RgS, 1-0.

(6 1) 1000-Silman. White to play. It's now clear that White is winning in our beginning position. However, that takes a high caliber of play, so I set it up again to see how my students would handle this type of technically winning situation. 1 000: "I'm a Rook for Bishop ahead but there are no open files for my Rooks. Black has one extra pawn and is more advanced than me. The pawns on a2, b7 and a7 are undefended but I don't see any way either side can take advantage of this. His pawns are blocking his Bishop so that means his Bishop is bad. This is in my favor. Black can boast that he has more space. So how do I use these advantages? There is a possibility of pinning the d-pawn and attacking

[diagram]
the one on e4. I must open a file for my Rooks and keep a close eye on my undefended pawns. One plan is Qb3, Rdl d4 and Rxe4 winning a pawn due to the pin on the a2-g8 diagonal. Another similar idea is to place a Rook on dl and play Qxe4 but that's no big deal since he should be able to defend against this type of thing. His e4-pawn stops my Rooks from going to f3 or d3. I'm inclined to advance my f pawn and open a file. I'll do this by doubling Rooks on f2 and fl and then advance the f-pawn by fS and f6." He did an excellent job of picking the position apart; far beyond what one would expect from a 1000 player (we had just finished talking about good and bad Bishops so he was very much aware of that idea). Also impressive is the fact that he noticed some hidden tactical possibilities based on Rdl and Qxe4. Unfor tunately, his reasoning falls apart when it comes to the actual plan chosen. He notices that no open file exists and makes a plan that tries to create one. This is excellent. However, he completely fails to take into account his opponent's moves. Just because you have a superior or even winnin g position doesn't mean there is nothing for your opponent to do!

1.Rf2? b6

Now White didn't ask why I played my move! You must always settle down and try to figure out what your opponent is up to. Instead, White forges ahead with his own (erroneous) ideas and completely ignores his opponent.

2.Rcfl?

Played instantly. Better was 2.Rd2 with the threat of 3.Qxe4. White could then have put pressure on Black's central pawns and tried to discourage Black from advancing them. Of course, White could not expect Black to miss this threat (after 2.Rd2), but placing your pieces on centralized posts is rarely bad, and at the worst serves to make it hard for Black to make use of his center pawns. 2 .. . c5 1000: "I don't like the way your pawns are coming forward. I'll stop them with 3.b3."

[diagram]
Ali of a sudden White starts to pay attention to Black's moves and now he forgets his own plans and begins to focus on his opponent's! You can't ignore your opponent's ideas but you also must avoid getting to a mental place where you do nothing but react to his moves and ideas.

3.b3?

Now Black's Bishop gets outside the pawn chain (one of the most important things you can do with bad Bishops) and takes up an excellent post on d3. Black no longer has any problems whatsoever. 3 . . . Bb5 1000: 'Tm not going to give you my Rook! I'll go to dl and pin the d-pawn." Notice how everything White does is just a reaction to Black's moves.

4.Rdl Bd3

1000: "You have no threat other than the Queen so I'll go to c3 with activity." White has lost his grip on reality and thinks he stands better just because he's u p an Exchange. This is not true. Rooks are no better than Bishops if you can't make use of them. Don't get trapped in the world of point count and ignore what's happening on the board. s.Qc3 d4 1 000: "I think I'm going to get my open file. After 6.exd4 Qxd4, I'd be happy to trade Queens."

6.exd4

During the last few moves, White should have begun damage control operations and given the Exchange back by Rxd3. 6 . . . cxd4 1000: "I'll retreat to cl which keeps me dominant on the file."

7.Qcl? e3

1000: "I like that. It's easy to defend my Rook, and his Bishop is hanging. His Queen is also stuck defending his d pawn so I'm not unhappy about his move."

[diagram]
Amazing! White is so possessed by the newly opened file that he ignores all the plusses that Black has created for himself (active Bishop, two powerful passed pawns and pressure against the White f-pawn).

8.Rb2

Here 1000 tried 8.Rf3 but took it back when I pointed out the possibility of 8 . . . Be2. 8 . . . Ba6 1000: "I'll play 9.a4 and try to kick his Bishop off the a6-fl diagonal with b4-b5. Wait a minute! I just missed the excellent 9.Qxe3! Fortunately I noticed it before I did anything else." I give him credit for noticing this tactical shot (made possible by the undefended position of Black's Queen). It's just bad luck that it doesn't work out.

9.Qxe3 dxe3

10.Rxd6 e2??

This turns out to be a serious mistake that allows White to escape with a draw. However, the first player doesn't see it because he becomes depressed. This leads to a sense of hopeless ness, and this again leads to an inability to see what's really going on in the position. Black should have played 10 .. . Rxf4! when the threat of mate on fl gives Black an important tempo. This would have led to the win of a White Rook (much as in the actual game). 1000: "I must retreat to bl. 1 1.Kf2 loses to 1 1 . . . Rxf4 + . " Notice the comment, " I must." Saying this almost guarantees that you will miss the reality of what's going on. "I must" is a chain around one's brain, and must be permanently exorcised from your chess vocabulary!

11.Rbl??

Trapped by the hypnotic tone of "I must," White fails to see 1 1 .Re6! Rxf4 12.Rbxe2 with a drawn position. 1 1. .. Rxf4 1 2.Rel There was no defense. 12 . . . Rfl +, 0-1.

[diagram]

[diagram]
have used his Rooks in conjunction with his Queen to eventually create an attack against the enemy King. Another point that may make White want to retain the Queens is the fact that the Black King is now free to run to the center and help hold things together. With the Queens on, the Kings would both stay at home. 1 . . .Qxc5

2.Rxc5 b6

1550: "Must move my Rook since I want to double on the c file. I will play Rc3, which allows the doubling and defends e3 and allows for attacks like Ra3."

3.Rc3 c5

1550: "White wants to challenge Black's pawns. Black has opened up the diagonal for his Bishop so White wants to move his Rook on fl; at the same time he also wants to protect his pawn on f4." So both amateurs (1000 and 1550) allowed Black to advance his pawn to c5. In this case, White noticed the' possibility but just allowed it to happen. You don't have to let your opponents do what they want. Stop them!

4.g3?

Absolutely horrible. White was worried about moving his fl Rook since an eventual . . . d4 would undermine his pawn on f4. By fixing his gaze on random will-o-the-wisps (I am reminded of a deer transfixed by the headlights of a car), he forgets about more important factors that are about to hit him on the head. 4.Rdl would have been much better. 4 . . . Bb5 1550: "That is what I was trying to avoid! Well . . . it's too late to do anything about it now. White's pressure is on the c-file so I'll play Rfcl when both my Rooks are safe from the enemy." It's becoming clear that the most common error that the amateur makes (in any situation) is to ignore the opponent's possibilities. Only when a direct threat (real or imagined) appears on the board do they respond, though this response tends to be filled with panic.

[diagram]
5.Rfc l Rd8?

I played this poor move to see if he would panic at the prospect of the d-pawn rushing forward. However, White rises to the occasion and comes up with a wonderful reply. Black should have played the obvious 5 . . . Bd3. 1 550: "Black is threatening a pawn push on the d-file so White will start a counterattack on the c-file by sacrificing a pawn with b4."

6.b4!

[diagram]
8.Rxc8+ Kf7 9.Rc7+ Kf8 10.Rxa7 Bc4 1 1.g4 followed by f5 and Kf2-

g3-f4-e5. 6 . . . Bc4 1550: "Black threatens the a-pawn. First, I'll trade."

7.bxc5 bxc5

1500: "Black has a bit of play but White's Rooks are also more mobile. White also wants his King in the game. "

[diagram]
8.Kf2?

It's interesting to watch White play a very thoughtful idea on one turn and then do some lazy "pass" on the next. Instead of this useless time-waster (where is the King going? I'm sure that White has no idea), he had a couple of moves that deserved consider ation. For example, 8.Ra3! a6 9.Ra5 ties Black down to the defense of his pawns, and 8.Rbl!? Bxa2 9.Ral Bc4 10.Rxa7 with a Rook on the seventh and the threat of Rc7 is also possible. It's strange that White worked so hard to create an open file for his Rooks, and when he succeeds in this plan, he refuses to make use of them. 8 . . .Rb8 1 550: "Ouch! I missed this move. Now he's getting activity and creating some threats so I'll sacrifice the Exchange back and put pressure on his other pawns. This should put me in charge."

Here he goes again. After the bad 8'h move (8.Kf2?) he comes storming back with a nice idea.

9.Rxc4!? dxc4

10.Rxc4 Rb2+

1 1.Kgl Rxa2 1 2.Rxc5 a5? A bad move. Black could (and should!) get an easy draw with 12 . . . . Ra3 1 3.Kf2 Ra2+ but I didn't want the game to end yet. Instead, I play to see what he remembers of our endgame lessons. 1 3.ReS 1 550: "Might as well eat the e-pa wn and get a passed pawn of my own. " 1 3. . .a4 1 4.Rxe4 Kf7 1550: "I will advance my g-pawn to g4 to limit Black's King activity and at the same time expand my majority. If I can get his queenside pawn for one of my kingside pawns, I will be a clean pawn up." I wasn't happy to hear this last comment. I had told him in the past that a Rook ending with three versus two pawns (or two vs.

[diagram]
one) that are all on the same side of the board is drawn. If Black can trade his a-pawn for White's pawn on e3, then a draw would result in spite of White's extra guy. At this point, White is winning and he should do everything he can to avoid any kind of drawish situations. The fact that his opponent is much higher rated is no excuse.

15.g4

Fortunately for White, he can't find any way to trade the a pawn for the e-pawn so he instead continues to play good moves and soon builds up an overwhelming position. 15 . . .h6 1 550: "I will keep advancing and claim more space."

16.h4 Kf6

1 550: "I will move my Rook along the fourth rank, which allows the e-pawn to advance."

17.Rb4 h5

1550: "I want to prevent Black's King from entering the battle so I will first drive him away with a check."

18.Rb6+ Kf7

19.g5

1 550: "Now I have three versus one. If I took on h5, it would just be two versus one since the doubled h-pawn would be useless." 19 . . . a3 1550: "White would like to get his King into action since it's doing nothing at the moment. First I'll activate my f-pawn by pushing it to f5. Then, if . . . g6, I will advance to f6 and White should win." This is the very moment that I was waiting for when I went into this endgame. I wanted to see if he remembered the extremely important rule: Rooks belong behind passed pawns. If he had played 20 .Ra6! I would have been delighted, though

20.g6+! first and only then 21 .Ra6 is probably even more accurate.

[diagram]
20.f5??

If White's Rook were on a6, then this pawn move would be completely winning. Unfortunately for White, Black is actually able to win the game now. 20 . . .Rb2 1550: "I think I made a big error. White can't trade Rooks. "

21.Ra6 a2

1550: "I can't believe it. I'm actually losing now."

22.g6+ Kf8

23.e4 Rbl+

24.Kf2 al"'Q

25.Rxal Rxal and the game was stopped

Tips * Once you learn how to break down the imbalances in a position, you have to practice coming up with a plan based on these factors. * Use this same understanding of the imbalances to figure out what the opponent should be doing and then make some effort to stop his plans (unless you are sure your plans will come to fruition first). * Don't ignore your opponent's threats or ideas. Just because you have a superior or even winning position doesn't mean there is nothing for your opponent to do! * You must also avoid getting into a place where all you do is worry about your opponent's intentions. Then you will spend the game reacting to his moves and will almost surely lose. * Avoid the quick, lazy moves that all of us are prone to on occasion. A lazy, ill-considered move often turns out to be the losing blunder.

[diagram]

1. . .

Nxe5? Giving White's dark-squared Bishop more scope and turning the potentially weak pawn on d4 into a strong attacking e5-pawn.

2.dxe5 Nd7?

Leaving the Knight undefended on d7. The amateur must be very careful when he sees that his pieces are undefended; many bad things can befall them when this happens.

3.Bxh7+

A simple combination that nets a pawn. 3 . . . Kxh7

4.Rxd7 Rfe8

White has won a pawn and could easily fall asleep with the thought that his game will win itself. How many prom[sing positions are lost in this way? Since the extra pawn is not going to make itself felt for a long time, White must work hard to insure that other positional factors will be in his favor. The most glaring thing about the position is the fact that Black has two Bishops. What are the rules for this type of situation? Going back to the chapter on minor pieces, we see that the side with the Bishop and Knight should trade off one of the enemy Bishops and create a Bishop versus Knight position. Then you must concentrate on making your Knight superior tD the enemy Bishop. With this in mind, White comes up with a detailed plan designed to make his Knight as good or better than any Bishop.

5.Qf21

Covering the important c5-square with gain of time since Black must do something about the threatened 6.Rxe7 Rxe7

7.Qh4+, picking up a piece.

[diagram]
6.Bc5!

Trading off a set of Bishops and preparing to give the Knight a nice home on cS. 6 . . .Bxc5

7.Nxc5 Bd5

8.Na41

The cS-square was nice but it was not permanent since no pawn defended it. Due to this, the greedy Knight heads for greener pastures on b6. 8 ...Qc6

9.Nb6 Rcd.8

10.RxdS Rxd8

ll.Qd4 and White was in complete control. The final moves saw White give the material back in order to weaken the Black King: 11 . . . Qb5 12.h4 Rb8 13.h5 Rb7 14.h6 gxh6 15.Rcl Qxa5

16.RcS+ Kh7 17.Qg4 Qxb6+ 18.Kh2 h5 19.Qxh5+ Kg7

20.QhS+, 1-0.

This game is certainly nothing special, but I was quite interested to see how a strong amateur player would handle the technical questions that arose after White won the pawn. (65) 1700-Silman. Black to play.

MA Tl RIAL I 1 6 3 1700: "Black's pawns on a6 and b4 are weak while White's weaknesses can easily be protected. White has more queenside space than Black. White might be able to use the weak b6-square and c5 is another potential target. Black h.as an ideal square on d5, though White could exchange pieces there." reminded him that this was the wrong strategy. In a past lesson I had taught him that the way to beat isolated d-pavvns is to trade off allthe minor pieces and then double on t:he d pawn with a Queen and Rook. The lack of minor pieces vvould t_ake away all the isolated d-pawn's dynamic strength and t:urn it into a pure weakness. Due to this rule, it is Black who would be happy to make trades on d5, not White. 1700: "I forgot about that stuff. Anyway, White would attack on the queenside and Black on the kingside. Does White want to allow . . .Nxe5, exchanging a good Knight for a limited one? I would not allow this Knight on e5 to be exchanged. I would have played it to c4 and b6. Black should take on e5. Overall, I think that White is a bit better due to his space, control of key squares and Black's weak queenside pawns. On second thought, if . . . Nxe5 then dxe5 makes the dark squared Bishop very dangerous! What is this talk about a kingside attack for Black? As usual, the amateur player is always thinking of attacking the enemy King, even if such a thing is unlikely in the given position. 1 .. . Nxe5

2.dxe5 Nd7

3.Bxh7+ Kxh7

4.Rxd7

1700: "That was easy to see." 4 ... Rfe8 1700: "I would like to get a Knight to b6. Also the Bish.op could go there." Bishops don't necessarily need to be advanced to be ef:"ective, but Knights do! He should have given a lot of thought to his

[diagram]
Knight's future. Note how ideas about superior minor pieces never entered his head. I would have been so happy if he had thought of trading one pair of Bishops (when the opponent has two Bishops, trade off one of them and leave him with only a single Bishop), but though my students are well aware of this rule, they have trouble recognizing and implementing it during actual play.

5.Bb6 Bd5

1700: "Do I want to exchange my bad Knight for his good Bishop? Should I give it to him and win it back by Qd3+? Can his c-Rook penetrate along that file? No, it can't. This means that I can take the time to double." I was happy to see him not panic over . . .Bxb3, which is really not a. threat at all due to the reply Qd3+. However, why does he want to double on a file that is not open due to the Bishop's presence on d5?

6.Rdl? Kg8

1700: "I might be able to trap his Queen with Ra7 at some point. Can I let him take on b3 and get a check on d8? No, I will just centralize my Knight. I also threaten Nf5!"

7.Nd4 Bc5

1700: "Trying to exchange a pair of Bishops. I thought I was the one who was supposed to do this? However, he is weakening my a5-pawn and pinning my Knight. If 8.Bxc5 Rxc5 my pawns on a5 and e5 are both weak. I think my game has gotten worse than it was at first. Critical is 8.Ra7 going after a6."

8.Ra7 Qxa71

9.Bxa7 Bxa7

10.Khl Bxd4

ll.Rxd4 Rel+

12.Rdl Rfc8 and we stopped the game since Black, for a

small material price, had gotten a firm grip on the initiative.

[diagram]
Tips * When playing against an isolated d-pawn, trade off all the minor pieces and the pawn's weaknesses will come to light (no attacking chances for the player with the isolated pawn, while the remaining Queen and Rooks will be able to put strong pressure against the pawn). * Even if you win material, you must not forget to read the imbalances and create a plan.

DEVELOPMENT

INITIATIVE

Development and initiative are almost invisible-they don't have anything to do with territory, nor do they revolve around pawn structure or any particular weakness. Instead, these terms belong in the mysterious realm of dynamics, compared to the statics that most of our other imbalances correspond to. A static advantage is a positionally motivated imbalance. It's long-lasting, and can be used immediately or later in the game. Material is a static advantage, as are weak pawns, weak squares and, of course, extra territory. A dynamic advantage is composed of something less tangible and permanent. Here concepts such as timing, tactical vision and playing with verve become important. The goal with a dynamic advantage is to make quick and energetic use of it, in the hopes of trading in the temporary activity for a permanent static edge or a quick knockout. 1 6 7

[diagram]

[diagram]

3.NeS, but instead White decides to advance his pawn and chase

Black's main kingside defender away.

1.e5

[diagram]
A strong move here, but usually the better developed side would try to open the position rather than close it. 1 ...Nd7 Now quiet play might allow Black time to get some counterplay in the center and on the queenside by . . . c5 followed by . . .Nc6. White has the use of a greater force at the moment so he decides to strike while the iron is hot.

2.Bxh7+1

Notice how White's last two moves have not allowed Black the time to get the rest of his forces out. When you are ahead in development, take the battle to the opponent'. 2 ...Kxh7

3.Ng5+ Kg8

4.Qh5 and Black will be mated (4 . . . Bxg5 5.hxg5). Poor Black

was overwhelmed by the superior force of the White army. RULE 2 - A lead in development means the most in open positions because the open central files should enable your army to penetrate into the hostile position with relative ease. If you have more pieces out and the position is wide open (or even semi-open), then don't hesitate to ATIACKI Browne-Quinteros, Wijk aan Zee 1974. Sicilian Defense, Moscow Variation.

1.e4 c5

2.Nf3 d6

3.Bb5+

This line remains popular at all levels of competition. 3 . . . Bd7

4.Bxd7+ Qxd7

5.c4

Black can win a pawn with the greedy (but overly risky) . . . 5 ...Qg4? However, this move, which does give Black a static material

[diagram]
edge, allows White to build u p an enormous advantage in development.

6.O-O Qxe4

7.d4

White opens up as many lines as possible. These open files should be looked upon as highways into the hostile position.

7. . .cxd4

8.Rel Qc6

9.Nxd4 Qxc4?

(67) White to play and attack like mad! Black's last move gives him a two pawn advantage. However, few things in life are free, and this suicidal capture gives White more development and more open lines. If you are the defender in such positions, remember that it is rarely a good idea to open lines if your King is still in the center.

10.Na3

From this point on, White will play with threats and never allow his opponent to bring his lazy troops out. 10 . . . QcS

11.Nab5

Threatening 12.Nxd6+.

11. ..Qd7

[diagram]
White answers the obvious 1 1 . . .e6 with 12.Nf5!.

12.Bf4

Renewing the threat against d6. 12 . . .e5

13.Bxe51

It's time to crack open the Black King. White is playing for complete Armageddon and, as a result, normal material and positional considerations no longer exist. 13 . . . dxe5

14.Rxe5+ Be7

15.Rd51

Black is not given a moment's rest. 15 • • . QcS Taking on d5 was not possible due to 16.Nc7+.

16.Nf5

Another fork is threatened on d6. 16 . • . KfS

17.Nxe7 Kxe7

Mate follows 17 . . .Nxe7 18.Rd8+.

18.Re5+, 1-0. Black has taken enough punishment. 18 . . .Kf8

19.Qd6+ does not paint a pretty picture for the second player.

RULE 3 - If the enemy King is still in the center and you have a lead in development, consider these factors an invitation to rip the opponent's head om Start an immediate attack. At the very least, you will keep his King stuck in the middle and make hint suffer for a long time to come. RULE 4 - A closed position often nullifi es a lead in development because the blocked files stop you from effecting any real penetration. If you have a big lead in development and think you can blast the

[diagram]
pawns out of the way, then by allmeans give it a try. However, more often than not, the side with the deficit in development will find that he has ample time to cure this problem if the central situation is locked up. A common opening that leads to a closed center is 1.d4 Nf6

2.c4 c5 3.d5 e5 4.Nc3 d6 5.e4 Be7 (this line is known as the

Czech Benoni) 6.Bd3 O-O 7.Nge2 Ne81 Black allows himself to fall behind in development because he knows that White's pieces cannot get to him due to the traffic jam in the middle. After 8.O-O, Black shows that he's willing to lose even more time by 8 ...Bg51, trading off his bad Bishop for White's good one. Black shows disdain for development and instead accomplishes a good strate gic goal, secure in the knowledge that he can catch up in development later. RULE 5 - The goal doesn't have to be mate! If you start an attack and win material (or get the two Bishops in an open position, or leave him with weak pawns, etc.) by the time he gets his forces out, then you are in possession of a fine static advan tage. Don't go crazy and attempt to force an inune diate decision where none exists. (68) • .i..ii. .• .t· .l .l•. • .i. • ·• .l i i White to play.

[diagram]
In diagram 68, White could attempt to make m e of his development lead and try to attack in some way, but why not grab material with 1.Bxf7+ Kxf7 2.Qc4+ followed by Qxc6 with a solid extra pawn? This would give White something to use for the rest of the game. I n itiat ive When you have control of the game, you are said to possess the initiative. The initiative can be based on static or dynamic factors. For example, if you are attacking a weak pawn (a static plus) and your opponent is reduced to a passive defense, you have the initiative. You would still own the initiative if you have a poor pawn structure but your lead in development gives you an attack (this time you have an initiative based on dynamics). In general, top players look upon the initiative vith great favor; it is always advantageous to have the initiat:ive. The question is, will you be able to retain it and what was the price you paid to acquire it? For example, you may have sacrificed a pawn to take control of the game (the initiative). Will your opponent eventually be able to equalize (when his extra pawn might take on enormous importance), or will your initiative lead to gains that are greater than the sacrificed material?

[diagram]

[diagram]
The position in diagram 69 comes about after the moves 1.e4 c5 2.d4 cxd4 3.c3 dxc3 4.Nxc3 (the Smith-Morra Gambit in the Sicilian Defense). Why did White sacrifice a pawn? He does gain a lead in development, but in this case Black expects to eventually catch up. The real reason White made the offer was to create two open files and a space advantage. Of course, this particular gambit is considered somewhat unsound at the top levels, but the concept is a good one: Always fight to take control of the game. Of course, if you can create static advantages and also retain the initiative then you have the best of both worlds. However, it's often a tradeoff, one kind of advantage for another. For example, if you are about to get pushed around, why not give up material (in trade for the initiative) and try to become master of your own fate? The example in the diagram is somewhat extreme. White immediately goes after the initiative and feels that a pawn is a small price to pay. However, why should White give anything away? Why not fight for the initiative by positional means (grab bing tactical possibilities if they arise) and attempt to get it all at no cost whatsoever? Though most gambits don't really work in the professional ranks (White is happy to try and make use of his extra move), amateurs can learn a lot from initiative-seeking pawn sacrifices. Ultimately, though, you have to be able to do both: mastering positional (static) ideas on one hand and making use of dynamic strategies on the other. • • • • • An eight year old student-rated about 1 100 and visiting me for the first time-showed me a game which he lost to an opponent (another youngster) with a rating of just 800. He wasn't sure where he went wrong, but a glance was sufficient to show me that he lost due to passive play. His opponent grabbed the initiative and literally blew him off the board.

[diagram]
800 vs. 1 100. Sicilian Defense, Rossolimo Variation.

1.e4 c5

2.Nf3 e6

3.Nc3 Nc6

4.Bb5 Nd4

5.O-O Nxb5

6.Nxb5

So far both sides have played really well. White enjoys a lead in development while Black has a solid position and owns a pair of Bishops.

6...d6

Quite playable, but this move caused some concern in me. I would have been happier to see 6 . . . a6, chasing the Knight back to obscurity. If Black had taken lessons from me earlier, he would have known that you battle Knights by taking away alltheir advanced support points.

7.d4

This guy is just 800 strength? White is trying to open up the position so he can make use of his lead in development. Of course, it's usually bad to open things up when your opponent has two Bishops, but the dynamic strength of a development lead must be exploited immediately or it will fade away. 7 .. . b6? The first poor move of the game. Correct was 7 . . . a6 8.Nc3 cxd4 when White's Knights are being contained and Black can hope to catch up in development (nullifying White's main weapon) and eventually make his two Bishops (Black's main weapon) work for him. Remember that you are supposed to create imbalances in the opening and then develop your pieces around those diff erences.

8.Bf4?

White's heart is in the right place but he falters anyway. He should have made immediate use of his advanced Knight by

[diagram]
playing 8.dxc5 bxc5 9.Bf4. Now Black is given another opportu nity to chase the annoying horse away. 8 . . . Ba6? (70) White to play. Black's last move (8 . . .Ba6) pins the Knight, but it allows the horse to remain on b5. It was still correct to play 8 . . . a6.

9.c4

I would prefer 9.a4, when 9 . . .Bxb5 10.axb5 opens a file for White's Rook. 9 . . . Qd7 So what is Black doing? Whatever it is, it's not correct. He is not aware of the possible battle between the minor pieces-we know this because he's not doing anything to make his Bishops active-and he is letting the enemy Knight remain on its active post. Black is also not aware of the danger of leaving one's King in the center for too long. Once you castle and get your King to safety, you can play for a long time. However, if your King is sitting in the middle, then you might get nuked at any moment. Finally, Black is not aware of the dangers inherent in a lack of development. At the beginning of this game, he bought the two Bishops for the price of development. Now it's time to replenish

[diagram]
his store of cash (development), but he refuses to do so. Moves like . . .b6 do nothing for development at all, and . . . Ba6 and . . .Qd7 leave all the kingside pieces at home.

10.a4 O-O-O

White threatened dx:c5 with a gang-attack on d6. Castling long defends this square but places the King in another vulnerable area.

11.e51

White is doing everything he can to open up the position and get to the Black King. This is exactly what you want to do when you enjoy a huge lead in development. 11 ... d5

12.cxd5 exd5

13.e6!!

The 800 rating kept swirling around in my head. I wish my students with class A ratings could play like this! In one move, White, who is playing with a lot of energy, brings two pieces into the attack. 13 ... f:xe6

14.Ne5 Qe7?

Note that 14 . . . Qb7 is still met by 15.Nc6! when the Rook and the a7-pawri both hang and 15 . . . Qxc6 fails to 16.Nxa7+

15.Nc6 and White went on to win.

This game raised some questions. Do most amateurs see a lack of development as a major problem? Do most amateurs attack with the verve that White demonstrated in the game? To answer these questions, I had two of my students take the White side from the diagrammed position and try to blow me off the board.

[diagram]

9.c4 Qd7

1400: "I will bring my Queen up to d3 where it will defend c4. This move also connects my Rooks." I prefer 10 .a4 followed by 1 1 .e5, as seen in the original game. White has become so concerned about defending b5 that he never gets his dreams for an attack started. A large part of chess success is based on attitude. If you decide that your advantage consists of something that demands quick and vigorous play and you insist on moves from yourself that

[diagram]
conform to those particular needs, then you will be a fearsome opponent. However, if you pay too much attention to the enemy's threats, then your mind will click into this defensive mode and you will become sensitive to every threat or non-threat that arises. You will start playing a game of reaction and your own ideas will never have a chance for expression.

10.Qd3 cxd4

1400: "Now the recapture dumps a piece to . . .e6-e5. I'll play e5. This opens the center but blocks my Bishop." He has already lost the game mentally. If someone's King is in the middle, then feel free to sacrifice a pawn or even a piece in order to get your army to it. In this case, White should play l 1.Qxd4! e5 (the move he feared. Simply good for White is 1 1 . . .Bxb5 12.cxb5 e5 13.Qd5) 12.Nxe5! (blasting his way through) 12 . . .dxe5 13.Qxe5+ Be7 14.Nc7+ and White regains his sacrificed piece. White didn't see this because he stopped looking when he saw the fork by . . .e6-e5. This is how blind spots are created; we see a move or two ahead, notice a problem, and completely stop looking. Instead, we should look one or two moves ahead, stop, and treat this future situation as our starting position. When you analyze from this new starting position you will often be amazed at what you find! ll.e5 d4 Notice how White has been reacting to Black's threats for the last several moves. In chess there are two wars being waged: one is on the physical chessboard. The other is the subtler battle of mind versus mind. In the present contest, White is doing whatever Black tells him to do. This means that Black has already won the mental part of the fight.

12.b3?

No words or thought; he just played it right away. He's still reacting to everything Black does. 12 ...dxc4 }3.bxc4 Bc5

[diagram]
Now White has a permanent weakness on c4 and he has also given Black use of the c5-square. 1400: "I want to take on d4. " He tried 14.Nfxd4 Bxb5 15.Be3?? Cl5.Qe4) and didn't notice that he was a piece down. I pointed this out to him and had him do something else. 1 400: "That's not good! I'll just keep up the pressure by moving my Rook to dl." White is making things easy on Black. He has to get control of the game before Black develops his Knight and castles; he has to make something happen before the long-term disadvantages of the White position make themselves felt. White should play

14.Nd6+ Bxd6 15.exd6 when the pawn on d6 is quite strong and

the pawn on d4 will quickly fall. Remember: Chess is a game where you come up with an idea that supposedly improves the plusses in the position, then you do everything you can to implement that idea. In the present case, White is just doing what his opponent wants him to do.

14.Rad1 Ne7

1400: "I want to trade one of my Knights for a Bishop to get rid of his Bishop pair. I'll do this by Nd2-b3xc5." He's lost all sense of reality and reverts to rules used only in static situations. Taking the Bishop on c5 only helps Black retain his extra pawn on d4. White should have taken his pawn back by

15.Nfxd4.

15.Nd2? O-O

16.Nb3? Bxb5

17.Nxc5 b:xc5

18.cxb5 Qd5. Black threatens both . . .Qxa2 and . . .Ng6 fol

lowed by . . . Nxe5. We stopped the game. So White noticed what was going on in this game but he never made a real effort to realize his ideals. It was becoming clear to me that mental toughness (this is something that can be learned) is a major part of chess strength. You have to insist on accomplishing your goals and you can't allow anything to distract you from this path.

[diagram]
The next game is still from the same position, but this student's collapse comes even faster. (72) 1 300-Silman. White to play. 1300: "My Bishop is undefended on f4 and my Knight is attacked and pinned. White has a space advantage in the center but this is evened out by Black's space edge on the queenside. I have a lead in development while Black has only one piece out. I'm probably just slightly better due to my development, though I'm bothered by my pinned Knight on bS. I would like to move it to Safety but then he would take my Rook. I'll go to d3 with my Queen. Then if he takes my Knight I can recapture with check." 1300 didn't talk like a man who has faith in his position. Notice how he really hated the fact that his Knight was pinned, and he even was worried (unjustifiably, I assure you!) about his unde fended Bishop on f4. Evidently, White doesn't realize that a huge lead in development on an open board takes precedence over most static principles.

9.Qd3

An interesting move. Now the Bishop on a6 can hang to tactics based on Nc7+ or Nxd6+ . 9 . . . cxd4

[diagram]
1 300: " I might be able to play 10.Nxd6+ when h e gets my Knight and I get his Bishop. Wait! After 10.Nxd6+ Bxd6 1 1 . Qxa6 I lose a piece to 11 . . .Bxf4. I'll just take back on d4. " Very interesting. White faces his first tough decision and he promptly falls apart. When you are trying to make use of a dynamic edge you should take your time and look long and hard for a knockout. This doesn't mean that you are playing only for mate. Far from it! A superior endgame, the win of a pawn, a huge positional plus; all of these things are good value for your dynamic dollar. In the present situation, White should have played 10.Bxd6! Bxd6 l 1.Nxd6+ Qxd6 12.Qxa6 when threats like

13.Qa4+ or 13.Radl guarantee that White will pick up the d-pawn

and be a solid pawn to the good.

10.Nfxd4 e5

1 300: "I didn't see that at all. I better attack." White more or less just gives up. I would have been happy if he hunkered down and tried hard to find a way out (it didn't mater if he actually found a saving idea, I just wanted to see some effort. lf you don't make an effort, you won't get results). Instead, he took a few seconds and makes a one-move threat. As it turns out, White had the strong 11.Qc4, threatening both

12.Qc6+ and 12.Nc7+. Then l l. . . Rc8 is met by 1 2.Qa4!. However,

it's impossible to find a game-saving shot if you don't look for it!

11.Nc6 Qd7

1 300: "My c6-Knight and my f4-Bishop are hanging. Things have gotten out of hand."

12.Nc7+

Mental and physical surrender. 12 ...Qxc7

13.Qxa6 Qxc6, 0-1.

In this game, White had an idea but noticed that it didn't work at the last moment. Instead of calmly reassessing the situation, he panicked and went berserk!

[diagram]
It is interesting to note that the amateurs took note of the development leads and realized that it was a favorable factor, but they were not able to make use of this advantage. Ti p s * Figure out if the position is a dynamic one or a static one. If it's dynamic, then you must play with tremen dous energy. * Once you decide on a goal (for example: you want to break through in the center) you must take as long as necessary to accomplish it (on the clock and on the board). A static goal might take twenty moves. A dynamic goal calls for some sort of instant result-this means that speed is extremely important. If it takes you forty minutes to figure out how to do what you want done, then take forty minutes! * Never let the opponent dominate you mentally! If you notice that you are meekly reacting to every thing he does, you must snap yourself out of your trance and fight to establish some sort of psychic control. * Castle quickly! When your King is safe, you can do what you want and play without fear of a mating surprise. If you see a King in the center, do every thing you can to blast things open and execute it. No subtleties here, just pure brutality!

[diagram]
Our next example shows what happens when one of the greatest attackers of all time gets his hands on the initiative: He never lets up until the opponent is dead. Even more interesting is how he creates the initiative in the first place. It's almost as if he treats his opponent like a sheep-- he herds him in a certain direction and the opponent obeys the commands given to him. (73) Alekhine-Marshall, Baden-Baden 1925. White to play. The main imbalance in this position is created by the mutual pawn majorities. White has a central majority and Black has a majority of pawns on the queenside. Seeing that the key to his success will be whether or not he can make use of the power of his majority, Alekhine takes immediate steps to get his pawns moving.

1.Qd2

A flexible move. White prepares to make use of his kingside majority with f2-f4. He can also castle queenside. 1 . . .Bd7 Since White's pawn majority influences the center and kingside, Black hopes to place his King on the other side of the board. Naturally, White takes immediate steps to prevent this.

2.Qe31

[diagram]
A very fine idea. Black is prevented from castling queenside and the Black Queen is also kept out of the d4-square. We will see how Black made use of this square in the games that follow. 2 . . . Bc6?1 Black decides to castle kingside, but it is rarely wise to castle into the strength of the enemy. In this case, the kingside is White's strength due to his majority of pawns. Better was 2 . . .Qa5, when Black could safely castle on the queenside.

3.O-O-O

With his King safely tucked away on this side of the board, White can advance his kingside pawns without being worried about weakening his King's protection. 3 ...

O-O

When you see Kings that are castled on opposite sides, it usually denotes a wild struggle where both players strive for an attack on the enemy monarch. However, in this case Black will hardly be able to strike a blow. Why? Because the Black majority is unable to take part in the attack. White gets to land the first blow and he keeps on punching till the opponent falls to the canvas. This type of active control is known as the initiative.

4.f4

The first threat. White takes over the initiative because the advance of his pawns gains time by attacking the Black pieces. 4 ... Qe6

5.e5

Another threat. Once again Black is forced to react to White and not bother with his own ideas. 5 ... Rfe8

6.Rhel Rads

7.f5

White's assault is in full swing, while Black's counterattack has not even started.

[diagram]
8.Qg5 Nd5

9.f6 Qf8

10.Bc41

White never gives his opponent a moment's respite. 10 . . .Nxc3

11.RxdS Rxd8

12.fxg71

Taking advantage of the fact that Black's Queen is the only defender of the Rook on d8. etc. 12 . . . Nxa2+ Also hopeless is 12 . . . Qe8 1 3.Bxf7+ Kxf7 14.Rfl+ Ke6 1 5.Rf6+ ,

13.Kbll

The automatic 13.Bxa2 would give Black a saving check on c5. 13 . . .QeS

14.e6! Be4+

15.Kal

A self-mate can be had by 15 .Kxa2?? Qa4 mate. White could also win with 1 5.Rxe4, though this lets Black enjoy a short-lived burst of activity by 15 ...Rdl+ 16.Kc2 Qa4+ 17.b3, etc. Alekhine's move is simpler, safer, and more brutally effective. 15 . . .f5 White wins more mundanely after 15 . . . fxe6 16.Bxe6+ Qxe6 17 .Qxd8+ Kxg7 18.Qd4+ followed by the capture of Black's Bishop.

16.e7+ Rd5

17.Qf6 Qfi

18.eS•Q+. Black resigned since mate follows in two moves.

[diagram]
1.O-O Be6

2.f4 Qd4+

It's worth noting that Alekhine was very careful not to give his opponent access to this square.

3.Kh2 O-O-O

1500: "I should have prevented this. I'll play 4.Rf.3. What else can I do? No! It's too passive!"

4.Bc2 Qe3

1500: " Can't play S.Qe2 because of 5 . . . Qxe2 and 6 . . . Rd2. I need to trade Queens."

[diagram]
5.Qf3 Qxf3

6.Rxf3 Rd2

[diagram]

[diagram]
after the King, but he has real trouble seeing that a square can also be a target.

1.O-O Be6

1700: "If I play f4, he can check me with . . .Qd4, but then he has to move his Queen because he can easily lose it to a Bishop discovery on b5. He could also check me on c5 when his Queen might be safer. I could just move out of the way, though, and continue my attack." This student tends towards excessive optimism. While confi dence is an important thing to have, you also need a touch of realism. Like 1 500 before him, 1700 is not really giving the possibilities of the opponent a thorough examination. The initiative in open positions will often go to the player who is first to control an open central file. In the Alekhine game, White went ahead with his pawn expansion only after stopping any counterplay on the d-file.

2.f4 Qd4+

1700: "Looks risky to me." At this point White is transfixed by his threat to win Black's Queen by Bb5+.

3.Khl O-O-O

1700: "Now he's attacking my Bishop and has stopped my threat of Bb5+. I can move it to c2 or play Rf3."

4.Bc2

Did you notice that we've reached the same position as in the previous game, with the insignificant exception of the King's placement on h 1 instead of h2? Perhaps we have stumbled onto something important. Per haps the amateur typically has some S<?rt of idea about what he wishes to achieve but rarely takes an honest look at the opponent's plans.

4. . .

Bc4 1700: "I have to defend my Rook."

[diagram]
Now White was in pure defensive mode. He seemed shocked that things had turned around so quickly and this depressed state of mind soon led to a blunder.

5.Rel Qf2

6.Qcl

He moved quickly and without thought. 6 ...Rd2, 0-1. Well, that was a disaster for White! Note how routine play keeps giving Black the initiative in these games. Now compare them to Alekhine's play and you will get a greater appreciation of two things: how he stopped Black's counterplay before it began and how he claimed the initiative for himself by making the most of his kingside pawn majority. The mixture of prophylaxis and aggression was quite impressive, don't you agree? In our next example (still using the Alekhine position), we move up the food-chain a bit and test the skills of an "A" class player. (76) 1800-Silman. White to play. 1800: "I like White. He has his minor pieces out and he has a pawn controlling the center. He has both the d-file and the half-open c-file to work with. He has a pawn majority on the kingside while Black has a majority on the queenside. We

[diagram]
have to kill his majority and get ours going. How do we do this? 1 .Qb3 slows down his development, but he just goes 1 . . .b6 and fianchettoes. At some point, I could play b4 stopping his pawns. I can't do this at the moment so I'll just castle and prepare to get my pawns going by f2-f4." As a higher-rated player, 1800 looked at more than his predecessors. Nevertheless, his error is basically the same. By seeing the game as some mad race between rival majorities, he fails to take into account other possibilities for Black and fails victim to the pressure on the d-file that the others ran afoul of.

1.O-O Be6

1800: "He has a pin coming up but there is nothing he can do with it yet. I'll get my majority rolling. " Like 1700, White sees Black's first move but discounts its usefulness.

2.f4 Qd4+

3.Khl O-O-O

1800: "I'm pinned and I don't see any counterplay for myself." Here we go again! All of these players saw the punch coming but refused to give it credence until their teeth were knocked out! How do players of C-A strength avoid this type of reversal? First, you have to work much harder at the board than these guys did! They gave the position just a cursory examination and paid the price. As we're discovering, it's critically important to come up with an aggressive plan for yourself (based on the positive aspects of your position, of course), but you must also figure out what the opponent is going to do and strive to cross his plans. This is done by determining that your plan is faster (which means you can ignore his stuff altogether), or by simply stopping him from doing what he wants to do.

4.Bc2

1800: "I need to consolidate and this does it." 4 ...Qe3 1800: "He's in my position! I don't know what to do."

[diagram]
The once-confident commander o f the White pieces suc cumbs to panic.

5.Qf3 Qxf3

6.Rxf3 Rd2

1800: "Black stands better. I need to sacrifice a pawn and get out of the bind." White is a little too eager to give up material. Your position may be unpleasant but you must hold on tight and refuse to give up more than is necessary.

7.Bb3?

So panic leads to the loss of material. The calm 7.Rcl was much better. 7 . . . Rxb2 and we stopped the game. Ready to do this one more time? Let's go to the strong expert class and see if someone of this strength can handle the position with any degree of proficiency. (77) 2100-Silman. White to play. 2100: "The major imbalance is a kingside majority versus a queenside majority. If White can break the blockade on e5 and push his pawn to that square, his Bishop will be more active and his pawns will push the Black pieces backwards. "Of course, this sounds good but it's not so easy to accomplish. On 1.O-O Black can play 1 . . . Nh5 and create a

[diagram]
blockade on f4. My dark squares would then be conquered. I have three moves to consider: 1 .O-O with the idea of f4. I already found a good reply to this; l .Ne2, giving up the b pawn. I don't think I can open up the center fast enough to justify this sacrifice; l.Qc2 with the idea of Ne2. This covers the f4 and d4 squares. Finally, 1.Qd2 is also possible but Qc2 gives extra protection to the e-pawn. "From Black's point of view: he wants to retain his blockade and prevent f4. He doesn't want to castle queenside because there are several open files. Black could try to work on the e4-pawn but that might be slow. He should probably try to use his queenside majority and get his King to safety with . . .

O-O.

"For White, I like 1.Qc2 because there are potential attacks on the c-pawn." That was nicely done! He was off on his assessment concern ing the correct location for Black's King, but his efforts to take the dark-squares away from Black are highly praiseworthy (though inaccurate). Notice how he also looked for ways that Black could fight against his plans (1 .O-O being met by . . .NhS). This was something that the C-A players didn't do.

1.Qc2 Bd7

2100: "Now I'll take away those squares on f4 and d4." Notice how the other players never even mentioned the existence of "squares." Any class player will make great strides if he realizes that the control of individual squares is as important as any other strategy in the game.

2.Ne2 Bc6

2100: "Now f3 or 3.Nc3 will make me look stupid so f4 is forced."

3.f4 Qa5+

2100: "I knew he was going there. If 4.Qd2, he can simply trade. My best option is 4.Nc3; the Knight's already done its job in allowing me to play f4. After 4.Nc3, I can also castle queenside and get my kingside majority into play."

4.Nc3 O-O-O

2100: "Now I have to decide between queenside castling and eS. It's risky to play in the center when your King is still

[diagram]
sitting there. I'd better castle since he threatens 5 . . . Nxe4!

6.Bxe4 Bxe4 7.Qxe4 Rhe8."

5.O-O-O

Though White's play was not the very best, he came up with a logical plan and this sufficed to give him a good position with a safe King and an active central majority. We stopped the game at this point. Ti p s * Don't become entranced with your own plans. You must also take note of the opponent's possibilities and gauge just how dangerous they really are. * Part of your plan can be the prevention of the opponent's goals. For example, you can be playing to win a weak pawn but can take time out to prevent his Knight from reaching a strong central outpost. * In an open position, the first person to dominate an open central file will usually gain the initiative. * The initiative will usually go to the first person who turns his plan into a reality. During my years of teaching experience, I have noticed that nothing freaks out the amateur player more than the threat of an attack against his King. Though the amateur's play on the queenside or in the center may be highly promising, when the opponent goes "boo" to his King, all thoughts about his own plans are quickly forgotten and his pieces rush to the kingside in an effort to defend their leader. When you lose such a game, you aren't losing because of the opponent's kingside attack. (which is usually more imagined than real). You are losing because you've given up on your own plans, and this lack of direc tion allows the enemy to safely do anything he wishes to do.

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
bxc6 (White is attacking a majority of pawns with a minority of pawns, hence the name) when Black will be left with a weak pawn on c6 that will bother him forever. Does this mean that Black is doomed to defend passively and hope for a draw? Of course not! It's important to note that Black's pawns are pointing towards the kingside. The pawn-pointing theory (discussed ear lier in the book) states that Black should play in the direction his pawns point, so this means that Black must try to generate a kingside attack. Thus the battle lines are drawn: White will play on the queenside, making use of the pawn weaknesses that his minority attack creates there (this gives him a long-range, static advantage. As a result, endgames are favorable to White). Black's play will come on the kingside (Black hopes for a middlegame decision). · My students in these two games were given lectures about the minority attack. Would they be able to integrate that information into an actual game scenario? 1400: "The position looks even. White's light-squared Bishop appears to be pretty good. Looks like Ne5 followed by f4 with a kingside attack might do well here. Black has a queenside pawn majority and White has a majority on the kingside. This means that White has the possibility of using a minority attack on the queenside. The other plan with Ne5 is interesting but Black has a lot of pieces aimed at the kingside and his pawns point there also. White's pawns aim at the queenside so a minority attack must be correct. I'm considering Rbl followed by b2-b4 starting a minority attack. I'm not sure if that is correct or if a3 followed by b4 is better."

10.a3?1

I was worried when he jumped on the Ne5 bandwagon, but it pleased me when he realized that this could be a chance to make use of the minority attack (something he'd never used before). The best move is 10.Qc2, which gives added support to the e4-square and connects the Rooks. When the time comes for the b4-advance, though, correct is Rbl instead of a3 since after an eventual b2-b4-b5 and bxc6 the Rook will be nicely placed on the open b-fiie. Another problem with 10.a3 is that after b4 Black can play . . . a6 when White must move the a-pawn a second time by

[diagram]
a3-a4 if he wishes to get in the desired b4-b5 advance. Note that Rbl followed by b4 allows White to advance his a-pa.wn (if needed) to a4 in just one move. 10 ... Ne4 1400: "Looks like I have to trade Bishops by Bxe7. By doing that I'm allowing Black to back up his Knight. Due to this,

10.Bf4 is possible. Trading the Bishops probably helps me

on the queenside with my minority attack so I will go ahead and snap it off. So far White is thinking only of his minority attack. This is a good sign! He has a plan and he wants to implement it. ll.Bxe7 Qxe7 1400: "I'm now concerned about his Knight on e4 and an . . .f7-f5 advance on the kingside. How do I get rid of his Knight? Nevertheless, my pieces are posted towar<il an advance on the queenside and I don't see how he can kill me right away so let's advance!" Here we see the start of 1400's fatal weakness as a. chess player: he becomes so worried about possible threats to his King that he starts to forget about his own ideas and even misses elementary tactical tricks (though, to his credit, he resisted the immediate temptation to panic and stays focused on his minority attack). At this point 1400 played 12.b4?? which hangs his face to 12 . . . Nxc3. I had him take the move over. 1400: "I can play 12.Qc2 to guard c3 and put pressure on e4."

12.Qc2 Nf8

1400: "Black is definitely setting his sights on a fierce attack against my King. In order to counteract that I can play Nce2- g3." White's fear of being mated has left all his previous dreams of a minority attack in the dust. From this point on, he plays a fearful defensive game and hands the initiative to Black. He didn't realize that the time White takes to "defend" himself allows Black all the tempi he needs to set a real attack in motion.

[diagram]
13.Ne2 Ng6

1400: "Now I'll bring my Knight around and get more protection for my King." White is now so preoccupied with thoughts of defense that he no longer entertains any hopes at all of continuing his queenside play.

14.Ng3

The game was stopped here. Though the move isn't bad in itself, White's reasoning is a disaster waiting to happen! White has reduced himself to just reacting to the opponent's ideas and is getting so confused about stopping all of the enemy's possi bilities (real or imagined) that he has become afraid to move anything at all. In the next game, I played pretty much the same position but this time I brought in my ever-confident 1700 student. Would he bravely follow his own plans or would he, like 1400 before him, succumb to the whims of fear and panic? 1700-Silman. Queen's Gambit Declined. White to play.

[diagram]
The starting moves were 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.cxd5 exd5 5.Bg5 Be7 6.e3 c6 7.Bd3 O-O 8.Nf3 Nbd7 9.O-O Re8 10.Qc2 Nt'S. 1700: "I want to prevent . . .Ne4 by taking the f6-Knight. This also allows me to play b4 immediately and begin my minority attack." This is more like it! White is going after his plan with as much speed as possible. However, how long will he retain this enthusi asm? ll.Bxf6 Bxf6

12.b4 Be7

Seeing that his Bishop is doing nothing on f6, Black wants to redirect it to d6 where it will menace the White King. 1700: "He's attacking my pawn. I can now push my pawn up or guard it with the Rook. If I play bS then he can try . . . cS. So maybe it's better to guard it first." He didn't figure out why I played . . . Be7 (other than to attack his b4-pawn) and he didn't seem to care what my plan was. We also get to see a bit of laziness present itself: he notices the possibility of answering b5 with . . . cS but doesn't take time out to see if that idea works for Black. After 13.bS c5? 14.dxcS BxcS

15.Radl Black would experience real problems with his weak d

pawn (after all, White's original plan was the creation of a pawn weakness and the lame creature on dS certainly qualifies) and the undefended Bishop on cS. Don't look at a move for your opponent and just decide that it works for him. Prove it!

13.Rabl Bd6

1700: "He's going right for a kingside attack. I should ignore that and continue with my idea." Bravo! As the old saying goes, "The best defense is a good offense."

14.b5 Re6

. 1700: "Still going for my King. I will capture on c6 and create a target there."

[diagram]
Black wishes to mix offense with defense. His Rook will defend c6 and join in the kingside attack. Note how both sides are following their respective plans (both sides are fighting for the initiative) and are not allowing side issues to distract them.

15.bxc6 bxc6

1700: "I can bring my Knight back to e2 where it guards the kingside and uncovers my Queen on c6." Now that a weakness has been created on c6, White can spend a little time shoring up his kingside. However, great care must be taken to insure that his own threats on the queenside never let up (if White can get Black to react to queenside threats, then Black's attack will lose its momentum). He must also make sure that he doesn't fall into a defensive frame of mind. t6.Ne2 Instead of this somewhat passive reassignment of the Knight, better would have been 16.BfS! (since endgames favor White, trades can only make the first player happy. In this case, the c8- Bishop was aiming at White's King so this equals one less attacking piece for Black) 16 . . .Rh6 17.Bxc8 Cl 7.h3!? followed by

18.Rfcl may be better. With the light-squared Bishops gone,

White suddenly has access to the f5- and b7-squares) 17 . . . Rxc8 (and not 17 . . .Bxh2+?? 18.Nxh2 Qh4 19.Bh3) 18.h3 (stopping the threatened 18 . . . Bxh2+ 19.Nxh2 Qh4) 18 . . .Ng6 (bringing up rein forcements. Neither side is losing sight of his goal.) 19.Rfcl (threatening 20.NxdS) 19 .. . Nh4! (this allows the remaining Black forces to get closer to the enemy King) 20.Nxh4 Qxh4 and now 2 1 . Rb7 or even 2 1 . QfS Rd8 22.Rc2 Rf6 23.Qg4 keeps Black's kingside play under control, still leaving him to deal with the weaknesses on c6 and a7. Note that 21 .NxdS! is also possible (21 . . .QgS 22.Nc3 with the threat of 23.Ne4 retains the pawn). I'll leave it to the reader to decide if Black can get any compensation after the chop on dS. I admit this is long-winded, but the point should be obvious. Even in the face of a kingside attack you must keep a clear head and not lose sight of your goals (like in this instance where trading

[diagram]
pieces is good for White since most endgames favor him). After all, White owns a static advantage, while Black's play is based on dynamics. 16 . . . Rh6 1700: "I can't take on c6 due to . . . Bxh2+ winning my Queen. I should block his Bishop on d6 by 17.Ng3 or 17.Nf4."

17.Nf4??

[diagram]

18.Ne2 g4

19.Ne5 Bxe5

20.dxe5 Qh4

1700: "I have to play h3. I don't like it but I no longer have any choice."

21.h3

White's last few moves have all been forced. Though things look hopeless, Black's lingering weaknesses on c6 and a7 give White some hope of surviving if a mate or further loss of material can be avoided. 21 . . . gxh3

22.g3 Qg4

1700: "He threatens to go to f3 with mate on g2."

[diagram]

MANY

IMBALANCES,

ONE B OARD

The vast majority of chess games contain battles between several different types of imbalances. One person may have high hopes for his advantage in space and superior pawn structure while the opponent will insist that his two Bishops and greater activity is what really counts. Often it's not clear which particular imbalance will triumph, but no one doubts that the first player who stops trying to make use of these positive attributes will allow the opponent to dominate. Though it's important to be aware of the general rules concerning the imbalances, it's equally important to be conscious of the fact that one rule might negate or strengthen another. When contemplating the imbalances you have and imbal ances you would like to create, always make sure that they complement each other. For example: you may have two Bishops

[diagram]
(vs. a Bishop and Knight), a passed pawn and the chance to gain extra space by advancing and locking the pawns. The desire to gain space may be great, but will this decision aid or hurt your Bishops (remember that they don't like closed positions)? Will the passed pawn be useful or will it make the enemy Knight (which might sit in front of the passer and act as a blockader) stronger? • • • • • Our first example of several imbalances interacting with each other is obviously in White's favor. He clearly enjoys the superior pawn structure and he also has a fine Knight versus a poor Bishop. Is this enough to win? Yes, White should win, but the process is far from easy. (80) Alekhine-Euwe, London 1922. White to play.

1.Rfdl

Staking a claim to the d-file. To win this game, White will play to keep the Black Bishop bottled up while attempting to create new weaknesses (points of attack or penetration) on the queenside. 1 . .. Kf8

2.Kfl

[diagram]
More obvious stuff. Once an endgame is reached, both sides should rush their Kings towards the center. 2 ... Ke7

3.c4!

This does two things: It keeps a Black Rook out of dS and it fixes the Black c-pawn on cS where it blocks its own Bishop. 3 . . .h6

4.Ke2 Rxdl

5.Rxdl Rb8

Let's let Alekhine tell us what's going on: "Black cannot exchange Rooks since after 5 . . . Rd8 6.Rxd8 Kxd8 White wins as follows: " 1 " phase: 7.h4 followed by g2-g4 and g4-g5, against which Black has nothing better than . . .hS, since the ex change of pawns will give the White Knight the square h4. "2°d phase: b2-b3 followed by Kd3, Nc3 and Ke4. "3ro phase: the transfer of the Knight to d3, which ties the Black King to d6 in order to hold the twice-attacked eS pawn. "4"1 phase: finally f2-f4, forcing the win of the g or e-pawn, after which White wins easily. "By avoiding the exchange of Rooks, Black makes his opponent's task more difficult."

6.Rd3 Bh8

7.a41

White intends to play a4-a5 and create new weaknesses in the Black position. Since 7 . . . aS 8.Rb3 wins material for White (the threat of NxcS is hard to stop), Black is unable to prevent this advance. 7 ...Rc8

8.Rb3 Kd7

9.a51 Kc6

10.axb6 axb6

ll.Ra3 White will use the a-file to penetrate into the Black position. Black cannot do the same along the d-file since the White King and Knight cover all the entry points.

[diagram]
ll . . . Bg7 And not 11 . . .Kb7?? 1 2.Nd6+ . White's Rook becomes more active than its Black counterpart mainly due to the fact that his Knight is taking part in the effort. Compare the horse to the pathetic Black Bishop and you will see the vast difference in strength between the two pieces.

12.Ra7 Rc7

Now White could trade Rooks and carry out the winning plan that Alekhine mentioned earlier; however, he decides that his Rook is better than the enemy's and keeping it should allow him to shorten the winning process.

13.Ra81 Re7

14.Rc8+ Kd7

15.RgSI Kc6

16.h4

Now White has the superior minor piece, a structural advan tage and a more active Rook. Since Black is unable to do anything active, White takes his time and plays to tie Black up. If you have an opponent backed up against a wall, take away any and all potential counterplay before going for the final kill. 16 ...Kc7

17.g4 Kc6

18.Kd3 Rd7+

19.Kc3 Rt7

20.b3

Still taking his time and doing little things that make his position more compact and safer.

20. ..Kc7

21.Kd3 Rd7+

22.Ke2 Rt7

23.Nc31 Re7

24.g5 hxg5

25.hxg5 Kc6

26.Kd3 Rd7+

27.Ke4

[diagram]
White has just added a superior King to his list of advantages. Now the win is just a matter of time. The final moves were:

27. . .

Rc7 28.Nb5 Re7 29.f3 Kd7 30.RbS Kc6 3LRc8+ Kd7

32.Rc7+ Kd8 33.Rc6 Rb7 34.Rxe6, 1-0.

We have seen that, in top flight chess, the diagrammed position is considered to be a matter of technique, but at the amateur level virtually anything can happen. Let's see what kind of mistakes the amateur makes while trying to realize his advantage. (81) 1467-Silman. White to play. 1 467: "My Knight is better than his bad Bishop and the open d-file is not a problem since White can easily challenge it. The queenside seems even. The only thing I can see is to play Rfdl." He saw the basics (though I was surprised that he never mentioned Black's doubled pawns) but was not sure how to make use of his advantages. In this type of position, a player should look for ideas rather than concrete moves. I certainly don't expect 1467 to come up with the plans that Alekhine laid out, but there are three things that a player of any rating can do: 1) Make each of his pieces better than, or at least equal to, their enemy counterparts; 2) If the opponent cannot do anything active, then don't rush the position; instead you should let him sit there, suffer, and beg you for

[diagram]
a draw; 3) Try to make your plusses expand while making sure that his negatives don't cure themselves.

1.Rfdl

1 467: "Now, if 1 . . .Rxdl+ 2.Rxdl, White threatens Rd6 and Rd7."

1.. .Kt7

1 467: "I can check on g5 and win a pawn!" He decides that I just hung a pawn and rushes to cash in his ill gotten gains. This type of decision should be made slowly; after all, White is moving his Knight from a dominant central location and placing it on the far rim of the board. Instead of this impulsive act, White would have done well if he had simply brought his King to the center.

2.Ng5+ Ke7

1 467: "I don't know if this is good, even though it wins a pawn. " He should have figured this out before he made the check.

3.Nxh7 Bh6

White's greedy idea, which forced the Black King to the center, has left him with a poorly placed Knight.

4.h4

The only way to free his embattled Knight. White has now taken on the role of the defender-someone who must react to his opponent's will. How did this transformation take place? White failed to make his pieces better than or equal to the Black ones and he failed to make use of his fine Knight (instead, he stuck it in a ditch). 4 . . . Rh8

5.Ng5 Bxg5

6.hxg5

1467: "I probably should have exchanged Rooks first."

[diagram]
He's no longer thinking of positive things to do. From here on, he goes completely on the defensive. 6 . . . Rh5

7.f4 Rf8

1467: "Attacking me. "

8.g3 Rfh8

1467: "I have a bit of a problem here."

9.Rfl e41

1467: " I should have exchanged a pair of Rooks while I could." The sickly doubled pawn now controls and contributes to an attack on the White King.

10.c4 Rhl+

1467: "Damn! Now he wins the b2- pawn. I should have played b3."

11.Kf2 R8h2+

12.Kel Rxf1 +

13.Kxfl Rhl+, 0-1.

He lost this game because he did a couple of negative things: He allowed his proud Knight to be exchanged for the horrible Bishop, and he allowed the enemy King to become centralized. This happened because he tried to cash in his advantage too quickly. Remember: When your opponent is helpless, take your time and make sure he doesn't generate any counterplayl 1467 was so upset about losing this nice endgame that he set the same position up and insisted on trying it again.

[diagram]
(82)

1.Rfd1 Kf7

2.Kfl

1467-Silman. White to play. 1467: This time I will leave my Knight on its dominant square and bring my King up to the middle. No more adventures for me! 2 . . .Ke7

3.Ke2 c4

1467: "I should have played c3-c4. This would have kept his pawns on the same color as his Bishop." Seeing things after they happen won't be of much help during a game. If he had asked himself (before playing 3.Ke2) how he could have made sure that the bad Bishop stays bad, he would have found c3-c4. Always ask yourself, "How do I make the negative areas of his position even worse?"

4.Rd2 Rxd2+

5.Kxd2 Rd8+

6.Ke2 Rd5

7.Rdl h5

1467: "My game has deteriorated. " White is still better but Black has made some progress: His Rook is happy on d5 and the Bishop can eventually find some life on the f8-a3 diagonal.

[diagram]
We stopped the game here since he wanted to try i t one last time from the beginning. (83)

1.Rfdl Kf7

2.c4

[diagram]
'A..

[diagram]

tsc ·"8·· 1467-Silman. White to play. 1467: "All right! I don't know what I have to do to get this right, but I actually have the feeling that I kind of know what I'm doing." 2 . . . Ke7 1467: Now I can bring my King up.

3.Kfl h6

1467: "I'm not penetrating, but right now I don't see how to do it. I need to activate my King and Rooks. A good plan is

4.a4-a5 when . . . bxaS leaves him with a weakness on a7 and

cS." Quite a difference from the other two games! Here he's killing my counterplay, centralizing his pieces and probing for weak nesses.

4.a4 a5

1467: "His Bishop is even weaker and now I have bS for my Knight. I could bring my King up and change all the Rooks,

[diagram]
but does that win? I need to get his g6-pawn to go to g5 when his Bishop is a horrible piece. To get him to play . . . g5 I must threaten his pawn, but how? I guess I should play b3 first to improve my game. I have time." He must have taken vitamins or something! Keep in mind that 1467 has not yet seen the Alekhine game but now, after a couple of trial runs, he is actually coming very close to the World Champion's ideas. Why the drastic change? I think he suddenly realized that his advantages are not going away and that a slow handling of the position leaves Black without any play at all. In a way, these three examples show how chess should be studied. All great players look at thousands and thousands of master games. By doing so, you see important patterns (positional and tactical) that can be emulated, you see how the opening, middlegame and endgame are all interrelated, and you get a feel for natural but strong moves. By playing the position three times, he learned a lot about its needs and secrets. His play improved enormously on the third try thanks to his newfound knowledge of this game's particular patterns.

5.b3 Rab8

6.Ke2 Bf8

1 467: "I'm thinking of playing Nc3 and e3-e4 to close the position. I don't like that, though. I should expand on the kingside via h4. Then I can consider Rhl-h3-g3." His original idea of playing e3-e4 was horrible since it killed a square that was a potential home for his Knight and his King. However, his 7.h4 followed by Rhl-h3-g3 deserves quite a bit of praise since it gains space and begins to pick on some of Black's weak pawns.

7.h4 Kf7

8.Rxd8 Rxd8

9.Rdl

1 467: "I know that I can at least draw this position." I wish he had given his original idea of Rhl-h3-g3 a try. 9 ... Rxdl

10.Kxdl Be7

11.g3 Ke8

12.Ke2 Kd7

13.Kd3 Bd8

14.Nc3 Ke7

15.Ke4 Bc7

[diagram]
1467: "Now 16.NbS Bb8, s o I need to get my Knight on d3 or f3 when I attack eS with all my pieces." I like the way he first picks a weakness to attack and then brings all his pieces to bear on that target.

16.g4 g5

17.hxg5 hxg5

1467: "Now I'll get my Knight to f3 to attack both gS and eS."

18.Nbl Kf6

19.Nd2 Bb8

1467: "I can't chase him from g5 and eS. I needed to get my Knight on g4 to win. Now it's a draw." We stopped the game. Ti ps * If you own a long-term advantage, don't be i n a hurry to make use of it. * If the opponent has a passive position, never allow him to get counterplay. * Even if you already have several advantages, always be on the lookout for ways to create new targets.

[diagram]
When i t comes to positions with several imbalances, humans, computers and other chess playing creatures may find themselves with differing views about who has the advantage. I recall once having a little argument with a well-known chess writer in the pages of a certain American chess magazine. In one of his books, he declared that Black stood better in the following position.

(84) I: • I.

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
Here the players agreed to a draw since White was exhausted from a long trip and · Black was disgusted that she had blown a winning position from the opening. At the time, the players and the tournament's other participants thought that White had the advantage and should have continued the battle. A glance shows that this is a reasonable assessment: White's Rook is on a completely open file, White's Bishop is very active, White has a queenside majority of pawns, Black has an isolated pawn on e6 and White enjoys a clearly superior King position. An impressive list, but I shocked Sharon when I declared that Black's position looked quite nice to me. What was I seeing that others didn't? Nothing at all! I just preferred to look at all the so called negatives in a positive light. Here's what I mean: > White's Bishop is indeed slicing down that hl-a8 diago nal, but what is it doing there? On the other hand the Black Knight is quite bothersome and threatens to pick up the a3-pawn by . . .Nbl . > White's Rook is on a completely open file but it is not attacking anything there. The Black Rook, though, is eyeing the morsel on c2. > White does have a queenside majority, but the purpose of such a majority is to create a passed pawn. Black's so-called weakness on e6 is in reality a tower of strength since it is already passed. Thus, I will not look at it as isolated-instead, I look at is as an active anack ing unit! > The White King is better placed than the Black one. You got me on that point!

[diagram]
Naturally, I immediately gave this position to a class C student and had him play me one of my patented "talk out lm.:d games." (86) 14 70-Silman White to play. 1470: "Black has an isolated pawn and a passive King. My Bishop is also dominating his Knight, though the pawn on g4 makes my Bishop bad. I think that I should be able to do something really good here; Black must be busted. I will use my superior King to march into h6 and win the h7-pawn."

1.Kg5?

[diagram]

2.Kh6

Winning the h-pawn will not worry Black. He is after a new Queen and certainly won't blink an eye at such a tiny threat. White

[diagram]
is making the mistake of assuming that Black will go into a panic at this first nibble. Instead, he will ignore White's King-walk and continue with his own ideas. 2 . . . e4 1470: "Giving me material. There is no turning back now; I have to take it and dare him to do his worst!" Black could have dispelled White's illusions with 2 . . . Ke6, but I felt it was more instructive to give up the h-pawn and demon strate the strength of the runner on e4.

3.Kxh7 e3

4.Rd3 Re7

[diagram]

[diagram]
hidden weakness on c2, so his Rook i s forced to stay o n the second rank to defend it. Black's Knight is kind of trapped on c3 so that covers the weakness at the moment. However, the threat to move it to bl and win the a3-pawn is very annoying for White. So overall, I will give the edge to Black. " I think that way because, aside from the threat of . . .Na3, Black also has three pawns to two on the kingside." Not bad at all! 1650 is not a prisoner of memorized preconcep tions and instead tries to figure out the present positio:-i in a fresh way. I decided to try to freak him out with a central King rush.

1.Ke5

1650: "White is aiming for d6 with an invasion on the queenside. I want to prevent this!" 1 . . . Ke7

2.Bg4

1650: "He is going after my pawn but this is an easy threat to stop." 2 . . . Rc5+

3.Kd4 Rc7?

1650: "Time to bring my Rook back to safety." Missing two important possibilities. The first (but weaker) one is 3 . . . Kd6 when 4.Ke3+ Ke5 leaves Black with the superior King. However, 3 . . .Kd6? turns out to be an error due to 4.Bxe6! Kxe6?

5.Kxc5 Ne4+ 6.Kxb5 Nxd2 7.Kxa5 when White's pawns are

stronger than Black's Knight. Nevertheless, if Black had played 3 ... Kd6 I would have been very happy, since it would have shown an awareness of the need to activate one's King in an endgame (the tactical flaw doesn't take away from the move's good intentions). The second possibility is 3 . . .Rd5+!, a move that he looked at but rejected due to 4.Kxc3 (note that 4.Ke3 Rxd2 5 Kxd2 Nbl + wins a pawn for Black). Now Black can take advantage of the loosely guarded White Rook by 4 . . .b4+ 5.axb4 axb4+ 6.Kxb4 Rxd2 with an extra Exchange and a sure win. If a piece is not well defended, you should always look for ways to win it.

4.Ke5

[diagram]
1650: "He wants a draw but I hate draws and I won't allow him to get one! I will just go after his pawn." I like his attitude but he makes the mistake of placing the Knight on the rim. Of course, it ends up being out of play there. 4 . . .Nbl?

5.Rf2 Nxa3

1650: "I hope my Knight can get back in the game!" Whether he can get it back into play or not is beside the point-he should have asked this question before putting it on a3.

6.Bxe6 Rc5+?

7.Bd5

1650: "This doesn't scare me. He wants to check me on f7 and win the h-pawn. He has no mating possibilities so it all comes down to a race." He was not aware (though we had discussed this point several months before) that a Knight is much worse than a Bishop in a mutual pawn race situation. The speed of a Bishop puts a Knight to shame in those cases.

7. . . Nxc2

8.Rfi+ Ke8

9.Rxh7 Ne3

1 650: "I think I have him!"

10.Ke6

1650: "He had a way our. He wants to mate me but that is easily stopped. I'm still doing well." He also missed 10.Kd4 (attacking Black's two undefended pieces at once) , which would have led to a draw. 10 . ..KdS

11.Be4

1650: "A trap! He's hoping for l l . . . Rc7 12.Rh8 mate! I will play 1 1 . . .Nf5 which defends my g-pawn and threatens . . .Nd4+. Then I will follow up with . . .a5-a4 and try to promote my pawn."

[diagram]
Note how the Bishop i s dominating the Black Kn ight. This Bishop is so much better than the Knight that White is now winning. 11 . . . Nf5? Leading to a quick finish.

12.g4

1650: "I expected that, but I don't mind giving up my g pawn for his b-pawn. "

12. . .Nd4+

White also wins after 12. . .Ng3 13.Bb7!. I invite the reader to work out the variations himself.

13.Kd6

1650: "Oh no! He threatens both Kxc5 and Rh8 ma1e." We stopped the game here. It should be apparent tf-iat leaving one's pieces in vulnerable, undefended positions is asking for trouble. Ti p s * The basic rules we learned when we started out are good guidelines but must be broken often. Don't fall in love with these concepts and become blind to the reality of any given situation. * Every imbalance is capable of doing something positive. Don't look at a thing as negative just because it's supposed to be weak or bad. You have to ask: "Is it bad in this particular position?" * Undefended pieces can easily lead to trouble. * When pawns are racing to promote on both sldes of the board, a Bishop will usually beat out a Knight due to its ability to jump from one side of the board to another in one move.

[diagram]
The next game shows a battle based on very different imbalances. Both sides nurse what they have and try to make it grow but, of course, only one side's vision will be proven correct. 2120-Silman. English Opening. Our game only started after I played the first eight moves for both sides: 1.c4 Nf6 2.Nf3 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.Qc2 O-O 5.g3 b6

6.Bg2 Bh7 7.a3 Bxc3 8.Qxc3 d6.

2120: "Lots of moves: O-O, b4, d3. What's my plan? Black's plan is to play . . .c5 and . . . dS and break open the center. How am I going to activate the dark-squared Bishop? I could play Bg5 with a pin or place it on the long diagonal.

9.d3 controls e4 and keeps options open."

While it's all right to play an obviously useful move (like 9.d3), · there is also a bit of laziness in the equation. White should really have at least a partial plan mapped out for himself. For example: White has the two Bishops and would like to make them better than the Knights. Since the dark-squared Bishop is the one piece that Black does not have, White should try his best to make it as active as possible. Thus d3 (limiting the enemy Knights), followed by b2-b4 and Bb2, placing the Bishop on the fine long diagonal, would be a simple but effective strategy.

9.d3 Nbd7

2120: "Where is his Knight heading to? If I develop my Bishop on the long diagonal, he could play . . . e5 and block it. 10.Bg5 is also silly due to . . . h6." He is still not quite sure what to do, so he holds off on any clear decisions and simply castles. This is fine here, but in many situations such trepidation might lead to problems.

10.O-O c5

2120: "Takes away this square from the Knight. Now he can't play . . .e5 since d5 would be weak. I could play b3 or b4. On l l.b4 cxb4 he opens up the a-file for me. I could also play d4 and open up the d-file so as to get play on d6. He wants to play for d5. My Knight on f3 is not doing anything so where do my pieces go? I'll get play by b2-b4."

[diagram]
In closed or semi-closed positions, you should lead with your pawns. For this reason, Black had no intention of playing . . .Nc5 since it would just get chased back by b2-b4. Instead, Black gains space with . . . c7-c5 and keeps his pieces flexibly posted behind his pawns. A d3-d4 advance would give Black use of the e4- square and activate his Knights. It should also be mentioned that Black won't hesitate to play an . . . e6-e5 advance if White posts his Bishop on the b2-h8 diagonal. True, it leaves a hole on dS. But can White actually use that hole? No, he can't. So, since this weakness is more illusion than reality, Black will be happy with . . . e6-e5 since it blocks the al-h8 diagonal and gains central territory.

11.b4 Qe7

2120: "Playing for dS. How can I mix things up? A good slow plan is b5 and a4-a5." Black has no intention of playing . . .d6-d5 (unless it achieves some very positive goal) since that would open up the position for the enemy Bishops. Instead, he will place his Rooks on squares that will inhibit White from playing in the middle. Once that is done, Black will seek counterchances on the kingside.

12.Bb2 Raes

2120: "Threatens to take on b4 and then follow up with . . . d6-d5 so I will prevent this and grab queenside space with b5."

13.b5 Rfe8

[diagram]
2120: " A wealth o f riches. What d o I want to play? I'm ignoring the center, which is bad. However, 14.d4 gives him the e4-square.What does he do here? Play for . . . d6-d5? My g2-Bishop is doing relatively nothing. How do I get my pieces into play? I'd like to play for a4-a5 but that has nothing to do with my b2-Bishop. " It's strange to see a guy with such a "wealth of riches" be so confused about how he's going to get play! His 13.b5 took the tension out of the center so he might as well continue on the queenside with a3-a4-a5. Funnily enough, it's Black who has most of the options here. He can play . . . e6-e5 or he can play . . . d6-d5 with the idea of . . .d5-d4.

14.Nd2

2120: "To transfer it to b3 in anticipation of a4-a5." Leaving White with only one Bishop instead of two. Black is also happy to make this exchange since it leaves White's King a bit less secure. 14 ... Bxg2

15.Kxg2 e5

2120: "He has no threat. I could play e4 when my Bishop cold get into play via cl since d5 still scares me. Pushing to e4 leaves me with play on the queenside." So White has stopped . . . d6-dS once and for all. However, his dark-squared Bishop is now all but useless (the locked position will be friendlier to the Knights) and the whole game will now come down to a race between White's queenside play (he will open lines with a3-a4-a5) and Black's kingside play (he will play for . . . f7-fS). This game has seen a few imbalances parade by: First we had a Bishop vs. Knight battle (which still exists) and now the emphasis is on mutual wing attacks (made possible by the closed center).

16.e4 Nf8

2120: "Transferring to e6 and d4. I will go ahead with my plan."

17.a4

[diagram]
2120: 'Tm only worried about a kingside attack, s o I would like a Queen trade." I like this comment very much. He is quite aware that his chances lie on the queenside and he knows that the presence of the Queens only helps Black, who will do his utmost to break through on the kingside. 17 ... Ne6 2120: "I see no threat."

18.a5 Nd4

19.axb6 axb6

20.Ra6 Nd7

2120: "Does he want to transfer his Queen to that side? Since my Bishop is doing nothing I will try to trade it off."

21.Qa3 Ne6

22.Ra1 Rf8

2120: "Trying to get some activity." Black wasted time with his Knight maneuver to d4; once it got there it moved away since it didn't want the pathetic Bishop to snap it off.

23.Nfl f5

2120: "I could take and gain a tempo with Ne3 or I could play Ne3 and sink at fS or dS. Does he have anything? He has no threat right away."

24.Ne3 f4

2120: "Now I have two squares. NdS wins b6. I'd like to get my Queen into the defense. 24.NfS attacks d6 and closes the file. I am winning a pawn." Yes, White will win a pawn, but his King is far from safe.

25.Nf5 f3+

2120: "Is he really going to mate me? I refuse to believe it! A good anitude, but the reality of the situation is quite different. White's King is in grave danger.

[diagram]
26.Kh1 Qg5

27.Qb3

21 20: "My Queen will come back and defend the g2 mating square." 27 . . .Rxf5

28.exf5 Qxf5

By giving up a very tiny bit of material, Black has made his pawns safe and is free to pursue his kingside desires. White's whole strategy has failed.

29.Qdl Rf8

2120: "I will trade Rooks."

30.Ra8 Nf6

31.RxfS+ Nxf8

32.Bcl Ng4

33.Kgl Ne6

2120: "More pieces into the attack." The Black Knights are suddenly looking quite good. In the meantime, the White Rook and Bishop are unable to help out on the kingside.

34.RaS+

2120: "Can't be bad." 34 .. . Kf7

35.Ra7+ Kg6

36.h3 Nf6

2120: "Now 37.g4 Nxg4 38.hxg4 Qg4+ is complicated and gives him several pawns and an attack for the Rook. Since he has no threat, I will be safe." He must be kidding. No threats? If I was White, I'd be terrified!

37.Kh2 Nd4

2120: "If g4, he will retreat since 38.g4 Nxg4+ 39.hxg4 Qxg4

40.Qgl Qxgl + 41.Kxgl Ne2+ picks up the Bishop but leads

to a favorable endgame for White."

[diagram]
38.g4 Qe6

2120: "What do I do about . . . Ne2 when . . . Nxg4+ is really strong? It's time I went for his King!" A panic reaction. I would have been happier to see 39.Ra2 intending 40.Be3 and 41.Bxd4. Then 39 . . . Ne2 would be met by

40.Rxe2, sacrificing the Exchange back.

39.Bg5??

Going berserk. The final moves were: 39 ...Kxg5 40.h4+ Kxh4 41.Rxg7 Nxg4+ 42.Kgl Qh6 43.RgS Qf4, 0-1. White lost this battle because he didn't work hard enough to make his Bishop active and then, once he closed the center (and as a result lost the minor piece duel), he did not take proper precautions on the kingside. Ti ps * Always try and make your pawn structure conform to whatever minor piece you happen to own. * Creating a hole (a weak square) is only a problem if your opponent can make use of it. * When you own two Bishops, you usually want to retain both of them. * When the center is dead (closed), you must find play on one of the wings. Even if your opponent breaks through on his side of the board first, your plan must still move ahead. * It's not too hard to deduce that if you're playing on one wing, your opponent must have some play on the other. Never discount this! Get your attack going as fast as possible, but don't allow yourself to lose sight of the enemy's correct plan. How TO PLAY

THE OPENING

"Wiienwe first learn how to play chess, we are force-fed certain rules. Basic endgames, middlegame ideas, basic tactics, and how to play the opening correctly. In the opening, we're told to develop all our pieces ("Don't move the same piece twice!" gets repeated over and over like a never-ending mantra). Then we're told to castle quickly so that our King finds a safe haven and our Rooks can connect, like long lost lovers, and work together. Fighting for control of the center with our pieces and pawns comes next. At this point, we get a little cocky, thinking that we know everything there is to know (discounting the memorization of variations) about this phase of the game. All this advice is useful when we are starting out; however, as we progress up the rating ladder we lose more and more games in the opening (or due to the opening) and we begin to suspect that

[diagram]
there i s something that we are not quite understanding. Sadly, we invariably discover that we can't find this mysterious missing knowledge in any books. We memorize more and more lines in an attempt to shore up our opening I.Q. , still lose countless games and, in a fit of despair, run off to Tibet to seek the mystical light that will eventually lead us to the discovery of the inner game of chess (at least, this is how I started out. I can only guess that it's the same for everyone). What is the real purpose of the opening? Is it really correct to mindlessly develop our pieces, only to discover that we often stand badly when everything is out? The answer is repeated again and again in the earlier parts of this book: we are trying to create favorable imbalances (or imbalances that have the potential to eventually become favorable) and develop our pieces and pawns around the differences that we have created at the beginning stages of the game. Once an imbalance is created, every developing move we make, every pawn that we push, must address this imbalance in some way. For example, after 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 (the Nimzo Indian Defense) 4.a3 Bxc3+ 5.bxc3, White accepts doubled pawns for the two Bishops and a space advantage in the center. White will play to increase this edge in territory via f2-f3 and e2- e4, while Black will strive to show that White's weakness on c4 is of greater consequence (via . . .b6, . . .Ba6 and . . . Nb8-c6-a5). Once again: it's this battle of ideas that determines where we develop our pieces, where we place each and every pawn, and delineates the fight that will be waged throughout the middlegame. Another common opening battle that is created in the first few moves comes about from the popular French Defense:

1.e4 e6

2.d4 d5

3.Nd2

So that White can meet the . . .Bb4 pin with c2-c3. 3 . . .Nf6

4.e5 Nfd7

White has an obvious space advantage in the center while Black will attempt to place pressure on the d4- and e5-pawns.

[diagram]
5.f4

Greedily claiming even more space. This makes a lot of sense. White gained a certain advantage and he wants to place his pawns on squares that enable him to increase it. 5 ...c5 Black claims some space of his own on the queenside and simultaneously attacks the White pawn on d4. Mindless develop ing moves like 5 . . . Nc6 would leave Black without territory or threats after 6.c3.

6.c3

Following an important rule: Try to rriake your center as strong as possible so that the opponent will eventually be engulfed in its space-gaining coils. 6 ... Nc6 And Black devotes a lot of energy to attacking d4. This forces White to make concessions and defend his pawn.

7.Ndf31

Why would White move an already developed piece a second time? Wouldn't 7.Ngf3, bringing a new piece out, be more logical? No, after 7.Ngf3?! Qb6 (stepping up the pressure on d4) White would have trouble guarding d4; he would be forced to place his Knight (it would have to move again after all!) on the unpleasant b3-square. The correct 7.Ndf3 allows White to support his center with all his pieces. 7 ... Qb6

8.Ne2 and d4 is well-defended.

These two examples have shown us that both sides use the opening to create some difference and then try hard to demon strate that their difference is more important than the enemy's. This means that the opening is not really about development at all, it's about ideas and their implementation. • • • • •

[diagram]
Our first game shows both sides sparring to gain anything that might be of use later in the game. Targets, space, good and bad minor pieces; all these things come into consideration when we start out a serious game of chess. 2100-Silman. Reti Opening.

1.Nf3 d5

2.b4 Nf6

3.Bb2 e6

4.a3 Be7

I made him play these first few moves, curious to see how he would handle this unorthodox type of position. White has gained some queenside space and has a powerful Bishop on b2 that eyes the central dark-squares. Black has a solid position and some central space but, at the moment, he doesn't have any clear plan or targets to aim at. 2100: "I can fianchetto my other Bishop if I want to. I have space on the queenside. I could play fore2-e4 via d3. I must make use of my dark-squared Bishop. Since I like the e2-e4 push, I should fianchetto, castle and play to advance with that move." The kingside fianchetto does not make much sense to me since the hl-a8 diagonal will be firmly blocked by the pawn on d5. I would prefer e3 (gaining more control over d4) followed by Be2, O-O and c2-c4. This increases White's advantage on the queenside by adding to the territory that he already possesses.

5.g3 O-O

6.Bg2

2 100: "I don't understand the point of b4 since he can play . . . aS or . . . cs. If 6 . . .aS, then both 7.bS and bxaS are possible." Moves like . . . a7-a5 and . . . c7-c5 could be answered by b4-b5 (gaining more space) if White's light-squared Bishop stood on e2 (where it would defend b5). The light-squared Bishop does not participate in queenside operations on g2. How TO P LAY T H E O P E N I N G I 2 3 3 Remember: White gained queenside space on move two, so he should continue to add to the gains that he has already made. All his pieces should work together in this (or any other) effort.

6...

c5 2100: "There's no life to this game. If 7.b5, the pawn might be weak since nothing is defending it. I could take. Any pawn sacrifice fails and 7.c3 is extremely ugly. My plan is to utilize the dark-squared Bishop and play on the kingside. Since he is playing on the queenside, I could try to hold with bS but I don't like it due to . . . a6 when the a-file might open and a3 could become weak." He said that there's no life to the game, yet the position is full of interest. Subtle decisions must be made, plans found, imbal ances created. Who could want more? As for his comment about getting a kingside attack, this is pure bluster. There's much too much play in the center for thoughts of a kingside attack to enter anyone's head.

7.bxc5 Bxc5

2100: "I could either castle or play d3. Oh, oh! I just noticed that 8.d3 loses to 8 . . . Qb6 with a double-attack on f2 and b2. I have to castle." I mentioned earlier that Black wanted a clear plan and targets. His last two moves have left him with play against White's isolated a3-pawn and possibilities of creating pressure down the half-open c-file (the c2-pawn might become weak). This isn't much, but it's a beginning. White's plans also need to be clarified. After castling, White must, at some point, play c2-c4. This advance strives to open up the g2-a8 diagonal and to make the c-pawn an active participant in the coming battle (before it gets stuck on c2 and turns into a permanent target).

8.O-O Nc6

2100: "I have to come up with a plan. My b2-Bishop is undefended and bothers me in many lines. Change of plan! He has too much control of open center squares for me to do a kingside attack. I'll just play for e4 as originally intended."

[diagram]
With 8 . . . Nc6, Black developed and tried to regain some control of his central dark-squares on e5 and d4. White's whole plan of e2-e4 is incorrect since that would leave him with a weak c-pawn on a half-open file. Better, as mentioned in my note to Black's seventh move, is a plan involving c2-c4.

9.d3 Qe7

2100: "I will continue to develop my pieces and play for e2- e4."

10.Nbd2 Rd8

2 100: "Does he really want to play . . . d5-d4 himself? I'm probably choosing incorrect plans. I can't tell if I want an open or dosed position. I want to play e4 but that doesn't work at the moment due to 11 . . . dxe4 with a nasty pin on the d-file. So I'll play e3 and if 1 1 . . .d4, then 12.e4." Usually a player with two fianchettoes wants the position to be as open as possible since that will benefit his heat-seeking Bishops. A closed position blocks them and makes them both useless. As stated earlier, White should play l l . c4 when 1 1 . . .d4 1 2.Nb3 opens the hl-a8 diagonal and gives White play on the queenside because of the extra space there and the open b-file. If Black answered 11 .c4 with 1 1 . . .dxc4?, then 1 2.Nxc4 would lead to a beautiful position for White. Both his Bishops enjoy wide-open diagonals, his Knights both aim at e5, all his pawns are safe, and he can generate play down the open b-file and c-file. ll.e3? Now a c2-c4 advance would leave the pawn on d3 weak. ll . ..b6 2100: "Playing to fianchetto on b7."

12.Qe2

2100: "Still preparing for my central advance." 12 . . . Ba6 H ow TO P LA Y T H E O P E N I N G I 235 (89) White doesn't know what to do. 2100: "He hampering my intended e2-e4 so I'll switch to a different plan. His c6-Knight gives him good control of the dark-squares so I will trade it off. " Notice how Black has placed his pieces on squares that fight for central control and restrain any central pawn advances by White. At the same time, Black has opened a key file (the c-file) and left White with weaknesses on c2 and a3. White, on the other hand, hasn't done much of anything. He has allowed weaknesses to appear in his position and, aside from randomly developing his pieces, has not made any effort to create points of attack in the enemy camp or to gain space for himself.

13.Ne5 Nxe5

I 4.Bxe5 Raes I didn't fall for 14 . . . Bxa3?? 15.Nbl when White would win material due to the two loose Bishops on the a-file. 2100: " He is trying to hit c2. I'm not active enough. My kingside stuff is not happening since f2-f4 is slovv. I also have to worry about the a3-pawn. It may be time to push it out of harm's way."

15.a4 Bb4

2100: "What's the point?"

[diagram]
Black understands that pawns are not the only things that can become weak. The new target is the c3-square, and Black rushes to claim it

16.Nb3 Bc3

2100: "He is getting rid of my strong Bishop."

17.Bxc3 Rxc3

18.a5

2100: "I need to try to get rid of everything." Exchanging off a weak pawn is a good idea, but unfortunately he forgets that his Knight on b3 is not as safe as it appears to be. 18 . . . Bxd31

19.cxd3 Rxb3

I stopped the game because White is a pawn down for nothing. Ti p s * If you gain space early, you should continue to add to the gains that you have already made. All your pieces should work together in this (or any other) effort. The same can be said for an early minor piece advantage (make all your pieces and pawns help to improve your piece and restrict his), a structural edge (show that his pawns are weaker than yours), or virtually any other imbalance. * Don't just develop pieces. You must make gains with every move. * Bishops on long diagonals want those diagonals to stay open. Only allow them to close up if you feel that you are getting something good in other areas. H ow TO P L A Y T H E O P E N I N G I 2 3 7 Admittedly, this was a rather one-sided contest. Our next game shows a more balanced battle. The moves that I forced him to play were: 1.c4 c5 2.Nc3 Nc6

3.g3 g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.e4 d6 6.Nge2 Nf6 7.O-O O-O 8.d3 Ne8.

(90)

[diagram]

9.f4 f5

2100: "I wanted to provoke that. I knew he would not let me play f4-f5. Now I have many possibilities. If ! go Nd5, he will kick it out with . . .Nc7. I will just develop and defend the d4- square and perhaps push to d4." The developing 10.Be3 is a good all-purpose move that eyes his weakened d4-square and connects the Rooks. ·

[diagram]
10.Be3 Nd4

2100: "He doesn't want me to play d3-d4. I have an idea to sacrifice a pawn to get some sort of activity with 11.NbS when the b2-pawn goes but I get lots of open lines. I want to get a quick d4 in to take advantage of his lack of development." I don't like the idea of him bringing his c-pawn to the vulnerable b5-square but I do like the fact that he's trying to open the position and take advantage of his lead in development. He is forcing the play and making Black dance to his tune. The move may be a bit dubious, but his heart's in the right place. ll.Nb5 Nxb5

12.cxb5 Nc7

2100: "Didn't fall for 12 . . . Bxb2 13.Qb3+. The b5-pawn isn't threatened at the moment so I can do anything I please. My original plan was to play d4."

13.d4 cxd4

14.Bxd4

2100: "Weakening his King by swapping Bishops." I4. . .Ne6 2100: "Now there's a lot of pins coming up. If 15.exfS Nxd4 and . . . Qb6 kills me. I have two moves: either 1 5.Bxg7 or

15.Qb3. Since I'll probably take on g7 anyway, I should try

to win a tempo."

15.Qb3 Kh8

2100: "No choice."

16.Bxg7+ Nxg7

2100:" I want to play Khl but it's so slow. I'll let him do it for me." 1 7.Radl Qb6+

18.Khl Be6

2100: "I have no idea what's going on here. Should sacrifice the b-pawn? No . . . I'll make him work for it!" How T O P LA Y T H E O P E N I N G I 2 3 9 The opening stage is over. Black has caught up in develop ment and is now trying to take over the initiative. This won't be so simple, though. True, Black does have the long-range advantage of superior pawn structure, but White has potential pressure down the e-file (against the e7-pawn) and his pieces are more active than the Black guys. Note that both sides came out of the opening with certain plusses and are now trying to milk these advantages for all they are worth .

19.Qd3 Raes

2100: "Hitting c4. I could play Rel but I will go for b2-b3 which controls some squares but gives him the c-file." White was hoping I'd play 19 ... Bxa2?? when 20. b3 traps the Bishop and threatens to pick it off in a number of w-ays (21.Rd2, 21 .Ra l , 21 .Qc2, and 21.Ncl).

20.b3 Rc5

2100: "I'm starting to regret b2-b3. I'm giving you time to double-up. Too late now; I have to continue with my plan."

21.Nd4 Bd7

2100: "It may be time for my a4 advance. It gives him a free move but may be the only way to defend b5."

22.a4 Rfc8

2100: "I still can't assess this. I have to get some counterplay to challenge his domination of the c-file. I have to get something going on the e-file." He finally notices his potential down the e-file.

23.Rfel e6 /

2100: "Saying no to my counterplay. But now I have a new target. "

24.exf5 gxf5

2100: "Whose King is weaker? What are my ideas here? His Knight looks silly but it guards lots of squares. I could sacrifice an Exchange or a Rook but maybe I don't need to go for any wild stuff. I'll force him to create holes ."

25.Qf3 d5

2100: "Cool! It feels great to push him around for a change. Now I can run to eS."

[diagram]
26.Qe3 Qd6

2100: "I hate that! He wants an endgame. I want to play Nf3- e5 but that weakens b3!"

27.Nf3

2100: "Now I'm going to get mated-my King is so weak!" I don't know why he felt that his King was weak; it looks perfectly safe to me. The advantages acquired from the opening are still influencing the moves for both sides. White still has to defend his queenside pawns while Black, due to the doubled White pawns, is virtually a pawn up in the center. White's biggest plus is his control of the juicy dark-squares on d4 and e5.

[diagram]
2100: "Still have no idea. I'll play Ne5 cause it looks nice. Is that a bad reason?" Making a move because it "looks nice" is not a good reason at all! I prefer putting the Knight on d4 where it guards b3, blocks the d-pawn, keeps the enemy Rooks out of c2 and eyes e6.

28.Ne5 KgS

2100: "Now I can challenge the file."

29.Rcl Bes

2100: "I will re-maneuver the Knight."

30.Nd3 d4

31.Qd2 Rc3

We stopped the game due to lack of time. The battle is still raging around the imbalances created in the opening. Ti p * The advantages you create in the opening often still have influence deep into the middlegame or endgame. H o w TO P L A Y T H E O r E N I N G I 241 This type of cut and thrust battle becomes more a..nd more common as your rating and the rating of your opponents grows. However, a beginner never looks at these things. IIlstead, he simply wants to get his stuff out and have some basic idea of what to do once his development is completed. The game that follows shows some of the typical mistakes that players in the 1100 range and below often make. 900-Silrnan. Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation.

1.e4

900: "Attacks the middle and the fS- and dS-squares. Also helps develop the Queen and Bishop." 1 ...e5

2.Nf3

900: "Attacks eS, develops and prepares to move the Bishop and castle." 2 ... Nc6 900: "Protects and develops."

3.Bb5

900: "Attacks the Knight and will someday threaten to win the pawn on eS. I remember you telling me that an immediate 4.Bxc6 dxc6 S.NxeS fails to 5 . . . Qd4 with a double attack on my Knight and pawn." --- 3 . . . a6 900: "Attacks my Bishop." You must always ask why your opponent played his move. That way you won't experience any horrible surprises.

4.Bxc6

900: "Chops off a piece with no loss of time." 4 ... dxc6

[diagram]

5.Nc3 Bc5

H ow TO P LAY T H E O > E N ! N G I 243 Putting the Bishop on an active square and playing to stop White from opening a file with d2-d4.

6.O-O

900: "Since you told me that I don't have to worry about his Queen and Rook coming down on me, I suppose that castling will be okay." He never even noticed Nxe5 which, however, can be an swered by 6 . . .Qg5 or 6 . . . Bxf2+ 7.Kxf2 Qd4+ when Black has taken advantage of the undefended piece on e5. 6 . . .f6

7.d3 Ne7

900: "I remember that you once told me that 8.Be 3 Bxe3

9.fxe3 would be a good idea. However, I really am attracted

to 8.Na4 with an attack on his Bishop."

8.Na4

White finds another typical error. One-move attacks are useless if they don't torment the attacked piece or if they don't accomplish other goals. Here White is sticking his Knight on the rim and, after Black moves his Bishop to safety, the first player will have to deal with the stupid placement of the poor horse on a4. Much better was his first thought of 8.Be3 Bxe3 9.fxe3 which --- brings a pawn to the center (where it controls the useful d4- and f4-squares) and opens the f-file for his Rooks. The exchange of Bishops also gets rid of Black's Bishop-pair (when your opponent has two Bishops, trade one of them off!). Compare this with 8.Na4 Ba7 which does nothing at all to improve White's position. 8 ... Ba7 900: "I would like to play d2-d4 but I can't. I will play 9.Qe2, which connects my Rooks and prepares Be3." A really good idea. White would love to trade off Bishops with Be3 since that develops, gives White more control of d4 and gets rid of Black's Bishop pair (as discussed above).

9.Qe2, and we stopped the game.

[diagram]
Tips * Don't play mindless one-move attacks which, after the opponent moves his attacked unit to safety (and you must believe that he will see your threat), leave your attacking piece on a useless square. * If you advance your pawns in the center, you will be able to open central files for your Rooks. Be attentive to the needs of your Rooks and they will serve you well. * If the opponent has two Bishops, trade one of them off. It's much easier to deal with one Bishop than two, since a pair of them is able to control both white and black squares.

USING THE

ROOKS

Most chess players are aware that Rooks need open files to be effective. However, these files don't just appear out of thin air (well, sometimes they appear to, but don't count on this type of lucky manifestation), you must go out of your way to create them. The amateur player often has trouble using his Rooks; they just seem to sit there, trapped behind their own pawns, and often don't play a part in the game at all. The following thoughts should prove worthwhile to those who have trouble with Rooks: RULE 1 - Use your pawns to blast open files. This holds true in open and closed positions.

[diagram]
(92) a

IV .1 •

[diagram]

[diagram]
This frees the f-pawn in anttc1pation of . . . f7-f5 , gaining kingside space and giving the f8-Rook more room to breathe.

2.Nd31

White plays for c4-c5, gaining queenside space and preparing to blast open the c-file for his Rooks. This type of systematic preparation for the opening of a file is a necessary skill if you want to progress in chess. RULE 2 - Don't open a file if you think that the opponent will take it away from you. RULE 3 - If the creation of an open file has noth ing to do with your other positive imbalances, then don't waste your time creating it. In diagram 93, Black's pawns pointed to the kingside so he not only played to open files, he also played to gain extra territory in that area. White's dreams of c4-c5 also attempt to open files on the side of the board where he enjoys more space. RULE 4 - At times you can allow the opponent to dominate an open file, as long as you make sure that no penetration points exist along it. (94) Black to play. Black appears to have pressure along the open b-file in diagram 94, but this is really an illusion because these Rooks can't

[diagram]
penetrate into the enemy position. The squares b5, b4, b3, b2, and bl are all covered and are taboo to the Black Rooks. • • • • • The following position shows that a file without penetration points is more or less useless. (95) Karpov-Andersson, Stockholm 1969. Black to play. The center is closed and Black's superiority on the queenside is just as obvious as White's on the kingside. Hoping to add to the flames of his queenside assault, Andersson played to open as many files there as possible. 1 . . .a5 Intending to blast everything open with . . . a4.

2.a41

An excellent move that stops the enemy a-pawn dead in its tracks. True, Black does gain the open b-file. True, White has weakened the b4-square. However, White feels that he can successfully deal with one open file. He certainly did not want to allow Black two of them! 2 ... bxc4

3.bxc4 Na6

4.Qe2

[diagram]
Karpov knows that his chances on the kingside are not going away, so he carefully deprives his opponent of the entry points along the b-file. Once this is done, and the enemy Rooks are neutralized, White will be free to play for his own attack in relative safety. 4 . . .Ra7

5.Bd2 Rab7

6.Bc3 Nb4

7.Bdl Na6

8.Nd2

White's pieces keep Black out of b5, b4, b3, b2 and b l . 8 ...Nb4

9.Re3 Be8

10.Nfl Qc8

l l.Ng3 Bd7

12.Qd2 Nh7

13.Be2

White goes about another positional plan before he starts an attack. He wants to trade off his light-squared Bishop for its counterpart on d7. Then the f5- and g6-squares will be permanent homes for the White Knights. /

13. . .

K.fi

14.Qdl Be7

15.Nfl Bd8

16.Nh2 Kg8

17.Bg4 Ng5

18.Bxd7 Qxd7

19.Nfl

Now that the Bishops are gone, White heads for the nice home on fS. 19 . . .f5 Getting rid of the hole before White can use it. This doesn't work out very well, but to allow White Ng3-f5 followed by g2-g3 and f2-f4 would also be hopeless.

[diagram]
20.exf5 Qxf5

21.Ng3 Qt7

Black sees that 21 . . .Qc2 22.f4! would give up material, since 22 . . .exf4 23.Re8+ leads to mate.

22.Qe2

With all his basic positional goals taken care of (the nullifica tion of the b-file and the trade of his bad Bishop), Karpov plays to open files of his own. He knows that if his Rooks get in the game, the Black position will fall apart. 22 ...Bf6

23.Rfl

White will play f2-f4, when both his Rook charge into play.

23. ..Qd7

24.f4 exf4

25.Rxf4 Bxc3

26.Rxc3 Re8

27.Re3 R7b8

28.Qf2

Threatening 29.Re7! Rxe7 30.RfS+.

28. ..Nh7

29.Nf5 Rxe3

30.Qxe3 Nf6

31.Nge7+ Kh8

32.Nxh6 Re8

33.Nf7+ Kh7

34.Re41 Rxe7

Giving up, since he saw that 34 . . .Nxe4 35 .Qxe4+ leads to a quick mate.

35.Rxe7, 1-0.

[diagram]

[diagram]
1400: "Continues with his queenside space edge. I like 2.a4 because it will kill his pawns, though it does open up the b file and weaken b4."

2.a41 bxc4

3.bxc4 Na6

1400: "Heading for b4. Since the center is closed, I will start to get things going on the kingside. "

4.Nxg5

Before this, White played just like Karpov! However, now he shows that he feels it is a race on opposite wings (which means that you must proceed with speed). While this demonstrates a

[diagram]
good understanding of wing situations, it's simply not true here. White could, and should, keep the enemy pieces out (via Bd2-c3 which, by the way, also eyes the Black a-pawn) and then take all the time he wants on the opposite side. 4 . . . fxg5 1400: "I'm trying to figure out the best way to get in. Since the center is locked, I would like to use my kingside pawns. An immediate f2-f4 fails but I do want to push f2-f4 at some point. The only way to do it is a Rook move followed by g3 and f4. Seems like it's too slow, though. Well, I have to get my Rook out of the way but I don't know where to put it." Notice how he played 4.Nxg5 without detailed thought. He didn't bother looking at the ramifications of his decision. This move was an act of aggression on the kingside that made him feel bener but did nothing to open lines on that side of the board. On the contrary, it made it harder for White to play the file-opening f2-f4.

5.Rc3 Be7

1400: "He wants to play . . . g5-g4 followed by . . .BgS, trading off his bad Bishop. I will stop this with g2-g4, when his dark-squared Bishop remains very bad."

6.g4?

He thought that he saw a threat and became so distracted by it that he forgot all about opening lines on the kingside. Instead, he stopped the "threat" of . . .g5-g4 (which in actuality places the pawn in grave danger after Bd3-e2) and closed up the very side he was hoping to open. Don't become so entranced by the enemy's ideas that you forget all about your own. 6 . . .Bf6 1400: "That makes it hard to push f2-f4. I still want to play for f4 and if he takes . . .exf4 then e4-e5 is possible. So 7.Qe2 is an idea." Black is making sure that any tactically based e4-e5 advance fails. Once he does that, he will have a free hand on the queenside. In a way, this is the reverse of what happened in the Karpov-Andersson game.

[diagram]
7.Qe2 Be8

1400: "That was inevitable. I want my Queen to go t.o h2 so f3 clears the znJ rank."

8.f3 Bxg6

9.hxg6 Qe8

I wanted to see how he would react to the loss of material. I was hoping he'd notice that, after Black takes on g6 (via 10 . . .Qxg6), White can make use of tactics (created by the c2-Bishop's potential X-ray to the Black Queen on g6) by 1 1 .f4 gxf4 (1 1 . . .exf4 1 2.eS) 12.Bxf4. Of course, this still fails due to 12 . . . exf4 13.eS Qe8, taking advantage of the unprotected White Queen (14 .Qd3 QxeS is nothing for White), but such tactics can often tum a game around and must be noticed if you want to have any real chance of saving a poor position.

10.Qh2?

1400: "Eyeing h6 and if he takes on g6 I go to h5 and trade." What is this madness about trading? Why would he want to go into an endgame after he has lost a pawn? The threar to the g6- pawn seems to have blown one of his fuses! 10 ...Qxg6

11.Qh5 Qxh5

12.gxh5 g6

13.hxg6 Kg7

1400: "Black has an extra passed pawn but I don't know if that pawn makes such a big difference. My two Bishops help and his Knight is useless since b4 is a nowhere square. I will trade Rooks since all his pawns are on dark squares which makes his Bishop bad. Ideally I would like to trade my bad Bishop for his Knight. " was very pleased at how he continually thought about getting rid of bad Bishops. However, his desire to trade when down material concerned me. Usually it is the person who is up material that wants to trade!

14.Rbl Rxbl

15.Bxbl Rb8

[diagram]
16.Bc2 Kxg6

17.Rb3 Rb4

1400: "He is threatening two pawns. I will trade and if he retakes with either one, I can block on b3 with my Bishop." Still trading away to his doom.

18.Rxb4 cxb4

Now Black has a new passed pawn and a nice square for his Knight on cS.

19.Be3 Bd8

1400: "He has two passed pawns. I have to improve the position of my King."

20.Kg2 Nb81

1400: "I think the push works now." Black intended to trade his bad Bishop (or get it outside the pawn chain) by . . .Nd7 followed by . . .Bb6.

21.c5 d.xc5

22.Bxc5 Nd7

23.Be3 Bb6

1400: "Trading his bad Bishop for my good one. I don't want his Bishop to go to d4 but what can I do about it?"

24.Bd2 Bd4

25.Kg3 Nc5. The game was stopped at this point.

Tips * Trading bad Bishops is fine, but don't think about that to the exclusion of everything else. * Open files are only valuable if you can effect some sort of penetration on them. * If you can stop the opponent's play, you don't have to be in a hurry with your own.

[diagram]
I n the diagram that follows, w e see a position that i s far from enticing for Black. Aside from having the inferior pawn structure, he is also about to lose a pawn. Masters know that in Rook endgames it is of the utmost imp01tance to keep one's Rook active. This rule should be followed even if you have to sacrifice a pawn. However, I suspected that in the amateur ranks this well known principle was unknown. (97) Silman-1 480 Black to play. How would an amateur defend such a position? I tried it against several students to serrif their reactions were uniform or varied from individual to individual. 1 480: "The position is miserable for Black. I need to give up a pawn and penetrate with my Rook so it gets active. However, 1 . . .Ke7 2.Rxa6 leaves him with two connected passed pawns on the queenside. My Rook could penetrate then and his Rook would be in front of his pawns but that probably doesn't make any difference. The other problem is that if I let him chop on d6, then the f6-pa wn would also hang. I would consider the game lost here and I would not have a positive attitude. I would play 1 . . .Ke7 2.R:xa6 Rc7 and penetrate with my Rook. Maybe I could get some play." 1 ... Ke7? Poor 1480 didn't enjoy this position at all! Apparently he was not aware of the old saying, "All Rook endings are drawn."

[diagram]
This i s actually a n old joke saying, but there is more truth to it than one would imagine. Why? Because all Rook endings take patience and skill to win. Such qualities are not always present, and a dogged resistance can easily bring rewards. He gave up the a-pawn because he had already given up the game. When you adopt a loser's attitude you will play loser moves. You must believe that you have a chance. If you don't, then your moves will echo this sentiment. His 1 . . .Ke7 gave White two connected passed pawns after 2.Rxa6, and these two pawns will easily win the game for the first player. We stopped the game since 1480 was too disgusted with the position to continue! Silman-1500 (also from diagram 97) 1500: "I can't save both pawns so I have two choices. One is to save the d6-pawn and advance the f-pawn and create a passed d-pawn. Second, is to try to keep the a-pawn by advancing it and give up the d6-pawn. I can get my Rook behind his pawns and try to prevent him from queening. The first plan gives him two passers on the queenside so the second is the way to go. "I have 1 . . .a5 or l . . . Ra7. The former allows 2.Ra6. I'm not crazy about 1 . . . Ra7 because it dooms my Rook to passivity, so 1 . . .a5 is better." I was very happy about what he had to say. He wanted to avoid a passive Rook and did not want to give White two connected passed pawns. 1 . . . a5 1500: "If 2.Ra6 Rb5."

2.Rxd6 Ke7

1500: "Protects the f-pawn, centralizes my King and attacks the Rook." So far he's done quite well. This natural move, though, just forces the White Rook to a better square. For the superior 2 . . . a4, see the next game.

[diagram]
3.Ra6 Rh5 and here we stopped the game since Black is a

pawn down with a passive position. (98) Silman-2100 Black to play. 2100: "Losing the a6-pawn is bad because connected passed pawns on the queenside are fatal for me. However, my Rook is not active and . . . Ra7 does nothing to help. I have to activate my Rook and stop his queenside pawns. I must hold the a-pawn and . . .a5 followed by . . .Ra7 is the only way to do it. I don't care about my d-pawn but my a-pawn is everything. Unfor¢'nately, my King can't be activated either. So 1 . . . a5 is forced since . . .Ra 7 is death. After 1 . .a5

2.Ra6 Rb5 or 2.Rxd6 a4!, and ifhe takes on f6 I liquidate and

the four vs. three should draw." Excellent! He intends to play this as actively as possible in order to avoid a passive pawn-down Rook endgame. I was especially pleased that he noted the drawn four vs. three endgame whenever you have pawns on only one side of the board you create excellent drawing chances. 1 . . . a5

2.Rxd6 a41

2100: "2 . . . Ke7 does not really activate my King so I have to liquidate. White has to get his King into play. Now (after 2 . . .a4) if 3.bxa4, I get counterplay with 3 . . . Rb4."

[diagram]

3.bxa4 Rb4 4.f3 Rxa4 5.Rd2 when White is the one with the

passive Rook. Nevertheless, White could still torture Black by bringing his King over to the queenside and relieving his Rook from guard duty. Whatever the result, Black has done his utmost to make the win hard for White to achieve.

3.Rxf6 axb3

4.axb3 Rxb3 and Black got his four versus three endgame.

The game was agreed drawn after 5.h4 h5 6.Kh2 Kg7 7.e5 Rb5

8.f4 Rb4 9.Kh3 Rh3+ 10.g3 Rb2.

Ti ps * A game is always easier to draw if there are pawns on only one side of the board. * A bad, defeatist attitude will get you only defeat. * Two connected passed pawns almost always win in a Rook endgame.

CURSE

OF THE

KING HUNTER

THE CURS E

MINDLESS

Everyone likes to attack the opponent's King. If it works, you get a quick win with a lot of flash. However, it drlves me to distraction when a player tries to do this without any regard for the particulars of the position. The amateur must learn that you have to do what the position calls for, not what you want to do! This means that you may be the finest attacker of all time, however, if the position calls for a queenside attack against a weak pawn, then that is what you should do. Attacks against the enemy King only make sense in the following situations: > If the center is locked, you should play in the direction that your pawns point. You play where your pawns point because that is where your territory lies.

[diagram]
(99) White to play. Black's pawns point towards the kingside (from c7 to d6 to e5 . . . getting closer and closer to White's King) in diagram 99, so he fs5h. ould be playing for a kingside pawn storm by . . .Nd7 and . . .f7- This also fits in nicely with rule number two. >- If the center is locked, you should try to attack with pawns. This gives you extra space and allows your Rooks to come into play. >- It is very important to understand that you play on the wings when the center is closed, but if the center is open, the middle is the most important area to concentrate on. Central play almost always beats wing play!

[diagram]

[diagram]
I n diagram 101 , White i s justified to look at the kingside since his main imbalance (the Bishop versus the Knight) is aiming in that direction.

1.Qd4 Kg7

The only move. Any Knight move would have allowed mate on h8.

2.g41

Threatening to advance to g5. 2 . .. h6 No better is 2 . . . g5 3.f4 when the Rook on fl joins in the fight.

3.f4 and Black is overwhelmed.

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

3.Nxe5! fxe5

4. Qh5+ Ke7

[diagram]
Or 4 . . .g6 5.Qxe5+ when White picks up the Rook on h8.

5.Qxe5+ Kfi

6.Bc4+

White's army comes out with gain of time. 6 . . .Kg6

7.Qf5+ Kh6

8.d4+ g5

9.h4 and Black cannot stave off White's threats.

• • • • • In the game that follows (between two amateurs, rated 1061 and 1466 respectively) we see White build up an excellent position on the queenside only to be tempted by the siren call of a non existent kingside attack. Minders-Gonzalez, U.S. Amateur West 1993. Queen's Gambit Declined.

1.d4 d5

2.c4 Nf6?1

A common error at the amateur level. Black is allowing White to trade his inferior c-pawn for the strong central d-pawn. Better is the immediate 2 . . .e6 or 2 . . .c6 when Black can retain a space gaining pawn on d5.

3.Nc3?1

Transposing back into the main lines of the Queen's Gambit Declined. White should have punished Black by 3 . cxd5 Nxd5, after which White can always gain a full pawn center by e2-e4. 3 . . . e6

4.a3?!

Fearing the pin by . . .Bb4, White throws avvay a tempo without just cause. You can't let every little possibility by the enemy cause you to panic. If you see something that worries you, look at it closely and make sure that it's worth stopping-you may

[diagram]
find that you are often preventing a bad move that the opponent never intended to play! Note that after the calm 4.BgS (also fine is 4.Nf3) 4 . . . Bb4 5 .e3, White need not fear the doubled pawns that arise after 5 . . . Bxc3+

6.bxc3 since he could always get rid of them by cxd5 followed by

c3-c4 (in other words, the doubled pawns were illusory). In this case, Black has actually helped White; his capture on c3 brought the passive b2-pawn to a more dynamic central post. 4 ... Be7

5.Bg5

Having chased away the ghosts with a2-a3, White gets back to his own plans. 5 . . . c6

6.Nf3 h6

7.Bh4 Nbd7

8.c5

Giving up some time (tempos) for lots of queenside space. More natural is 8.e3 , but I will never criticize a move that aggressively fights for something (be it two Bishops, material, development, superior pawn structure, or in this case, space)-- it shows that one's heart is in the right place. An insistence that every move you make creates some sort of gain will get you far in chess. 8 . . .b6

9.b4 b5?

Wasting a move and destroying the tension that 8 . . .b6 cre ated. White's pawn moves (a3 and cS) allowed Black to take a lead in development, and he should try to take advantage of this by ripping open the position. He could castle first before initiating a fight, but the immediate 9 . . .bxc5 10.bxcS (better is 10.dxcS, creating an interesting fight between White's queenside majority and Black's central majority) 10 . . .eS! (destroying one of the defenders of c5) should turn out pretty well for Black: 11 .dxe5 (the solid 1 l .e3 allows Black to make his own spatial gains in the center after 10 . . . . e4) 1 1 . . .Ne4 1 2.Bxe7 Qxe7 with threats to win the White pawns on e5 and c5. By ignoring the one advantage he had (lead in development), Black quickly finds himself in an inferior position.

10.e3 a5

11.Bd3 O-O

12.O-O Res

(103)

[diagram]
White to play. White has come out of the opening with a nice game: he has more space on the queenside and has possibilities to expand in the center with e3-e4, thereby stopping i\,!ack from doing the same thing with a later . . .e6-e5. In the actual game, White was blind to the fact that his fortunes were tied to his extra queenside space and central possibilities. Instead, he decided that a kingside attack was in order. Why? My guess is that he likes to go after Kings and thought that this was as good a time to do it as any. Needless to say, this is not the way to play good chess!

13.Ne2?

White thinks that a Knight on g3 will help him create a kingside attack simply because he has an extra piece on that side of the board. However, you should lead your pieces to squares where they have a future. Once the poor horse reaches g3 it will be badly posted since it can't go to e4, f5 or M!

13. ..

Bb7

14.Ng3??

Trapping his own Bishop on h4.

[diagram]
axb4

15.axb4 Rxal

16.Qxal and now Black can win the Bishop with 16 . . .g5. In

the end, White did indeed hang his Bishop and he eventually lost the game. Noting White's reluctance to play in the center or on the queenside, I began to wonder if my students would make the same mistakes, even though I had warned them of this type of error in the past. The next two games begin from the position after move twelve. (104) 1600-Silman. White to play. 1600: "The first thing I have to do is find the candidate moves for White. They are 13.NeS, 13.Bxf6, 13.Qc2 and

13.Rel . Those are a few of them. Now I will see if we have

even material. Yes, it's all even. Next, I will look at King safety-both Kings appear to be safe. What are my weak nesses? White is solid, my dark-squared Bishop controls a good diagonal. On the queenside, any trade opens the a-file and no weaknesses are created so I don't have to worry about that . Do I have any combination on the board? I don't see any for White. Any for Black? Nothing. His c6-pawn is weak but I don't see any way to get at it. "So my plan is to kick Black's Knights and make them retreat. Best is to move the Queen from the first rank so

13. . .

axb4 14.axb4 Rxal 15.Rxal gives me files."

13.Qc2

dying active,

[diagram]
He played a good move, but his reasoning was confused-to say the least! Never start by looking at the candidate moves-that's the last thing you should do! My student, though, immediately began to list them (I had not seen him for two years, so it seems that he had forgotten what we had discussed in our old sessions). Next he jumped from one thing to another, never noticing that he possessed extra queenside space. Finally, he makes the cryptic statement that he is going to kick Black's Knights (how?) and then he plays 13.Qc2. At the risk of repeating myself, you start by listing all the imbalances. Then you ask which side of the board you (and your opponent!) are going to play on (you will only play where you have a favorable imbalance). You only look at candidate moves when you have assessed these other factors. 13 ... Nh5

14.Bxe7 Qxe7

[diagram]

[diagram]
15.Ne2?

16o0: "This keeps him out of f4. My long-range plan is to play a Knight to d6." Horrible. One idea of playing e3-e4 is that he can answer . . .dx.e4 with Nxe4 when the dream of using d6 becomes a reality. With the Knight on e2, however, this is no longer possible. Another idea associated with e3-e4 is that he can follow up with a Rook to the e-file when White would have considerable pressure in the center. The immediate 15.e4 was called for, when Black could not counterattack with . . . .e6-e5 since d5 would fall. The Knight's absence from the center gives Black the time to free himself. 15 . . . e5 1 600: "I will counterattack."

16.e4

With Black suddenly showing signs of activity, White feels compelled to strike back. However, instead of being the one to dictate the tempo of the game, now White is reacting to Black. 16 ...Nhf6 The Knight rushes back to the center where it defends d5 and attacks e4. 1600:" I must watch out for 17.exd5 e4 with a fork. How do I exchange without allowing this fork?" Decentralizing and time-wasting moves like 1 5.Ne2 usually lead to the opponent taking the initiative. Remember: you want to be the one who tells the other guy what to do. Passive moves have the opposite effect.

17.Ng3 axb4

Black sees that an undefended White Rook on a l might lead to problems for his opponent.

18.axb4 Rxal

19.Rxal exd4

[diagram]
1600: "Now I'm getting closer to his weakness o n c6. Since my e4-pawn is attacked three times and guardedt:hree times I have time to follow my plans. I can play N5, Nxd4 or exd5. I must watch out for back-rank mates on el after Nxd4 but everything seems safe." White's three to three count is a bit off (Black is attacking e4 four times), though another oversight is the straw that will break his back.

20.Nxd4??

You should always be aware of all your weak points and undefended pieces. In this case, White must carefully watch his Rook on a l , his pawn on b4 (when a Black Knight comes to d5) . and his pawn on e4. By not taking the opponent's possibilities seriously, he allowed himself to be knocked out. Much better was

20.Nf5. r

20 . . .Qe5 1600: "Pinning me and threatening my d4-Knigtlt. The c6- pawn is poison now and I can't easily chase his Queen from its good square. On 21.Nf5, he has 21 . . . dxe4 so I must defend my Knight."

21.Nge2?? dxe4 and the game was stopped.

Tips * Moving a piece away from the center (called a decentralizing move) should always be viewed with suspicion. * Only go after the enemy King if the position justifies it. A King-hunt is not something you decide to do because you "feel like it." * Undefended pieces often lead to nasty tactical surprises. Make sure your pieces are well-gu arded.

[diagram]
One of the amateur's greatest weaknesses is his inability to grab the initiative. He wants to attack but he does not realize that the concept of attack must encompass the whole board. Real attacking means putting pressure against a particular target; this can be an enemy King or a weak pawn. You should strive to create a target and then force your opponent to react to your threats against it. In our next game, White astutely notices the creation of a weakness and jumps all over it. ( 1 05) 1400-Silman. White to play. 1400: "Central space is even. There is some action on the queenside and I have more space there due to my pawn on cS. The squares and pawns on c6, d6 and b6 are weak but not easy for White to get to. White is safe on the kingside. White's pawns are pointing to the queenside. I would like to put my Bishop on the h2-b8 diagonal where it hits e5 and d6-it's not doing much where it stands. "Now for a plan. I want to play either in the center or on the queenside. I like Bg3, which aims at both sectors, followed by NeS." I'm extremely happy with his appraisal. He didn't even look at the kingside since there were no favorable imbalances in that area. The only thing he didn't notice was Black's ultimate inten tion of advancing his pawn to e5. Don't forget to look for your opponent's best plans! By doing that, you won't run into any unpleasant surprises.

[diagram]
13.Bg3

1400: "I'm a bit better because Black is cramped due to my space-gaining c5-pawn." 13 ...Bt'S Trying to snag his Bishop with 13 . . .Nh5 runs into 14.Ne5! Nxg3? (14 . . .Nxe5 15.Bxe5) 15.Nxc6. 1400: " Black is thinking of fianchettoing his King Bishop since it has no future on e7."

14.Ne5

Played without thought. Why he chose this aggressive-look ing move (which incorrectly permits the side with less space to trade pieces) over the logical 14.e4, remains a mystery. 14 ...Nxe5 '---

15.Bxe5 Nd7

1 400: "Now it's looking bad for me. He will get the two Bishops if I stay on e5. However, if he takes me on e5 I get the d4-square." When he played 14.Ne5 he lost momentary control of the game. The mild panic that resulted from this is why he immedi ately began to think that something had gone wrong. Fortunately, he makes a nice recovery.

16.Ne2

It's odd, but all three of our test subjects have resorted to this ugly move! 16 ... Nxe5 This and Black's following moves are very weak since they give the White Knight a beautiful central post and force him to improve his position. However, this student always had trouble attacking the enemy King (preferring quiet positional play) and I wanted to give him the opportunity to test his skills in that area.

17.dxe5 Qc7

1 400: "I must defend my pawn."

[diagram]
18.f4 Be7

19.Nd4

White has built up a significant advantage in territory and also enjoys a great Knight on d4 versus a pathetic Bishop on c8. 19 ... f6 So far, I had made simple one-move threats or done nothing at all. Now I lash out and try to get counterplay in the center. Will he fold at the first sign of pressure or will he rise to the occasion? 1400: "Black is trying to open lines for his two Bishops. He is weak on the light-squares so I'm going to take advantage of that with QhS."

20.Qh5!

Bingo! All of a sudden my position takes a turn for the worse. He wants to blow me off the board and it's not clear if I can do anything about it. This switch from more space to an attack on the wing is quite natural-the side with more territory can move his pieces from one side to the other with great speed. Note, however, that White has only decided to go for a kingside attack after Black weakened the light-squares around his King. In other words, this decision was not made lightly-he had a clear reason to attack my King. 20 .. . RfS 1400: "I'm looking at how much damage Qg6 does. He can play . . .fS and shut off my Bishop. Since . . .fS makes Qg6 useless, I will bring up more pieces."

21.Rf3

I like the idea of bringing more pieces into the attack. However, 21.Qg6 fS 22.g4! should be winning for White because

23.gxfS will pick up some wood. Remember that mate is not the

only goal of a kingside attack A safe material advantage would be more than adequate. 21 . . . Qd7 Black's ugly contortions deserve a grim death.

[diagram]
22.Rg3

1400: "Threatening Qxh6. I think I've got him!" 22 . . . f5 1400: "He didn't like the mating possibilities that my Bishop gave me."

23.Qxh6

See what the 1mt1at1ve does? By playing forcefully to take advantage of a weakness on the kingside (note the word "weak ness"), a player with a 1400 rating has pushed someone around who is over a thousand points higher!

23. .. Rt7

He is treating me like a dog! I waited expectantly for him to put me away. \ 1400: "Now I want a way to finish him off. Rg6 aims at e6. I must be careful about breaking this pin, though."

24.Rg6?

With an extra pawn and an attack, he begins to get greedy for small gains. Instead of this move, which restricts the mobility of his pieces, he should do two things (if no immediate crush exists): 1) take away all possible counterplay-he is a pawn up and winning, so if he takes all my cheapo chances away he should easily score the point. 2) Reorganize and then break through with the remainder of his forces. Aside from 24.BxfS! exfS 25.e6 which wins at once, White could play quietly and lock in the victory with 24.Rbl (defending the b-pawn and stopping any nonsense down the a-file) followed by Qg6 and Rh3. The beauty of this line (if something like 24.BxfS did not exist) is that Black would be completely helpless and would likely resign. Once again: If you have a long-range win (in this case, White has a material advantage and an enduring attack) but don't have an immediate knockout, stop all enemy counterplaj. 24 . . . axb4

[diagram]
1400: "Black is struggling for counterplay on the other side. Should I defend or ignore him and go for the kill? I'm still focusing on the e6 point. I just noticed that my intended

25.Nxe6 runs into 25, . . Qxe6! 26.Rxe6 gxh6. I will back off

and get out of the pin."

25.Qh5

Just giving up. Black has broken through on the queenside and now White must find a way to kill his opponent on the opposite wing. The move he played is simply too slow. 25.Bxf5! was still possible. 25 . . . Bxc5 and we stopped the game since lines like 26.Nxe6 Bxe3+ 27.Kf1Qxe6 28.Rxe6 Bxe6 are good for Black. Ti p s * Only play where you have some sort of favorable imbalance. Simply wanting to attack on the kingside is not justification for doing so. However, if weak nesses appear there then by all means go after him with gusto! * Always try and force your ideas onto your oppo nent-get him to react to what you are doing. Of course, you must also make sure that what you are doing conforms to the needs to the position. * Never allow counterplay when you have a lock on the game.

[diagram]
Our final example in this chapter starts with a quiet positional opening. White is supposed to play on the queenside and in the center but somehow his amateur eyes still stare longingly at the Black King. The first moves were: 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 4.e3 O-O

5.Bd3 d5 6.Nf3 b6 7.O-O Bb7 8.a3 Bd6 9.cxd5 exd5 10.b4 a6

and now 1 500 had to annotate the book moves for both sides: (106) White to play. 1500: "White wants to push his pawn on f2 to f4. To do this he must move his Knight to el." I asked where White should be trying to play. 1500: "Black's Bishops are aimed at White's kingside. So Black is attacking the King. I still like Nel followed by f4, though, with a kingside attack for White." Amazing! Look how the amateur player always wants to go after the King, no matter what the position calls for! He tells me that Black is attacking the King but he ignores this and says that he wants to do the same via Ne 1 and f4 (which weakens e4 and e3 along an open file). Why so stubborn? Black's semi-open e-file is closer to the kingside than White's semi-open c-file. Where is White's space advantage? On the queenside, or course. Since you are supposed to play where your advantages are, this means that White should be setting his sights on the queenside.

11.Qb3

[diagram]
1 500: "Not the kind o f move I would play. This pressures d5 but I don't like it since d5 is well defended. What's the point if something is already guarded?" 1 1 .Qb3 has several points. By attacking dS, White ties down two Black pieces (Knight on f6 and Bishop on b7) to its defense. The real purpose, though, is based on the semi-open c-file. White wants to place his Rooks on that file and bring pressure to bear on the Black c7-pawn. However, White sees that the Black Bishop on d6 not only eyes his kingside, but also defends c7. White's plan is to trade off this fine Black piece for the bad Bishop on cl via a3-a4, Ba3 and b4-bS. This would exchange a poor piece for a good one, hurt Black's chances for a successful kingside attack and leave the c-pawn more vulnerable to an assault by the White Rooks. 11 . . . Qe7 1500: "This pressures the center and centralizes a piece." It does those things but it also eyes b4 and makes a2-a4 and Ba3 more difficult to achieve.

12.Rbl

1500: "Protects b4 so he can push a4 and a5. " He does not see the real point of White's play but I did not expect him to. White is using an advanced idea that would probably be overlooked by most players under 2100. The main point of this exercise was to see if 1 500 could concentrate on a queenside attack. Unfortunately, his wistful glances towards my King made it clear where his heart was. The game was stopped at this point. Ti p s * You must be able to play in all three areas of the board (queenside, center, and kingside), depending on where your favorable imbalances are. * A person that does nothing but attacks the enemy King will end up a loser most of the time. Balance, and a willingness to do whatever is called for, is the key to success in chess.

WHICH SIDE

OF THE BOARD

SHOULD You

PLAY ON?

[diagram]

[diagram]
move if you don't know Which Side of the board you are SU pposed play on. To do this, you first take note of all the imbalances for both sides. Once this is done, try to find a plan based on those imbalances-try to use those favorable aspects of your game as guidelines that will tell you where to seek extra space, where to attack weak enemy pawns and where to create effective homes for your pieces. For example, the center is locked up. Your opponent has a weak, isolated pawn on the queenside and you also have a space advantage in that area. Your opponent is the one with the advantage in space on the kingside and most of his pieces are massed in that area. Where should you play? You may dream of running over to the kingside and trying to clobber his King, but that is just an emotional reaction that has little to do with the reality of the board. You must conquer this illogical desire and quietly go after his weak pawn on the queenside. That's your side of the board, that's where you should play. • • • • • During my private lessons, I constantly harp on certain key themes: Always pay attention to Bishop versus Knight; never play without a plan; before playing a move, always ask yourself, "What wonderful thing does this move do for my position?" And, of course, I remind my students to follow one of the finest general rules in chess: The best reaction to an attack on the wing is a counterattack in the center. When a person first comes to me, they either don't know this rule or, if they have heard of it, they've never bothered to follow it. However, after a few sessions of me nagging them, they usually begin to develop an awareness of such possibilities. Of course, if "C'', "B" and "A" players are able to use this rule, then one would think that Grandmasters would never be victims of it. The following game, though, shows that this is simply not the case-players of all strengths leave themselves open to its effects. If you want to punish them, all you have to do is pull your arm back and punch them in the center!

[diagram]

1.d4 Nf6

2.c4 e6

3.Nf3 d5

4.Nc3 Be7

5.Bg5 O-O

6.e3 Ne4

In modern times Black throws in 6 . . . h6 before deciding on 7 . . . Ne4 or the more popular 7 . . . b6.

7.Bxe7 Qxe7

8.Qb3 Nxc3

9.Qxc3 c6

10.Bd3 Nd7

11.O-O f5?1

Creating a big hole on e5. If Black ever brings his Knight to e4, White will get a superior minor piece by trading it for his Bishop and planting his Knight on the permanent e5-square.

12.Racl g5?

[diagram]

[diagram]
Black is starting a strong kingside attack However, the experi enced master knows that this type of wing attack will always fail if he can initiate a counterattack in the middle; in this case, White can blow open the center with Nd2 and f2-f3 followed by e3-e4. So why did an experienced Grandmaster like Maroczy make such a mistake? To answer that, we would have to know what he drank before the game--demonic possession is another theory.

13.Nd21 Rf7?

Pointless.

14.f3

White continues his preparations to rip open the center. 14 ... e5

15.cxd5 cxd5_

16.e41

The center gets nuked and Black's open King and lack of development begin to become serious liabilities. 16 ... f:xe4 17 .fxe4 Rxf1 +

18.Rxfl exd4

19.Qc71

Pinning the Knight and tying up all of Black's pieces. Black is completely lost. 19 . .. Kg7

20.Rf51 dxe4

21.Nxe4 Qb4

Giving up. The obvious 2 1 . . .h6 would have held out longer.

22.Rxg5+, 1 -0.

A pathetic performance from Maroczy. Let's go back to the position after 12 . . . gS.

[diagram]
1000-Silman. White to play. In the next few examples, I tested my students' ability to recognize when a central counterattack was called for by giving them the White side of the diagrammed position. If they showed a mastery of the necessary concepts, they would be rewarded in the usual way: a new car, a date with some super-model, a microscopic rendition of Elliott Winslow's signature, etc. How ever, if they failed to understand what was going on, they would have to pay ten times the normal lesson fee (the idea of fines during a lesson has been espoused by IM John Grefe). 1000: "Black has a weak square on e5 which White could use for his Knight. If I could trade off my Bishop for his Knight, I could use it but I don't know if that is possible. Black is starting a kingside attack which is justified since the center is locked; there are no open files. He will play . . . g4 and chase my Knight to a poor square. I can trade Queens with Qa3 but I'm not sure if that does any good. I can take on d5 when . . . cxd5 allows Qc7 with a pin on his Knight. If . . . exd5 my Bishop gets more scope. I will play cxd5 and try to get play in the middle." This guy's rating is only 1000 yet he pointed out some profound things! He noted the possibility of gaining a superior minor piece if his Knight could stay on e5. He also remembered me telling him that a wing attack is only justified if the center is under your control or is closed. He was well aware that he should try to open the center up and so he tried l.cxd5. I suppose the

[diagram]
idea of Nd2 followed by f3 and e4 was too difficult since the Knight move to d2 looks like a retreat and it also goes away form the desired e5-post. Don't be afraid of retreating moves it they help achieve an important goal (in this case, blasting open the center with e3-e4).

13.cxd5 exd5

1000: "I would love to get his Knight or play e3-e4. Maybe that push would be possible after Rfel . " This earned a hefty fine. Words like "maybe" should not play a part in one's choice of move-you should know what your moves will lead to! For example, if he had tried 14.b2-b4 with the idea of opening the c-file with b4-b5, I would have been proud of him (it doesn't matter if it's the best plan or not, at least he is following a dear course of action and trying to do something positive by opening a file for his Queen and Rook) since that would have continued his reasoning behind 13.cxd5. Unfortu nately, when I refused to open the c-file for him (via 13 . . . cxd5) he simply gave up on the idea.

14.Rfel g4

1000: "At this point, I have to jump into eS." Now he's just reacting to my moves and is no longer trying to follow any kind of plan. Try to notice when the transition between thinking of your own ideas and reacting to the opponent takes place. In this game, 1000 got lazy on move two and never woke up.

15.Ne5 Nxe5

16.dxe5

1000: "This is not working out well because I'm blocking my Queen." A typical post-laziness mental process. The first stage is to get depressed and tell himself that he is doing badly. 16 ... ReS 1000: "I'm losing a pawn! I should have played h2-h3 earlier and stopped his . . .g4 push."

[diagram]
The next stage is to panic and live in the past (I know because I've done it several hundred times in my career). Now he is thinking about all the things he could/should have done earlier in the game. Notice how even these dreams (h2-h3 to stop my . . . g4 push) are defensive in nature. We stopped the game and brought him back to reality with smelling salts. Our next game starts from the same position. 009) 1700-Silman. White to play. 1700: "All of Black's weaknesses are covered. His King is safe since his Queen and Rook defend. Black has a kingside attack. Material is even. White must defend the e4-square; Black would love to stuff a piece there. Black has more space. Where would both sides like to place their pieces? Well, e4 and eS are the squares. Black also has an unguarded Queen on e7. If White can push his pawn to e4, followed by Rel , then the Queen on e7 would be both ered. So what is White's best move? I think White is in trouble. Black has space and kingside pressure. Black threatens . . .g4 followed by . . . Rf8-f6-h6. What can White do to prevent mate on h2?" Very interesting! He noted that the e4- and e5-squares were important but he failed to note that e5 is a permanent weakness while anything on e4 can be chased away by f2-f3 or even taken by

[diagram]
the Bishop. All the positive things that he said about Black's position would be true if the center stays closed. He mentioned the possibility of playing for e3-e4 (opening the center) but he gave up on it immediately. After the game, he told me that it would be too difficult to get e3-e4 in. Listen! If serious chess means you need thirty minutes to find an answer to the position, then that is time well-spent. If you can't solve the position, at least you will have the satisfaction of knowing that you tried as hard as you could. If you are White here and see that White's only hope is to play for e3-e4, don't just give up on the idea. That's like giving up on yourself! Insist on finding a way to make positive things happen.

13.Ne5 Nxe5

14.dxe5

1700: "Now his Rook can't go to f6." I suppose this is kind of clever in a way. I decided not to fine him yet. 14 . . . Bd7

15.f4

1700: "Trying to restrict his Bishop and equalize space on the kingside." 1 5. . .g4 1700: "I will block his Queen's path to h4 via g2-g3."

16.g3?

He is now in a completely defensive mentality. Who cares if my Queen goes to h4? A Queen by herself can't do much damage. He should have played on the queenside by b2-b4 or even c4-c5 (gaining more space). It's important to note that with the g-pawn on g2, Black's . . . h7-h5-h4 advance has no sting since . . . h4-h3 can be met by g2-g3 while . . . g4-g3 is met by h2-h3. Now Black can advance his pawn to h4 and force open the h-file. White's fear led to the worsening of his own position.

16. . .

h5 1700: "I still like Black but White stands better now than he did before. White has a much better minor piece but Black

[diagram]
still has chances on the kingside. Black wants to pile up on the h-file."

17.Rf2 h4

1700: "I will bring my defenders around." He has been reacting to my possibilities from the very beginning and he is still doing it. No wonder that his position gets worse with every move.

18.Rg2 Rt7

1700: "Expected. Now I run my King to safety."

19.Kf2 Rh7

20.Rhl Kfi

1700: "Black is still piling up on the h-file by . . . Rah8. Black will exchange on g3 and White must be ready for th.at but I can't stop him from killing me on the h-file." The game was stopped here. Our next example is from the same position, but novv we have two children (a six-year-old girl and an eight-year-old boy) playing as a team against me. (1 10) • .t •. •

[diagram]
.. • . • \ • ·· • .• 8 8 'i' i..VStD '8 8 8 I:l l:t @ 800 and 1 100-Silman. White to play. 800: "Black wants to attack us. It's scary."

[diagram]
1 100: "I want to open files by cxd5, then I might move my Knight to e5."

13.cxd5 exd5

1 100: "That's the best recapture. I want to get his King by Ne5 which might open the center and allow my pieces to get to him." 800: "That's a good idea." I liked that 1100 saw that the Black King was getting a little open. Neither player is reacting to me yet; they are both still trying to create their own ideas.

14.Ne5 Nxe5

15.dxe5 Re8

1 100 and 800: "We have to guard our pawn."

16.f4 g4

1 100: "I will go Reel to attack in the center and bring my pieces over to the kingside." 800: "I want to play g3." They argued for a while. So far, 1 lOO's heart is in the right place-he wants to take control of the game but he does not know how to do it. His dreams of a central advance come too late, and queenside play via b2-b4-bS was indicated. Unfortunately, 800 wants to react to imaginary threats and begins their demise by playing a defensive game. 1 1 00: "17. g3 just moves a pawn and does nothing. My move is better." 800: "I want to block his pawn and stop . . .Qh4." 1 100: "You have to concentrate on our plan and not worry about his." 800 won the argument (showing an advanced knowledge of marriage but little of chess) and got her way because they had agreed on l lOO's ideas earlier. l l OO's last comment was very wise and he deserves praise for it. Ultimately, 800 got punished for her defensive strategy: I took all the change in her pockets.

[diagram]
17.g3 Be6

1 100 and 800: "We are not impressed with this move since your Bishop is blocked and bad." They are both aware of good and bad Bishops.

18.Rcel

1100 made this useless move since it was his turn to get his way. Is this getting his Rook into the game? No. Is this creating open files for his Rooks? No. You must create open files for your Rooks, so b2-b4 followed by Rcbl, Rfcl and b4-b5 was called for (this plan is known as a minority anack). 18 . . . h5 800: "I hate it when people do scary moves. He's threaten ing . . . h4." 1 100: "I want to move Qc2 to defend on the second rank and attack f5." 800: "I'm really worried about . . .h4 and want to play h4 myself." Having talked themselves into a state of panic, they both agreed.

19.h4

1 100 and 800: "Oh no! He can take enpassant!" We stopped the game at this point. Ti ps * Find a chess teacher who won't fine you for your errors. * Don't fear retreating moves if they accomplish some sort of important goal. It is not unmanly to move a piece backwards! * Take note of the transition between positive thoughts involving active plans and negative thoughts revolving around reactions and defense.

[diagram]
* Insist on making good things happen for your position. If it takes you a lot of time to find these ideas, then consider this time well-spent. * Before you take time out to stop a threat, make sure that his move is something you should really be afraid of. If it isn't, then go ahead with your own ideas! * If someone tries to attack you on the wing, break open the center as quickly as possible. 111our next game, we see how an amateur handles a quiet position. Will he demand kingside action or will he calmly look to tl1e center or queenside for answers?

1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Be2 O-O 6.Bg5 (the

[diagram]

[diagram]
Black's dark-squared Bishop is strong, though. The Bishop on gS is not doing anything other than pinning the Knight. One plan is to trade the g4- and e2-Bishops; my e2-Bishop is horrendous. My first plan of action is to create some sort of imbalance. 1 2.h3 Bxf3 leaves me with two Bishops. He gets the es-square but it's something to work with." He did not mentioq that White had more central space. I did like his thought that, though the two Bishops are nothing to crow about in this position, at least it gave him something to work with. His willingness to create an imbalance and then try to make use of it in the future shows that 2100 has improved his understanding of the game.

12.h3 Bxf3

13.Bxf3 a6

14.a4

2100: "Stops any sacrifices with . . .bS and threatens a4-a5 with potential queenside play based on the extra territory there. " I love it! He i s killing counterplay and gaining space. This sounds simple-in fact, it is simple. However, most amateurs aren't able to employ this kind of positive (since it gains space) prophylactic maneuver. 14 . . .Qe7 2100: "What does that do? I want to play Rfel when . . . NeS is met by Be2 and Bfl with a solid game and a pin along the e-file."

15.Rfel QfS

2100: "Yech! One of his ideas is to defend d6 and chase off the g5-Bishop. However, the Queen is entombed on f8 so I don' t like the maneuver much. I will continue to play for a queenside space-advantage with a4-a5." Nothing much is going on in the center (except a bunch of trades along the e-file) and Black's King is far too safe to attack. Due to this, White plays to gain the upper hand on the queenside and also hopes to make use of his two Bishops in a later endgame.

[diagram]
t6.a5 Rxel+

17.Rxel Re8

2100: "Getting rid of the Rooks. What's that do? My imbal ance consists of two Bishops so I must open things up. If I trade Rooks, his minor pieces will probably kill me due to the various weak squares. I'll try to get some play with Rbl and b2-b4." I don't know what he is talking about when he alludes to the weak squares in White's camp. However, his decision to play Rbl and b2-b4 is excellent. He has a space edge on the queenside and now intends to increase it with the line-opening b2-b4.

18.Rbl!

2100: "Black has the center under control. I have two Bishops but they are not doing much at the moment." 18 .. .h6 2100: "Since my plan is b2-b4, I want to hit cS with everything I have. 19.Bf4 does nothing due to . . . Ne5." Another excellent piece of reasoning. By playing Be3, he begins to eye a common target (cS) with several units. Don't just attack a point with one piece. Use everything you own!

19.Be3 Ne5

20.Be2 Nfd7

2100: "Now I should continue my plan by b2-b4. Winning a piece with 21.f4 is tempting, but it fails to 21 . . . Nxc4!

22.Bxc4 Rxe3 23.Qxe3 Bd4. I will continue on the queenside

and at a later time push him back with f2-f4. It is important for me to realize that his Knight on eS is not permanent-I can chase it away some day."

21.b4 and we stopped the game since our lesson time was

over. White has the advantage because he recognized that his play would come on the queenside and he went for it with great energy.

[diagram]
Ti ps * Some imbalances, like the two Bishops, may not be too useful right away. However, they could easily become a force later in the game. * In closed or semi-closed positions, you usually play in the sector where you own the most space. White's queenside strategy was very effective in the last game, but most amateurs have a tendency to reject queenside or central play; their eyes are only aimed at the King. This tunnel vision is not acceptable! You can't become good at chess unless you can make use of all three areas of the board. Our next position (from the Tartakower Variation of the Queen's Gambit Declined) was reached after 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6

3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Be7 5.e3 O-O 6.Nf3 h6 7.Bh4 b6 8.cxd5 a:d5

9.Be2 Bb7 10.Bxf6 Bxf6 ll.Rcl Nd7 1 2.b4 Res.

(112) I W I.

[diagram]

[diagram]
but my King is in no immediate danger, though it would be useful to get my other Rook into the game. The points of attack are dS and c7. As much as I'm tempted to attack the d-pawn, I think I'll castle and complete my development." So far, s o good. H e notices that c 7 and d S are the targets, though he did not mention that b2-b4 gained queenside space and prevented Black's liberating . . . c7-c5 (nor did he notice the p<)werful 13.Nb5!, a move I stop on my next tum).

13.O-O a6

1550: "This seems silly because it blocks his Bishop. It prepares . . .b6-b5, I guess, but I don't really know what that would accomplish. It doesn't really seem to do much of anything for him. Maybe he is trying to play . . .c5 and it stops me from answering with b5. This must be what he has in mind. This is not such a terrible threat, so I should get back to my own plans. If 14.Qb3 c5, 15.Nxd5 is possible. What are my other points of attack? Let's look at the kingside. There's nothing there; his Bishop on f6 is a little suspicious without a Knight there I have some possibilities. His h7- square looks w-eak to me. 14.Qd3 eyes both h7 and a6. "Let's go back to basics. What are the imbalances? He has two Bishops so I would like to trade a pair of Bishops, but how do I go about it? That's one thing that a6 does, it keeps me off of bS. How about Qc2 and Bd3 and e3-e4? That would liberate his Bishop. How about Bd3 followed by Ne2 and Nf4? Does this do anything? Back to Qb3. How does he defend his pawn? He has . . . Nf8 or . . . c6. He won't want to stick his Knight back in the comer so 14 . . . c6 15.Bd3. Maybe even Bdl with the idea of Bc2 and Qd3. Yes! That would threaten a mate. Then Ne2-f4 follows his . . .g6 defense with an attack." He had quite a think! Several important points were men tioned and he even asked about the imbalances. However, he is so caught up in creating immediate threats that he didn't seriously entertain a slower pl.i.n based on a gradual buildup of queenside pressure by Qb3, Rc2 and Rael (eyeing c7). He could also pressure the d-pawn by Nel-d3-f4 and Bf3. What is most interesting is that he knew that the queenside is where he is supposed to play, but he is desperately looking for any excuse to initiate play on the kingside. Once he noticed the

[diagram]
Bdl-c2 followed by Qd3 idea (which is quite wrong), he was helpless to resist!

14.Qb3 c6

1550: "He did what I thought he would do. Is there any drawback to my Bdl idea? Seems all right." He was tempted by the prospect of a kingside attack and he can't say no to the siren call. White should continue on the queenside or switch to a central break with Bd3, Rfel and e3-e4. This is now effective since Black's light-squared Bishop no longer influences the e4-square .

15.Bdl Be7

1550: "What is this? Oh, he is attacking b4. Is this a threat? No, I can ignore his threat for now and play either Bc2 or Ne2. My point of attack is c6 but only my Rook can attack it unless I can somehow get in Ne5. I could also double Rooks so I can afford to take some time. I think I'll go ahead with Ne2 and my attack. This also gives me options of Qd3 followed by Bb3. " All of a sudden, h e decides that he has plenty of time (which he does) but he still goes ahead with his kingside hopes. One of the things he's done well during the last several moves is to always try to understand the point behind his opponent's move. This is a good habit that will save him in lots of games. If you know what the enemy is up to, you will not have to suffer through unpleasant surprises. This doesn't mean that he actually understood what Black was really doing, but he gave it his best shot. Another highlight of 1 5SO's thinking is his ability to ignore the opponent's threats. Once he sees what Black is up to, he refuses to react to it, always preferring to follow his own plans.

16.Ne2 Bd.6

1550: "I didn't anticipate that. It stops both Nf4 and Ne5. My Knight can go to g3 but where can it go from there? His Bishops are starting to look menacing. His pawns are potentially weak but at the moment they are all well defended. I'm losing track of my points of attack while I screw around with this mating attack. 17.Qd3 pressures his

[diagram]
a-pawn and also threatens Ba4 with an attack on c6. Oops . . . if I play Qd3, my pawn hangs. Perhaps a2-a3 is in order to free my Queen." Since Black's pawns point to the kingside, Black turns his Bishop's attentions to that side of the board. Black has stopped White's plans, so 1 550 starts to panic. To his credit, he defends his pawn and tries to keep everything safe.

17.a3 Qe.7

1 5 50: "He is trying to play for . . .a6-a5 to free his Rook. He's slowly taking the initiative by finding my points of attack. How do I stop this threat? My Rooks are not linked. What if I go back to my original plan with Qd3? What does that open up for me? After Bc2 and Qd3, he will be forced to play . . .g6. Then I can follow with Ng3 and Nh5. Can I just ignore his stuff?" This whole kingside idea is bogus since Black can safely defend h7 with . . . g6 or with . . . Nf6 or . . . Nf8. The student should take note of the White pieces. Are they all working for a central b reak with e3-e4? No . Are they working together to pressure the q ueenside? Two of them are, the rest are just sitting around doing nothing. White went wrong by playing a bit on one side and a bit on the other. You must figure out where you want to play right away a nd make your whole army devote itself to that plan. We stopped the game. Tips * Pick a side of the board and stake a claim! Go after it with gusto and don't allow the opponent or your secret desires to distract you . * The kingside is not the end-all and be-all of chess. Seeking play in the center or on the queenside is just as effective (often more so) as a kingside attack.

[diagram]
A direct kingside attacking set-up in an open position can be very dangerous, and the defender should start a central and/or queenside counterattack right away. When facing a kingside attack in an open position, speed is of the essence and you must play with a lot of energy or fall victim to the enemy's attack. The moves that led to diagram 1 1 3 were: 1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6

3.c3 (the Alapin Variation of the Sicilian Defense) 3 ...Nf6 4.e5

[diagram]

12.Qe2 Na5

2100: "Heading for the b3-square. I probably don't mind giving him my dark-squared Bishop for his Knight. Since Nd2 fails to . . . Nf4, I can look at letting him into b3 via . . .Nb3 when Bxh7+ can be met by . . . Kh8 and several of my pieces hang. So I can't rely on cheap tactics. I have to somehow get my queenside pieces out. I'll stop his threat by a calm Bc2."

[diagram]
13.Bc2?

This poor move shows that White is beginning to react to the Black counterattack ; just what the second player had hoped for. White should have made a play for the initiative with 13.Qe4 when 13 . . . g6 14.Bh6 Re8 15.Nbd2 takes care of everything in an economical way.

13. ..

RcS 2100: "Now on b2-b4 he has . . . Nc4 but I don't know if this really does anything."

14.b4?

White is still playing on the wrong side of the board. 14.b2-b4 creates new weaknesses on the c-file and forces the Black Knight to a nice square.

14.. . Nc4

2100: "I want to play Nbd2 but that would leave my Bishop on c2 undefended. First, I will defend it with tempo."

15.Qd3 g6

16.Bh6

2100: "Taking advantage of the newly-created dark-square holes." t6. . . Re8 2100 : "Black has two nice Knights but his kingside is badly weakened. If I don't play actively, I can get mauled on the queenside. I would like to transfer my Queen to the kingside but I'm not sure how to do this. His Knights are strong and l would like to trade one of them. His dS-Knight is really bothersome so I will get rid of it with 17.Nc3 (I showed him 17 . . . Nb2 which wins a piece so he took it back and placed the Knight on d2)."

17.Nbd2 b5

2100: "If I take his Knight, his passer is dangerous. How ever, his cS-square is also weakened but I think I will ignore this and play for mate."

[diagram]
He should have followed this "mate or die" philosophy much earlier in the game. If your game is geared for a kingside attack, you must attack like a maniac or risk drowning in the opponent's counterplay.

18.Ne4 Qc7

2100: "How to stop his threats? Both 19 . . . Nxe5 and 19. . . Nb2! are in the air." We stopped the game, though White could have gotten right back in the game by 19.Qd4! when the threat of Nd6 (since a capture on d6 opens up thye d4-g7 diagonal) is annoying (play would be about equal after 19. ..Qb6). It's clear that you can't appreciate your possibilities if you give up on your own position! Ti ps * If the board calls for a kingside attack, then you must attack. * In an open position, you must get your attack up and running as quickly as possible. If you do things too slowly, the opponent's counterplay will lead to his taking the initiative.

DEVELOPING

MENTAL

TOUGHNESS

It's time to develop an attitude! Since chess is largely a game of psychology, you must believe in yourself if you are going to have any hope of achieving good results. As soon as doubts enter into the equation, the moves come more slowly, a tendency towards passivity raises its ugly head and you find yourself entertaining destructive thoughts concerning the horrible things (often imagi nary) your opponent is going to do to you. To illustrate how strong a part attitude plays, let's compare two of my students. Student number-one is ten years old and knows very little about the game. He has no positional under standing at all, plays the opening very poorly and thinks the endgame is an entirely different sport. With a style geared only for mating attacks one would think he would do poorly, but it turns out that he owns a 1900 rating and often beats players hundreds of points higher than himself! His success is made possible by an

[diagram]
overwhelming desire to win every game. When he plays a move, you know it has some mean intention behind it. Student number-two is fifty years old and possesses the positional understanding of an expert, a solid opening repertoire and a fair knowledge of the endgame. Superior in almost every respect to student number-one, he only has a rating of 1 500. The reason? He lacks confidence and is too quick to give up on his plans in the face of imaginary threats. The following suggestions should prove helpful to anyone who regularly makes mental errors during a chess game: 1) Always expect the opponent to see your threat and make the best reply. This forces you to look for moves that improve your position even if he is aware of your plans. 2) Play to win against anyone and everyone. Even if a draw suffices to give you a high placing in the final round of a tournament, playing to split the point is one of the best ways to lose a game. Play to win and make him begyou for the draw! 3) H you find a plan that conforms to the demands of the position, follow through with it. Don't allow the opponent to say "boo" and scare you from your proper path. 4) Play with confidence. Never allow yourself to believe that you are playing some sort of perfect chess machine (they don't exist). Allhuman oppo nents make errors and have lapses. This means that everyone can be beaten. Play without fear (after all , we are allgoing to lose lots of games, so there is nothing to be afraid of, is there?) and you will instillfear into your opponents. 5) H you tlnd yourself in a lost position, tighten everything up and hang on like grim death-don't play one last cheap shot and resign. Play the move that you would hate to see if you were in his situa tion. Extending the game in this manner will make

[diagram]
him work hard for the point and, if he gets tired or frustrated, may even lead to a mistake on his part and a success for you. 6) H your opponent is in time pressure, never try to move quickly and push him over on the clock. Take your time and concentrate on making the best moves. Moving fast places you in the same situation that he is in and gives you an excellent chance to make a major error. • • • • • The most common mental error in chess is that of supplication: you begin to get worried about your opponent's plans, you stop implementing your own ideas and just react to his and, finally, you end up completely on the defensive. We have seen examples of this condition throughout this book. Here is another look at a disease that must be tamed before you can expect good results. Our diagrammed position came about after 1.c4 e5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.g3 g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.d3 d6 6.Nf3 Nf6 7.O-O O-O.

[diagram]
1 • .t. i. A . ... .ljj.� � 8 � .i�� 8 ts � 8 ll .A iV J:t @ 1 378-Silman. English Opening. White to play. 1378: "White's pawns are pointing towards the queenside, so according to the Silman pawn-pointing theory I should

[diagram]
be playing on that side of the board. What about Black? His pawns are aiming at my kingside-I don't like that at all! Black will probably play . . .Ne8 followed by . . . t7-f5 and try to mate me. I can't allow him to do that so I'll stop his plans with Bg5, pinning and immobilizing his Knight." White's correct plan is 8.Rbl followed by the space-gaining b4-b5. Unfortunately, after only seven moves White demonstrates a losing attitude by concentrating on Black's ideas to the exclusion of his own plans. It is very important to realize that White has already planted the seeds of his own defeat by refusing to take a more aggressive stance. This doesn't mean that you always have to attack. It means that every move you play should do something positive for your position. Keep this idea in mind: After deciding what move you want to play, write it down, look at all possible checks and captures and ask, "What wonderful thing does this move do for my position?" If your move doesn't stand up to this simple question, then don't play it! Actually, White's 8.Bg5 is not bad. By getting rid of the Knight on f6, White fights for control of d5. Unfortunately, this is not why White played it. He was thinking about nothing more than stopping the enemy from attacking him-pure defense and nothing else. The best way to get an opponent to stop his aggressive intentions is to worry him with your own plans.

8.Bg5 h6

1 378: "Taking his Knight would be bad because he would just recapture, move the piece away, and advance his pawn to f5. I need to retain this Bishop with a retreat." Still mesmerized by Black's kingside potential, White accepts a further loss of time. He still has not made one move towards his queenside attack. Best was 8.Bxf6 when the d5-square has been weakened and White is free to proceed with his own plans on the opposite wing. Don't just wish you had play somewhere. The great players insist on getting play-they make it happen!

9.Be3? Be6

1378: "He might be getting ready to push his pawn to d5. I can move my f3-Knight and put more pressure on the d5- square."

[diagram]
White is still in defensive mode; he's twitching to Black's tune.

10.Rbl followed by 1 1 .b4 is indicated. Actually, White would be

happy if Black played for . . . d6-dS since that would lead to an open queenside file (the c-file) after cxd5.

10.Nd2? Ng4

1378: "He's attacking my Bishop and I can't move it to safety. I suppose I should get things started on the queenside with 1 1.Rcl, when a later . . .dS allows me to create a semi open file." More incorrect thinking. Rather than take matters into his own hands, White plays a move that may be good "someday." I'm sorry, but this is not good enough. There is no room in chess for words such as "maybe," "someday" and "somehow. " Either a move does something, or it doesn't. Don't rely on your opponent to make your moves useful.

11.Rcl? f5

1378: "I have to chase his Knight away." White has given up all hope of finding an active plan or even of thinking ahead. He is now simply reacting from move to move and has completed his slide into mental paralysis.

12.h3?

This horrible move wastes more time and weakens the kingside. An aggressive move like 12.NdS (preventing . . .f5-f4) would at least force Black to think a little bit. 1 2. ..Nxe3

13.fxe3 h5

1378: "He threatens . . . h5-h4 so I have to stop him. " Poor White is so freaked out that he sees danger in every Black move. Why did Black play his 13th move? Chess is largely a game of targets (weak pawns are the most common type of target, but weakened squares and a vulnerable King may also fall into our category) and I often talk of "target consciousness" in my lessons.

[diagram]
Two skillsmust be honed: 1) the ability to recognize and create targets; 2) the ability to attack them with as much energy as possible. Black's last move, . . .h6-h5, was designed to allow the g7-Bishop to start an attack against White's newly weakened e3-pawn.

14.h4

Attacking on different wings is a common part of chess and such a situation often creates a very violent struggle. The first player to give up on his own play and pay attention to the opponent's will most likely end up losing. In fact, it's your job to sell him on your plan. I liken this to grabbing the opponent's head and physically turning it in the direction you want him to face. Once you get him reacting to your threats (playing your game), he will no longer be thinking in terms of progressing with his own ideas. Then your victory will only be a matter of time. 14 . . . Bh6 1378: "Now he's attacking e3. I can only defend with the King and the Rook. If 15.Rf3, e4 16.dxe4 Ne5 is possible so the King move is forced." Though 1378 was being trained in my system of thinking (as explained in the third edition of How To Reassess Your Chess), he didn't make use of it at all in this game. As you can see from 1 378's experience, living from move-to-move without ever look ing at the imbalances or trying to assert mental mastery over the opponent will give you nothing but a miserable defensive chore and a likely loss. 1 5.Kf2? Strange, White got so worried about the weakness on e3 that he completely forgot about the danger to his own King. 15.Nd5 would have held out a little longer, but White's game was already an unhappy mess. 15 . . . f4 Destroying the King's protection. Why have White's worst fears come true? Picture a car race. You have two ways to avoid

[diagram]
defeat. You can either beat your opponent to the finish line or you can stand in front of his car and try to stop it. In this game, White could not really stop Black from carrying out his plan of kingside pressure. His only hope was to go for the finish line and try to prove that his queenside play was more valuable than Black's play on the opposite wing. Failing to do this, White played into Black's plans, created weaknesses in his own camp and got run down by an opponent who was bigger and stronger on the kingside due to Black's space advantage in that area. This is where reading the imbalances comes into play: if you can't list the imbalances, you won't know which side of the board to play on. In other words, you'll be playing blind. At this point we decided to stop the game. How is it that 1378, an aggressive player who works hard at the board, played so passively? The answer is that when you get involved in a particular frame of mind, it's hard to extricate yourself from it (ever hear a song and have it play in your head for the rest of the day?); any person who starts thinking in a passive, fearful manner will find his/her attitude getting progressively worse. This disease can only be prevented by recognizing the problem and making a concerted effort to eradicate it. I recommend the following simple study technique for those players who are affected by this defensive/reactive malady: Go through your losses and make a note at the point where you think you gave control to your opponent (note the distinction be tween the opponent taking control and you giving it away). When you have done this, look at the imbalances and try to find what the correct moves and ideas should have been (of course, the moves and ideas must be based on those imbalances!). If you want to win, you must demand a constructive continuation from yourself, so don't give up until you find something that fits the above criteria. What we are trying to do is create an attitude where you will not accept anything but a complete effort from yourself. The creation of proper mental habits will lead to a more satisfying tournament experience. Another common mental error is the tendency to see threats where none exist. When you react to imaginary threats, you are

[diagram]
often wasting time trying to prevent the opponent from making a bad move! Don't go out of your way to prevent something unless you are sure that it would really be a problem. In the following example, we see an amateur who is afraid of what Black does and also of what Black might do! (115) 1413-Silman. White to play. The position in the diagram was reached after 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 d6 3.Nc3 Bf5 4.f3 Nbd7 5.e4 Bg6 6.Be3 c6 7 .Bd3 e5 8.Nge2 Be7. 1413: "White has a space edge over the whole board-even in development. I think it's time to get my King out of the center." 1413 noted that he owned a space advantage but he did not even try to come up with an active plan. Of course, it's quite possible to devote all your attention to the extra space; if you can gain enough territory, your opponent might end up getting squeezed to death. Unfortunately, White made no real effort to dissect this position and his moves will eventually reflect this.

9.O-O O-O

1413: "Black would like to trade pieces and relieve his cramp. I will play d4-d5 to gain space in the center and, if he takes, I get an open c-file."

[diagram]
Not bad, but he is basing his play on Black opening the c-file for him. You can't expect your opponent to do what you want him to do.

10.d5 a5

1413: "I willplay a2-a4 to control b5 and shut his queenside play down." What queenside play? Just because Black pushed his pawn to a5 doesn't necessarily mean that he has play on the queenside. Actually, White could dictate matters on that side of the board with l l .a3 followed by 12.b4 with lots of territory. Instead of this logical, positive continuation, he begins to react to the opponent. l l.a4? Handing over the b4- and c5-squares for no reason whatso ever. The recommended l 1 .a3 followed by 12.b4 leaves White in control of both these points. 11 .. . h6 1413: "Black wants to play . . . Bh7 and . . .g7-g5 and get more space on the kingside. I'm also looking at the kingside and Ng3, which eyes f5." As usual, 1413 falls victim to the amateur malady of "King fear." Amateurs always think that the opponent wants to start a mating attack (which Black had no intention of doing), while White dreams of doing the same thing to Black's King!

12.Ng3 Nc5

1413: "He wants to take the d3-Bishop and maybe play . . . Na6-b4. I'll shut that down with Bxc5 and leave him with two inactive Bishops." Why would Black want to capture the bad piece on d3 with his fine c5-Knight? White's idea of playing for a superior minor piece deserves praise, but his reason for doing so was based on fear; fear of a threat (. . .Nxd3) that Black would never have done!

13.Bxc5 dxc5

1413: 'TII continue with my queenside play and go for pressure on b 7."

[diagram]
14.Qb3

You only get real pressure on the enemy position if you can attack a point with several of your pieces. Remember that chess is a team effort, all your army should participate. 1 4.Qb3 is an obvious one-move threat that forces Black to move his Queen to a good square. 14 . . .Qc7 1413: "He connected his Rooks and protected b7 and e5. I will prepare for f4 by Nce2. " Now he loses focus and forgets about his reasons for the capture on cS. Originally he wanted to leave Black with two inactive Bishops (actually, the Bishop on e7 is bad. The guy on g6 is good by definition but is obviously doing very little) but now he goes for f3-f4, a move that opens the position and frees the e7- Bishop. 1 5.Nce2 Nd7 1413: "Right now, Black has the Bishop pair. His dark sisquared Bishop is bad but my Bishop stinks. My g3-Knight more active than his and I have more central space. It's pretty even over all. I will go ahead with the pawn push." He said some good things but what did all those factors have to do with him pushing his f-pawn? Nothing at all! Only play moves that highlight your positive imbalances. t6.f4? 1413: "Trying to open up my Rooks." His 16.f4 did open the f-file for his Rooks but it also activated Black's dark-squared Bishop, gave Black play on the e-file and allowed the Black Knight to take up residence on eS. You tell me who got the better deal. t6 ...exf4

17.Nxf4 Bd6

18.Nxg6 fxg6

19.Be2

[diagram]
1413: "This allows my Queen access to the kingside and defends my Knight." White now has two connected passed pawns in the center, but both of these pawns will be firmly blocked. Black has made serious gains in the form of nice posts for his pieces while White, after a brief but suicidal bit of activity, is still reacting to his opponent. 19 ...Bxg3 1413: "It's ugly, but I'll retake with the pawn."

20.hxg3 Ne5

1413: "I don't want to trade Rooks because my Bishop is horrible. His Knight would be far superior to my Bishop." He noticed the minor piece situation but it's now far too late to do anything about it!

21.Bf3 Rf6

1413: "He will double up. I'll try the same thing, simply because I don't know what else to do." Still reacting.

22.Rf2 Raf8

23.Ra.fl g5 and the game was stopped.

Ti ps * If you find yourself reacting to the opponent's ideas, you're walking the road to doom and destruction. * Figure out which side of the board you're supposed to play on and then claim that area of the board as quickly as possible. Don't let anything distract you from this holy goal! * When you are about to make a move, always ask, "What wonderful things is this move doing for my position?" If you can't answer this question, don't play the move!

[diagram]
* Don't just wish you had play somewhere. It's your job to make it happen! * Don't hand over key squares to your opponent. The idea of holding squares is alien to many amateurs. Work hard to make this concept a major part of your strategic repertoire! * Always be aware of the battle to make your minor piece superior to your opponent's. To avoid the unfortunate spiral into the abyss (be it on the board or in one's mind) that these amateur's experienced, I give these additional recommendations: > Don't look at your opponent's rating before the game. This prevents you from freezing up and getting into a defensive "I want to draw" type of mindset. Once you convince yourself that the opponent is a chess god, you might as well resign and take up knitting. Treat every one you play with a touch of contempt! There is noth ing a higher rated player hates to see more than an opponent who refuses to be respectful to a superior. A positive "win at all costs" attitude will add at least 1 50 rating points to your stats! > Always have a plan and never forget that the only plan that matters is yours. The opponent's ideas should be treated as nothing more than minor annoyances; swat them away jf they start to sting, and then go back to what you were doing. Now let's explore two other subjects: giving up and depres sion. Sometimes things don't go the way we wanted and we find that defeat appears to be looming. Depressed over this state of affairs, we make a few hopeless moves and accept our fate. Don't let this happen to you! Fight back! Often we have more play than we supposed but we are trapped in a negative mindset and become blind to these promising possibilities. I remember

[diagram]

3.Nxd7 Kxd7 4.Na3 followed by 5.O-O-O White enjoyed good

winning chances.

[diagram]
All his thoughts smacked of defeatism because Black only concentrated on the negative qualities of his position. He never bothered to ask what was right about his game. Though material down, he is ahead in development and has chances of an attack abandsed on the weakened light-squares on f3 and d3. If the Queens Knights go off, these attacking chances evaporate, so you nust find a way to retain your army and make use of the advantages you have.

1. .. Rxb7!!

This stops Nc6 and breaks the pin along the a4-e8 diagonal. r:t's true that Black loses some more material (not that much, though-just a Rook for a Knight and pawn), but he is able to train his sights upon the weakened light-squares in White's camp. . . . N2.Qxb7 Nxe5 and all of a sudden White is facing threats of f3+ and . . . Nd3+ . This turns the game around and leaves Black Vfith a very powerful attack. Material doesn't matter; Black had already sacrificed a couple of pawns for the advantages just listed and throwing out some more ballast should not make him blink. J'he moral? Don't go along with the opponent's agenda! Don't allow yourself to be herded around like a sacrificial lamb! Look bard for the plusses in your position and insist on making use of them. So far, we have only discussed a negative, defeatist attitude . 'What about overconfidence? Can that be a problem? Most defi nitely! When you fall into the trap of overconfidence, you cease to concentrate properly. You "know" you are going to win and, as a result, stop looking at the board in an honest manner. This lack of attention makes you miss ways to finish up the game quickly and leaves you open to tricks, traps and time-pressure blunders.

[diagram]
(1 17) Caluag-Burtman, Los Angeles 1993. White to play. Black, an expert, was the higher-rated player and had been in control of the game the whole way. Burtman's advantage in space and the lack of coordination of the enemy pieces had convinced her that the win of material (the b6-pawn) and a quick victory were within reach. A few moves earlier she had been right, but she had fallen asleep during her last few turns and lost all sense of danger. After all, what could the opponent (a 1900 player) possibly do to her here? The answer proved to be a rude shock.

1.Bxa6!

All of a sudden, the White army is working together rather well! A safe advantage for Black has turned into an unpleasant tactical mess. 1 . . .bxa6

2.Qe2

There's no good way to defend a6. For example, 2 . . . Nb8 fails to 3.b7 mate! 2 . .. Be7

3.Qxa6+ Kd7

4.Qb5 Ke6

5.d4 Nb4?

[diagram]
After the initial shock, Black once again became confident of h.er win and once again tunes out the tactical possibilities in the position. Here White, who was playing in a desperate frame of mind, gave in to the will of his opponent and somehow eventually lost after 6.Bxb4 cxb4 7.Rcl?? (missing an instant win by 7.b7 vvhen there is no answer to the threat of 8.Ra6) 7 . . . Rc8. However, White could have stolen a memorable point in another way:

6.d.xc5 Qxc5 7.Rxe7+! Qxe7 8.Bxb4 Qd7 9.Qc5 (threatening

]_ O.Qd4) with material equality and a winning attack. It's funny, but both players were so stuck in their roles (Expert defeats Class "A" player) that neither was aware of the fact that Black was on the brink of extinction. I am quite sure that if the rdes had been reversed, Sharon would have seen the danger. As Black, however, these lines were completely invisible to her simply because she had lulled herself to sleep--her overconfi dence (which translates to a lack of vigilance) chopped hundreds of points off her strength. Tips * A bad attitude will always lead to bad results. * Don't concentrate on what is wrong with your game. Concentrate on what is right with it and insist on making use of those positive imbalances. * It's great to be confident, but overconfidence can easily lead to a fatal loss of vigilance. * The game is not over until the opponent has re signed. Take pride in finishing the enemy off with gusto and never allow counterplay that might turn the battle around.

"W

TESTS

"1YT

VY e don't have to go over this game, I already know where I went wrong. " I've heard this line from students for many years now, and in virtually every case, I find that their view of the game's errors was based on an opening mistake or a major tactical blunder. When I point out subtle errors (which are far more common and more important than mere blunders), they are often amazed to find that I'm criticizing moves and ideas that they were proud of in the actual game. Ideally, one of the best ways to improve is to play a tournament game, deeply annotate it while trying to unearth the inaccuracies by both sides, and then show those annotations to a skilled chess teacher. The information this teacher will (hope fully!) bring to your attention will prove to be invaluable. The following tests allow you to practice this technique. Though I'm not really there, by comparing your written com ments with my answers, you should get a very personal and deep insight into the possibilities that this type of instruction offers. #1 #2

[diagram]

(119) K K •

[diagram]

A,

#5

[diagram]
WJiat is White's proper move and what's his proper p.Ltn? (122) .. ... 1. • A .l A

A, A .& A

8 A

[diagram]

[diagram]
Where should Black park his dark-squared Bishop? (1 24) • • l l l Black to play. The book move is 7 . . .Be7. Does 7 . . . g6 make any sense here? (125) Black to play. #9 #10

[diagram]
An.notate this game and then go over my notes and see how your ideas and comments measured up. l .e4 e6 2.d3 dS 3.Nd2 Nc6 4.Nf3 Bd6 5.g3 Ne7 6.Bg2 d4 7 .O-O Ng6 8.Nc4 eS 9.Nxd6 cxd6 10.b3 Bg4 1 1 .Ba3 Qf6 12.h3 Bd7 13- Nd2 bS 14.Rcl b4 15.Bb2 O-O 16.Nc4 Bc8 17.Qe2 Nce7 18.f4 exf'4 19.eS dxe5 20.Bxa8. Ann howoytate this game and then go over my notes and see our ideas and comments measured up. 1 .d4 Nf6 2.Nf3 c5 3.e3 e6 4. Bd3 Nc6 S.c3 cxd4 6.exd4 dS

7.Nbd2 Bd6 8.O-O O-O 9.Rel Qc7 10.Nfl h6 l l .Qe2 Nd7 12.Bc2 Re8

13- Qd3 Nf8 14.h3 Bd7 15.Nlh2 a6 16.a4 Rac8 17.Re2 Bxh2+ 18- Nxh2 NaS 19.Nf3 bS 20.NeS Nc4 2 1 .Nxd7 Qxd7 22.Qg3 Kh8. #11 #12 i.

[diagram]

[diagram]
List the imbalances and t1nd a move that conforms to tliose differences. (128)

I #1 4

[diagram]
'if I:t White to play. Scan the imbalances and then decide if 1.h4 followed by 2.Rhl and h5 is justified

[diagram]
# 1 5 Is White justified in playing 1.h4 in this position? (130) White to play. Would 1.Bf4 be foolish here?

[diagram]

[diagram]
White to play. #1 7 #18

[diagram]
Don't bother looking for individual moves. Instead, figure out what Whlte's correct plan is. Also, be aware of-why you made this decision. (132) K .t.

.A A A

[diagram]
8. 1i liJ

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
White has several tempting choices here. What would you do and why would you do it? (136) K 'if • .t • I A .t i • .l A .l A i. • 8 8 l2J ttJ 8 8 8 8 8 8 + 'ti' ..t 1:%. White to play. Ust the imbalances and then find a plan that helps 'White make use of his main plusses. What is White's hest move?

037) K

'W • .t Aa .I

[diagram]
8 'it' 8 8 8 @ ..t I:t White to play. #23 #24 ► ♦

[diagram]
A big question comes to mind: should White capture on h6 and open up the g-fll e for Black's Rooks? (1 38) White to play. Black appears to have an excellent position. Is this true, and what should White do?

039) K

White to play. #25 #26

[diagram]
In the game White played 15.Bg6. Is this a good move? If you don't like it, what do you think he should have played? (140) • .. 1 • • l i. j. .• . l "A A. • .8

1 8 A

8. fj 8 .t ltJ 8 ..8.. 1:1 � I:t White to play. In the game, White played 1.Be4. What do you think of 'this move? Is it a logical choice? (141) • A l 'i' K • ..t. • A .l � � i. 8 White to play.

SOLUTIONS

TEST

SOLUTIONS

Each test solution starts with the problem's specifications.To offer the student the maximum instruction, I often give the moves leading to the actual problems/solutions (with copious notes) and the moves that follow. In many cases, I also add the occasional lecture and lesson summary. #1

[diagram]
Everyone has seen the term "losing the thread" in Grandmaster notes. It usually refers to a player who loses concentration and fails to understand what's really going on in the midst of a heavy battle . One useless move after another gets banged out and suddenly a good position, or even a winning one, quickly unravels into a ball of chaotic twine. This dreaded "thread" affliction tends to be psychological in nature . You get a nice position, you relax (evidently thinking that it vill play itseID, one bad move leads to another (panic may set in at this point!) and suddenly you "wake up," only to discover that it's far too late. Though everyone falls victim to this syndrome from time to tir.ne, steps can be taken to avoid it. The first thing you must do is to always INSIST on understanding the position to the best of your abilities. No position will play itself and, no matter how huge your advantage may be, almost any position can be lost if you set your mind to it. Never tell yourself that you're winning. Doing this trivializes the technical process and can easily lead to "thread disease. " Instead, learn to take great pride in pushing your opponent off the be>ard in the safest and most economical fashion. In other words, when your position gets good, work twice as hard as you did ea:dier! Class "A" player-Class "B" player. Los Angeles, 1998. Sicilian Accelerated Dragon.

1.e4 c5

2.Nf3 Nc6

3.d4 cxd4

4.Nxd4 g6

This opening, known as the Accelerated Dragon, has long been a favorite of mine and many of my students.

5.Bc4

[diagram]
A rare move. White deprives himself of the "Maroczy Bind" (c2-c4) and, in addition, gives Black some original and highly tempting options. 5 ...Qa5+ I'm quite fond of this strange-looking move. Black tries to take immediate advantage of White's loose pieces on c4 and d4.

6.Bd2?

This is supposed to be an error (both 6.c3 and 6.Nc3 are better), but White flicked it out so fast that Black suddenly became convinced that his opponent had prepared the whole line. I suspect that part of this paranoia was forged by White's higher rating. If the first player had been rated 1200, Black would have accepted that his opponent didn't know what he was doing. However, since White was a mighty "A" player, Black has trouble believing that "big A" could make this kind of mistake so quickly! Now, thanks to this self-imposed psychological burden, Black finds it difficult to take his mind off his opponent and onto the board. 6 ... Qc5 Black knew this move was supposed to be good. What had White cooked up?

7.Bc3

A good try in a bad situation. Both 7.Nxc6 Qxc4 (winning the e4-pawn) and 7.NbS Qxc4 8.Nc7+ Kd8 9.Nxa8 Qxe4+ (when the a8-Knight will never make it out alive), are worse. 7 .. . Qxc4

8.Nd2

[diagram]

[diagram]

9.Bxd4 Nxd4

::IO.c3 Nc6 ::11.O-O Bg7 ::12.f4 P ro l> l e m Po s i t i o n

[diagram]

[diagram]
Better was the obvious 12 . . .d6 when 13 . . . Nf6 would have worked rather well. White's problem is that he doesn't have anything to attack in the Black position. Of course, Black should also be looking for ways to create targets in White's camp (this kind of basic thinking should not stop just because you've won material!). By moving his pawn to d6, he tells White that an e4-e5 advance will either lose a pawn or leave the first player with a weak e-pawn after . . . dxe5. Having nullified e4-e5, Black could then have developed in peace. Plans like . . .b7-b5-b4 would have eventually blasted open some lines and highlighted the superior ity of Black's minor pieces over the White Queen.

13.e5 Nd5

14.Nc4

Suddenly Black's Knight is hanging out to dry, his g7-Bishop is blocked, and the c8-Bishop still can't get out of its cage. Black's still doing well, but these unexpected problems begin to drive home his earlier doubts.

14. ..

Nb6 The c7-square was a more flexible home for this Knight. Now White will be able to gain more time battering the poor thing around.

15.Ne3 O-O

16.a4

Threatening to trap the b6-Knight with 17.aS. It's very impor tant for White to keep Black busy; if the second player manages to get all his stuff out then his larger army will eventually overpower the lone White Queen.

[diagram]
Black has been reduced to reactionary chess: White makes a threat and Black reacts to it. The text leaves holes on b5 and b6. Less fatalistic was 16 . . . Rb8 17.aS Na8 18.Nd5 d6 1 9.exd6 exd6 when Black's pieces will finally be able to escape from their tomb.

17.Qb3

Still pointing a firnzer at that tortmf'<i horc;;p

[diagram]
17.. . Ra6

Ugly but forced.

18.Radl

White has a limited army, so it's still very difficult to create any bsting threats . 18 .. . Rd8

19.Qa3 d6

Black has lost faith in his position and now panic enters the picture. A serious reassessment of this situation would have told bim that his dark-square Bishop isn't really doing much on g7. 'Jhus, the calm 19 . . . Bf8 (threatening 20 . . . e6 followed by 21 . . .BcS) suggests itself.

20.exd6 Rxd6?

[diagram]

21.Rxd6 exd6

22.Qxd6 Nxa4?

[diagram]

23.Qc7 Ra8

24.Nc4

Black's uncoordinated forces are spread all over the place in a seemingly random fashion. The immediate threat is 25.Nd6, hitting both c8 and f7. 24 . . . BfS

25.f5!

An astute move, showing that White is paying close attention to detail. The immediate 25.Ra l? falls victim to 25 . . . NcS 26.Nb6 i\Tpf-\ whPn Whi tf''s 011een is unexoectedlv traooed! With f4-f5

[diagram]
thrown in, this line won't work for Black because the White Queen now has access to the newly-opened c7-g3 diagonal. 25 ... gxf5 Also depressing was 25 . . . BxfS 26.Qxb7.

26.Ral Bc5+

As mentioned earlier, 26 . . . NcS 27.Nb6 Ne6 now fails to

28.Qg3+.

27.Khl Nxc3

This horse, tormented throughout this game, is driven to suicide

28.bxc3, 1-0.

[diagram]

THE WINNER

IS THE PLAYER WHO MAKES THE NEXT

TO LAST MISTAKE!

Our next key point centers around psychology. If you feel that you are winning, don't refuse to pull the trigger just because your opponent is higher rated than you. Get angry, become stubborn; INSIST on coming up with a proper method of execution. Whatever you do, don't get cold feet when your instincts tell you that the game should be won. This line of reasoning takes us to our second point:

RESPECT NO OPPONENT!

So far I've painted a picture of a player (in a worst-case scenario) who goes into a game thinking that he really doesn't stand much chance of winning (fear of the higher-rated oppo nent) and also thinks that the guy sitting across the table is perfect and won't make any real mistakes (showing a complete lack of realism). This becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy since such a player really won 't stand any chance! The following game illustrates all of these points: The "mighty" higher-rated player (Black) indulges in a planless opening. Then

[diagram]
White (a "B" player) tosses his advantage out the window. Not to be shown up, the 2100-player once again falls into the gutter and soon has a resignable position. Not quite believing his luck (in other words, not believing that his opponent could really play so badly), White refuses to win the game, making one error after another until he becomes a mentally-beaten husk. This psycho logical collapse leads to yet another victory for the rating system. Makarewicz-Darias (1780-2140), Los Angeles 1998. Torre Attack.

1.d4 Nf6

2.N.f3 e6

3.Bg5 d5

4.e3 Be7

5.Bd3

The ever-popular Torre Attack: dynamic, easy to learn and fun to play. Who could ask for more in an opening system?

5 . . . O-O

6.O-O

Natural but inaccurate. Better is 6.Nbd2 when 6 . . . cS 7.c3 Nc6 could be met by 8.NeS with a nice game for White. The trick to this opening (from White's point of view) resides in control over e5. When Black moves his b8-Knight to d7 or c6 he threatens to "win" eS with . . . Qc7. White can't allow this! In general, White must be ready to meet . . .Nc6 or . . .Nbd7 with Ne5 when the threat of f2-f4 clamps down on es and gives him good chances on the kingside. 6 . . . c5

7.c3 Nc6

8.Nbd2 b6?!

Missing his chance. White's opponent has just demonstrated that he doesn't understand the position at all. Correct was 8 . . .Qc7 when the threat of 9 . . . eS guarantees Black good chances (note that 8 . . . Qc7 9.Bf4 Bd6 won't help White). It's important to point out that Black has fallen into a very dan_gerous men ta I tr.::i

[diagram]
clear plan in mind. Such a "strategy" will usually lead to real rrouble. Naturally, you should train yourself to avoid this kind of lazy thinking.

9.Qe2

[diagram]

10.exd4

An excellent response that happily breaks the "always capture towards the center" rule. By leaving his pawn on c3, White keeps the enemy Knight off of b4 and opens up the e-file for future operations.

[diagram]
1 1.Bh4 Bb7 Still getting his pieces out with no plan in mind. In this kind of position, Black should be playing for a minority attack via an eventual . . . b6-b5-b4 (creating open lines and weaknesses in White's queenside structure).

12.Ne5?

Much too early. What's the rush? Black can't really do much of anything so White would have been well advised to continue building up in the center and on the kingside. One plan (of many) was 12.Rfel followed by 1 3.Radl, Bbl and Qd3 with storm clouds brewing on the kingside.

12. ..Nxe5

13.Qxe5

More tempting is 1 3.dxeS but Black would suddenly spring to life with 13 . . . Nd7 14.Bg3 Nc5 when 15.Bc2 is met by 1 5 . . . Ba6.

[diagram]
What has White accomplished by his early 12.NeS? The first thing that catches my eyes is White's willingness to exchange Black's passive c6-Knight for White's more useful beast on f3 (the side with more space should not exchange pieces). I am also disturbed by White's joy in placing his Queen on an exposed square. Never initiate an exchange unless you can clearly list the thing(s) you are gaining!

13...Nd7

Suddenly White is being herded in a direction that he may not . have wished to take.

14.Bxe7 Nxe5

15.Bxd.8 Nxd3

16.Be7 Rfe8

17.Ba3

Black has managed to trade off several pieces and now, thanks to the opposite-colored Bishops, enjoys an even game. However, now we can see the differences between the two players: while White was happy to trade off from a superior game to a even one, Black wants to push the envelope as far as possible. Seeing his d3-Knight as a strong piece, and also recognizing that the make-up of the game has suddenly changed, Black tries to extract the maximum from the position. This noble goal (in chess, any greedy goal is noble!) falls flat when White suddenly wakes up and begins to play brilliantly!

[diagram]
Planning 18 . . . aS and 19. . .b4. Unfortunately for Black, this move blocks the a6-d3 diagonal (which stops Black from defend ing his Knight with . . . Ba6) and leaves the Knight in sudden danger!

18.f4

Forcing Black to address the threat of 19.Rf3. 18 .. . g5

[diagram]
Taken aback, Black weakens his kingside, not believing that White will find a way to take advantage of this flaw. The more natural 18 . . . aS 19.Rf3 b4 fails to 20.Rxd3 bxa3 21 .b3 when White will eventually scoop up the a3-pawn with Nd2-blxa3.

19.fxg5 hxg5

20.Rf6

White sees a very interesting idea and, in his excitement, misses Black's best response. Better was 20.g3, taking the f4- square away from the Knight.

20. ..

Nf4?? This lands Black in serious trouble. Correct was 20. . .Kg7 when 21 .Rafl ? (White should play 21.Rf3) loses material to 2 1 . . . Nf4. Notice how each side makes one mistake after another, always letting the opponent escape from fate. P ro b l e m P o s i t i o n (1 43)

.. K •

[diagram]

[diagram]
21.Bd6

The main imbalance in the position is the opposite colored Bishops. Once White's Bishop reaches eS, it will dominate the game by laying claim to all the weak dark squares in Black's camp. Compare this piece with Black's pathetic alter ego on b7. 21 . . . Nh5

22.Rh6!

Excellent! White suddenly creates a mating attack. 22 .. . Ng7 No better was 22 . . .Nf4 23.BeS Ng6 24.Bf6 when Black can't make a move. After 22 . . . Ng7, White has a completely won game. He realized that he was in charge but he suddenly became worried about the horrible 23 . . .fS (as he put it: "And Black gains space."). Strange, don't you agree? With a strong attack blazing, and threats mount ing with every move, White stops in his tracks and becomes paranoid that the opponent must have something good (would White think like this if Black was rated 1200?).

23.Rf6n

In White's mind, he was stopping two Black threats: 23 . . .NfS (forking Bishop and Rook) and 23 . . .fS ("gaining space"). Correct, of course, was 23.BeS (meeting 23 . . . NfS with the reasonably strong 24.Rh8 mate) when Black is busted. For example, the feared 23 . . .fS (threatening nothing and weakening e6 and eS) gives White various strong replies like 24.Nf3 g4 25.NgS or 24.Rg6 Re7 when White has a couple ways to win material. 23 .. . Nf5

24.Be5

The difference in Bishops still leaves White with a huge advantage. 24 . . . g4

25.Rafl b4

[diagram]
Desperate, Black tries to confuse the issue. He's hoping for

26.cxb4 (this has nothing to do with White's kingside attack and

he did well to ignore it) 26 . . . Rac8 when Black's Rook penetrates to c2. Why let Black get counterplay for a silly pawn?

26.Nb3

A solid move that prepares to bring the Knight to cS. Also tempting was 26.Rlf4 (very much to the point!) when g4 (and perhaps the King as well) dies in flames. 26 ...bxc3

27.bxc3 Ba6

White's unnecessary Knight move gave Black time to bring t:his Bishop into play.

28.Rf4 Be2

Black knows that he's busted but he doesn't lose heart. He hangs on for dear life and hopes White goes insane.

29.Kf2 Bdl

30.Nc5??

White saw 30. Kel but he wanted to win cleanly and didn't like t:he look of 30 . . . Ne3. However, a calm look would convince him that 30.Kd2 (or 30. Rxf7) 30 . . . Nxg2 3 1 .Kxdl Nxf4 32.Bxf4 was hopeless for Black. The Knight move that White chose gives Black enough time to get his Rooks into the game. 30 ... RabS

31.Nd7??

Freaking out. With panic welling up in his chest, White didn't notice that 3 1 . Bxb8 was possible. Notice how White's three unnecessary Knight moves let Black activate his whole army. Hmmmm, this is actually the "next to last mistake" (actually, White made the last several mistakes) so that earlier rule (the winner is the guy who makes the next to last mistake) appears to be bogus! 31 ...Rb2+

32.Kel Ne3

[diagram]
The worm has turned. Now Black threatens 33 . . .Re2 mate.

33.Rf2 Rbl

34.Rxf7??

Giving in to despair. What if White calmly tried 34.Rh6 (threatening a mate of his own and telling Black to prove his threats)? Then attempts at a slam dunk don't seem to work: 34 . . . Bf3+ 35.Kd2 Nc4+ 36.Kd3 (avoiding 36.Kc2?? Be4 mate) 36 . . . Be4+ 37.Ke2 and Black doesn't have more than a perpetual check with 37 . . .Rb2+. 34 ...Bf3+

35.Kd2 Nc4+, 0-1. White didn't care what was going on

anymore; he'd had enough and just wanted to get away from a bad memory. A sane look at the position would have convinced him that 35.Kd3 Kxf7 (35 . . . Be4+ 36.Ke2) 36.gxf3 was worth playing out. Did you notice the emotional decline in White's play? Com pare it to Black's never-say-die attitude and you will understand why Black ended up winning this game. Tips * The winner is the player who makes the next to last mistake. * In chess, never respect anyone! Every player, no matter how high his rating, is waiting to be dragged down and dismembered. * If you don't give off an air of confidence, your opponent will sense your weakness and beat you like a drum. * Never develop your pieces in the opening with the intention of looking for a plan later. When "later" comes, you are usually on your way down. * The side with more space should not exchange pieces. #3

[diagram]
Goldberg-Schloss (1680-21 18), National Open 1998. KID, Boring Variation.

1.d4 Nf6

2.Nf3 g6

3.Bf4 Bg7

4.e3 O-O

5.Be2

This system, known by some as the reversed London System and by others as the Boring System, is easy to learn and carries quite a bit of sting. 5 ...d6

6.h3

. . .NThis allows the f4-Bishop to safely retreat to h2 in case of h5. 6 .. .b6

7.O-O Bb7

8.c4 c5

9.Nc3 Nbd7?

Black misses a good opportunity. He had to play 9 . . . cxd4

10.exd4 d5 with the idea of giving White an isolated d-pawn via

l l . . .dxc4. Now White gets an advantage and Black will find it very hard to find active play.

10.d5 Nh5

l 1.Bh2 Bxc3?

12.bxc3 f5

[diagram]

13.Ng5

The correct plan begins with 13.NgS!, hitting the weakened e6- square, creating a discovered attack against h5, and preparing to redirect the Knight to f4 (where, if Black has played . . .h7-h6, it will hit both e6 and g6) by h3-h4 and Ng5-h3-f4. Most importantly,

13.NgS intends to blast open the center (thereby making use of his

two Bishops) with f2-f3 followed by e3-e4 .

13. . .Ng7

14.h4

Another fine move. This prevents . . . h6 followed by . . . gS and, by doing so, ensures that the White Knight will have access to the f4-square. 14 . . .Nf6

15.f3

[diagram]
Preparing to blast through in the center with e4.

[diagram]
16.Nh3 Nd7

17.e4 Bc8

18.Qd2 Kh7

19.Bf4 h5

20.Ng5+ Kg8

So far we've seen a classic case of a higher-rated player trying (in a very incorrect manner) to imbalance the position so that winning chances can be obtained. Unfortunately for Black, his "win at all costs moves" (1 1 . . . Bxc3? followed by 1 2 . . . f5 was more wishful thinking than common sense) were really nothing more than suicidal blips on the chessic screen. Now White, who has played extremely well up to this point, could rout his opponent with 2 1 . Bd3 followed by 22.Rael when an eventual e4-e5 or exfS will break through on the e-file: 2 1 . . .NeS

22. Rael fxe4 23.Bxe5 and now both 23 .. .dxeS 24.Rxe4 9the

weakness on eS is horrible) and 23 . . . exd3 24.Bxg7 (Black has permanent weaknesses on e7 and e6) are both miserable for the second player. Note White's correct plan: safe, central play designed to open up the position for his two Bishops.

21.g4??

Groan. With one move, White has weakened his King and activated Black's dormant c8-Bishop. 21 . . . fxg4

22.fxg4 hxg4

23.Bxg4 Nf6

24.BxcS Qxc8

Everything's changed! Suddenly Black's Knights have access to the h5-square and Black's Queen, once dead to the world, now threatens to leap into g4.

25.e5 Qg4+

26.Qg2 dxe5

27.Bxe5 Nf5

[diagram]
Black avoids the tempting 27. ..Qxc4? 28 .d6! when he would be in serious trouble.

28.Rf4 Qxg2+

29.Kxg2 h5

30.Bxf6 Rxf6

All right, here we go. Watch White's King turn into a hero!

31.cxh5 Ne3+

32.Kf'3 Rxf4+

33.Kxf4 Nxd5+

34.Ke5 Nxc3

35.Rcl Nxb5

36.Rxc5

Black is a pawn up, but he has no winning chances whatso ever because White's King and Rook are much more active than their Black counterparts. 36 . • • RfS Hoping for 37.RxbS?? RfS+ , picking up the Rook and winning the game. If your opponent hangs a piece, never just at tribute it to stupidity and snap it off. First look at his move and try hard to fathom what nefarious schemes he's creat ing. If you can't see what's on his mind, TIIE N snap it offl

37.Ke6

White's King deserves its royal title. 37 . ..Nd4+

38.Kxe7 Nf5+

39.Ke6 Nxh4

40.Rc7

White's Rook joins the party and snuffs out any thoughts of winning that Black may have entertained. 40 . . .a5

41.Nf7 Kg7

42.Ng5+ Kg8

43.Nf7, 1/2-1/i.

#4

[diagram]

40.Rd5

This move not only attacks the Bishop, it also threatens to trade Rooks (with Rd8+) in some situations and prepares to close the Black Bishop out of the attack by an advance of White's central pawns. 40 ...Bf6

41.f4

This stops Black from playing . . . BgS+ and prepares e4-e5. Notice how White is going out of his way to snuff out the activity of the Black forces.

[diagram]
41 ...RbS Black's Rook now threatens to leaps into a dominant position with . . . Rb2+ . Naturally, White can't let this happen.

42.Rb5

White's Rook stares down its counterpart! This territorial battle between Rooks is made possible due to the fact that an exchange (via . . . Rx.bS) favors White due to his passed b-pawn (after axbS), the possibility of creating another passer (via e4-e5, f4-f5 and e5- e6), and the superior position of the White King. 42 . .. RcS Threatening to win a piece by 43 . . . c3+ (sacrificing d3 to break the blockade!) 44.Kxd3 c2.

43.e5

Closing the enemy Bishop out and once again laying claim to the blockading square c3. 43 ... Bh4

44.Bc3 Bg3

45.f5 Bf4+

46.Kdl Be3

White would be in trouble if Black's Rook could find a way to penetrate into the White position. However, White's pawns (blocking off the a-file and e-file) and White's hard-working Rook combine to keep Black's Rook at bay.

47.a5 Rd.8

[diagram]
I. ··"·

[diagram]

48.Rb4

In the actual game, White went berserk and managed to lose. A real shame, considering that he outplayed his opponent up to this point. (Why do marginally higher rated players win so often? Is it really superior strength, or does psychology and consistency play an even greater role in the ultimate result?) The text is strong because it keeps Black's Rook off the open b-file and ties it down to the defense of the c-pawn. Worse was

48.a6 Ra8 when 49.Rb4 Rxa6 50.Rxc4 leaves White a whole move

down on the game, while 49.RaS Rb8, threatening mate on b l , would also improve Black's chances. White's plan in this position is to win the c-pawn for his a pawn, chase away Black's Bishop and then play to win Black's remaining passed pawn on d3. 48 . . .RcS

49.a6 Ra8

50.Rxc4 Rxa6

51.Re4

#5

[diagram]
An important move. White's maneuver forces the Black Bishop to give up its hold over the d2-square. This frees the White King and allows it to chop off Black's pawn on d3. 51 ...Bg5

52.h4

Now White's King gains access to d2 and Black is suddenly the one who will have to play for the draw. White was saved by his nimble Rook. Always insist that your Rooks perform in the same active manner! # 5 Tips * The defending side should always try and trade pawns on one side of the board. 'fP.is leaves him with a much smaller area to defend and less targets to worry about. * Making sure your Rooks stay active is one of the most important concepts in Rook endgames! * Passed pawns must be blockaded at all costs! * Take away the activity of the enemy forces. We live in a fast-food nation; everything has to be handed to us quickly and easily. This may explain why so many players are consumed with a desire to know their openings inside and out. So, forget about middlegame study. Forget about the endgame. Memorization is the key for these "sit down, win fast and get up" mentalities. However, what about old dudes like the author who don't have a memory (youngsters who can't remember anything may also

[diagram]
---- --

[diagram]
include themselves), think the words "win fast" spring from some other language and actually enjoy playing a long, thoughtful game? The funny thing about opening study is that all the memoriza t:ion in the world won't help you if you can't play the other phases in a strong manner; a player who understands middlegame strategy will usually come out on top against an opening expert. Another karmic opening lesson involves this simple truth: you ruay memorize all the key opening lines, but your opponents con't know these variations-they will always step away from the book and leave both of you in the dark! When that happens, isn't uknowing how to actually play the game the thing that will ltimately count? Before I overreach by stepping out of the bounds of opening t:1ought, let's take a glance at a book review by IM John Watson and see what he has to say about opening study: "What do most readers look for in an opening book? Unfortunately, something that they won't get. 1WIC [Mr. Watson is referring to The Week In Chess, a web-site that gives up to the minute chess news] readers, for example, apparently want pretty much what my own students keep asking for: a book which explains all the 'ideas' of an opening, but isn't cluttered up with all sorts of nasty variations which one will never run into over the board anyway. "I'm sorry to report that this is just a fantasy. Learning an opening by accumulating abstract ideas is a little like learning a language by reading a grammar book. Worse, actually, because generalizations in chess don't apply with nearly the consistency or predictability of grammatical rules. "If a chess opening could be learned by absorbing the opening's 'ideas' (whatever those might be), the opening phase of the game would be universally mastered and of little interest . The fact is, no verbal description of what squares are important or where the pieces 'usually' go can describe the dynamic interplay of tactics and positional factors in any major opening. Whereas, by contrast, the straightforward study of enough examples will lead to a nuanced and practical knowledge of how to play that opening. In addition, by studying in context, you will automatically get a much better grasp on how those impor- 4 11 1

[diagram]
tant squares and typical maneuvers work than you would have from reading a general description." What in the world is Mr. Watson talking about? His first paragraph says that the study of opening ideas won't get the job done (which, I am told, enraged many of his readers . . .hey guys, chill out a bit!), while he later says that learning these abstract concepts by the study of actual games (compared to general descriptions) will indeed give you a good grasp of the system you wish to master. In other words, he's giving good advice (which he usually does) in a way that managed to confuse many people. Parroting general concepts like a sleep-deprived Moonie is indeed a menu for disaster (but going back to our lazy fast-food mentality, that's what many players yearn for). But learning the correct plans for your particular system (which includes the correct squares for your pieces, the correct middlegame ideas, typical traps and structural problems, and even typical endgames that arise from your opening) is far superior to the soulless memorization that most books seem to insist on. Up to this point, the main piece of advice is to study master games so you get a feel for the "complete story" of your opening system (opening, middlegame and endgame). Two other bits of chess wisdom, though, will prove useful to the reader: > In the opening, middlegame and endgame, your opponents will invariably give you sizable oppor tunities to knock them for a loop (or, at the very least, to make modest but important gains). To make use of these chances, though, means that you must spot them and pounce when they arise (and they will arise!). > While playing the opening (whether you know what you're doing or not), don't allow yourseH to get lazy and try to stay flexible (don't make a decision on one move only to realize you want to do something else a short time later. Both laziness and flexibility often go hand in hand). Though vague, these ideas will (hopefully ) be clarified in -7

[diagram]
Makarewicz-Douglas (1700- 1800), Los Angeles 1998. Torre Attack.

1.d4 Nf6

2.Nf3 e6

3.Bg5 Be7

So far we have a very simple position. Now White has to make some basic decisions. Should he place his pawn on e3 or would he like to get that pawn to e4? Does he want to play the game like a normal Queen's Gambit Declined (via c2-c4 and Nc3) or does he prefer the warm confines of a Torre Attack (where the c-pawn usually finds rest on c3)?

4.e3

An innocent looking move, but White not only shows a lack of flexibility, he also demonstrates that he hasn't decided what he wants to do (laziness). If it was White's intention to keep this pawn on e3, then there's nothing wrong with his fourth move. But if he wanted to place it on e4, then 4.Nbd2 (threatening 5.e4 and staying flexible) is obviously superior. This means that 4.e3 isn't a bad move by itself, but it turns out to be a bad decision when we see what White really had in mind. 4 ...h6

5.Bxf6?

A really strange decision. Having committed to e2-e3, White should have calmly moved his Bishop back to h4. The only reason one would take on f6 is to gain time for the e4-advance, but White's fourth move has already ruled that out. 5 . . .Bxf6

6.e4

We've now reached a well-known book position with an extra tempo for Black (White should have the free Nbd2 in here). It's clear that White's e2-e3-e4 showed a propensity for laziness that must somehow be eradicated from his chess character. 6 . ..

O-O

[diagram]
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Illogical. Black has the two Bishops and should be doing everything in his power to set up a flexible position that can ultimately be opened up (making the Bishops better than the White Knights). Correct was 7 . . .g6 followed by 8 . . . d6, . . . Bg7, . . . b6, . . . Bb7 and . . .Nbd7. This formation takes all the advanced squares away from White's Knights (following Steinitz's anti Knight rule) and prepares the central opening . . . c7-c5 advance.

8.c3 e5

This gives Black some kingside chances but it doesn't make the f6-Bishop very happy. The second player seems oblivious to his ownership of the two Bishops.

9.d5 Ne7

10.O-O d6

[diagram]
12.Nc3

I might have been tempted to retain the light-squared Bishop for defensive purposes by 12.Rel when 12 . . .Nf4 can be met by

13.Bfl .

12 ...Nf4

13.b4

White could have safely prepared this by 13.Qc2 (allowing the Rooks to defend each other) when 13 . . . Bg4 is answered by

14.Nd2.

13...a5

Suddenly White realized that 14.a3?? loses to 14 . . . axb4 when

15.axb4?? Rxal 16.Qxal Nxd3 leaves Black with an extra piece.

However, all is not lost and White begins to olav verv vf'rv "WPll

[diagram]
14.Rbl axb4

15.Rxb4 b6

White's play depends on his ability to eventually toss in c4-c5. ""Though it appears that Black has stopped this forever, White demonstrates other ways to skin the queenside cat.

16.Qc2 Bg4

17.Nd2 Qc8

A mystery. I suppose that Black was setting up some tactic llased on . . . Nxg2 and . . .Bh3+. P r o b l e m P o s i t i o n (147) 'ii 1 •

.A.

£ .A

• -I. i.

8 A

[diagram]
t;J i.. 'it' ltJ White to play. What is White's proper move and what's his proper plan? S o l u t i o n

18.Ral

A great move. White brings the Rook to a safe square, prepares to solidify his kingside with Bfl and places the Rook behind his a pawn in anticipation of a2-a4-a5, blasting open the queenside. This mix of defense and attack makes a nice impression. 18 ... h5

19.Bfl h4

20.a4

[diagram]
White calmly ignores his opponent's inaccurate kingside demonstration and proceeds with his own plans on the opposite wing. I'm very impressed by White's lack of panic. 20 ...g5

21.a5 bxa5

22.Rba4 Kg7

23.Rx:a5 Rx:aS

24.Rx:aS Bh5

White has completely outplayed his opponent and, with 25.c5 (at last!) followed by 26.Nc4, could claim a clear advantage.

25.Nb3?

The Knight doesn't stand well here. Even if White plays c4-c5 (placing pressure against d6), how does this Knight join with the pawn to attack d6? If you place the Knight on c4 (after c4-c5), both the Knight and the pawn work together for one goal (on c4 the Knight can also leap to fS via e3).

[diagram]
26.Be2 Nxe2+

27.Qxe2 Rh8

28.Qd3 Bg5

29.Nd2 Bg6

30.c5 f5

Now White would still stand very well after 3 l .exf5 Bxf5

32.Nde4 when his Knights are strongly placed and the attack

against Black's c7 and d6 pawn chain is in full swing. Unfortu nately, he went completely berserk via 31.Qa6?? when he lost a piece and the game after 31. . . Qxa6 32.Rxa6 Bxd2. A great pity. He ignored Black's attack beautifully, but in the end, a fear of his opponent's illusory attack prompted a blunder riddled panicky trade of Queens. #6

:\ 5 8 I T H E A MAT E UR 's M r N D ---- ---

[diagram]
Withgate-Makarewicz (1800-1700), Los Angeles 1998. Sicilian Defense, Alapin Variation.

1.e4 c5

2.c3 d5

3. . e5 Bf5

4.d4 e6

5.Nf3 Nc6

6.Be3 Qb6

7.Qe2

Neither side knows the opening, but one gets the feeling that :Black's moves (all directed at the d4-pawn) make sense while White's are, at the very least, suspect (blocking the fl-Bishop with 1he Queen can't be good). Because of this, Black should look hard for a "vengeful" move here; something that punishes White for the Jack of harmony in his game. P ro b l e m Pos i t i o n

(148) K

[diagram]

[diagram]
7 . ..cxd4? So l u t i o n Forcing White to bring his pieces to good squares. Correct: 7 . . . Bg4! , increasing the pressure against d4. Black would then continue with . . . Bxf3 (if it doubled White's pawns) and . . . Ng8-e7- f5, with all his guys (a team effort!) hitting d4.

8.Nxd4 Nxd4

9.Bxd4 Qc7

Black's intended 9 . . . BcS?? loses a piece to 10.QbS+ .

10.Qb5+ now Black played the horrible 10. . .Kd8?. Though

things turned out well for him later in the game, he should have calmly blocked the check with 10 . . .Qd7 when l l.Qa5 (threaten ing to win by BbS) again meets with a calm reaction: 1 1. . .Ne7

12.BbS Nc6 when all is well for Black. Yet another case of a

position poisoned by panic! Makarewicz-Lazarus (1700-1900), Los Angeles 1998. KID, Boring Variation.

1.d4 Nf6

2.Nf3 g6

3.Bf4 Bg7

4.e3 d5

5.h3 O-O

6.Bd3 c5

7.c3 b6

8.Nbd2 Nc6

9.O-O Bb7

Both sides have gotten their pieces out in a quiet but reasonable manner. If I was White, I'd probably try 10.Qbl!?, defending the e4-square and preparing to gain queenside space with b2-b4.

[diagram]
10.Ne5?

[diagram]

10. . .Nd7

ll.Nxc6 Bxc6

12.Bh2?

This makes no sense at all. What was attacking the Bishop? '-Vhy did the Bishop have to move? Surely a more useful possibility existed? More sensible was 12.Nf3, stopping Black's intended . . e7-e5 for a moment and bringing the Knight to a better square. 12 ...e5

13.dxe5 Nxe5

14.Bxe5?

This was White's intention all along. Naturally, it also poses a question: why did the Bishop have to be on h 2? Couldn't White ltave done something other than 12.Bh2 and been a whole move c:head? More laziness (we never even asked why White was so fast ID give his opponent the two Bishops. Did the obvious attack on d3 bother White so much that he felt obliged to make this huge concession?). A much calmer (and saner) approach was 14.Be2 followed by

15.Nf3.

14 ...Bxe5

15.Nf3

[diagram]
(149) K

[diagram]

#8

[diagram]
C . Evans-Makarewicz 0950-1700), Los Angeles 1998. Sicilian Defense, Tal Gambit.

1.e4 c5

2.f4 d5

3.exd5 Nf6

4.c4 e6

5.dxe6 Bxe6

6.Nf3 Nc6

7.Nc3

[diagram]

[diagram]
At this point, Black forgot the book moves and was on his own. However, not knowing the book wasn't a huge problem because he understood the nature of the position: Black's a pawn down but he has an easy development, pressure on the half-open d-file against White's backward d-pawn, and control over the very nice d4-square. 7 . .. g6!? The book move is 7 . . . Be7. However, the move played makes good sense: Black prepares to place his Bishop on the fine g7-c3 diagonal. In doing so, he'll gain even greater control over the d4- square.

8.Be2 Bg7

9.O-O O-O

10.Khl Res

ll.d3 h5 I wasn't impressed with this move when I saw it. Nevertheless, when Black explained that he was fighting to control the light squares and, as a result, would increase his control over d4 by the maneuver . . . Nf6-g4-h6-f5, I had to heap praise on him. It doesn't really matter if 1 1 . . .h5 is a good move, any detailed plan of this ilk deserves a hearty stamp of approval.

12.ReU?

AWful. White misses Black's idea and loses a lot of time as a result. 12 ...Ng4

13.Rfl Nh6

14.Be3 Bxc4

Black couldn't resist the discovered attack against e3. The confident 14 .. . b6 followed by . . . NfS would have left White under considerable pressure.

15.Bxc5 Ba6

16.d4

White decides that enough is enough and heads for the safe waters of a draw. #9

[diagram]
16. ..Bxe2

17.Nxe2 b6

18.Ba3 Nf5

19.Qd3 Ncxd4, Draw agreed. By knowing the most basic

ideas of his opening, Black was able to come up with a novelty and outplay a much higher-rated (and better-prepared!) opponent. Tips * Make sure your "simple developing move" is a part of your plan. If it isn't, you may find that you wasted a move. * Panic can destroy the best-laid plans of amateurs and professionals. Have faith in your position and never give the opponent's ideas any respect at all (or at least more than they deserve). * If you bring a Knight to an advanced post, make sure it can stay there or be certain that any ex change favors you . .Annotate this game and then go over my notes and see how your ideas and comments measured up. J . e4 e6 2.d3 d5 3.Nd2 Nc6 4.Nf3 Bd6 5.g3 Ne7 6.Bg2 d4 7.O-O Ng6

8.Nc4 e5 9.Nxd6 cxd6 10.b3 Bg4 1 l . Ba3 Qf6 12.h3 Bd7 1 3.Nd2 b5

J4.Rcl b4 1 5.Bb2 O-O 16.Nc4 Bc8 l 7.Qe2 Nce7 18.f4 exf4 19.e5 dxeS 20.Bxa8. Neuhoff-N.N. (1 474-1500), Los Angeles 1998. French Defense, KIA.

1.e4 e6

2.d3

[diagram]
White began playing this line versus the French when he saw the positions that arose after 2 . . .dS 3.Nd2 Nf6 4.Ngf3 cS 5.g3 Nc6

6.Bg2 Be7 7.O-O O-O 8.eS Nd7 9.Rel bS 10.Nfl aS 1 1 . h4 b4 12.Bf4

with hS and Nfl-h2-g4 to follow. Though acquainted with the general ideas and set-up of the King's Indian Attack, his knowledge proved to be a double-edged sword. He would do well if Black played the moves just given, but if Black varied in some significant manner, White would often repeat the same plan and moves even if it no longer had any point! This teaches us that basic ideas have value, but if you cling to them, they will tum to poison. Every new move by your oppo nent, whether it's good or bad, changes everything and must be looked at in a fresh manner. 2 ... d5

3.Nd2 Nc6

A bit odd. Black usually uses his c-pawn in an aggressive manner by 3 . . .Nf6 and . . . c7-c5.

4.Ngf3 Bd6

It's now clear that Black doesn't have anything prepared and is just making things up as he goes. Since Black has wandered so far from the normal path, White should push aside his memorized setups and look for something particularly tasty. Instead, the first player just tosses out his usual moves.

5.g3

Part of his system, but 5.d4! would have punished Black's poorly considered development and given White a dear advantage. 5 . . . Nge7

6.Bg2 d4

7.O-O Ng6

8.Nc4 e5

H:l o T H E AM A T E U R 'S M I N D (151) K · . .t..._.. .• 4 l A '))j. White to play. Neither side has created anything special during the last few moves. Black has closed up the center while White (with the exception of the aggressive 8.Nc4) has followed his pre-game recipe. On the eighth move it became clear to White that he wasn't in E:.ansas anymore. Finally (and, undoubtedly, with a heavy heart) l1e pushed his hoped-for setup aside (it's hard for White to advance his pawn to eS when Black's pawn stands there!) and looked for something else to do. How would one go about making a decision for White? Two t:hings stand out: 1) Black hasn't castled yet. 2) White can grab the two Bishops with Nxd6 . The fact that Black hasn't castled calls for an immediate, aggressive reaction and an opening up of the central position. Gaining the two Bishops is a long-range plan. White would still want to open the position for his Bishops, but he could go about his plans in a calmer manner.

9.Nxd6+

[diagram]

[diagram]
9 . . . cxd6 An error, but I have to give him credit for not fearing doubled pawns. Black's move actually makes a lot of sense: it firmly defends eS and opens the c-file for his Rooks (once again proving that doubled pawns are often a very good thing). Unfortunately, White can cast doubt on Black's concept. to.b3n Absolutely awful. White is hoping to put pressure on d6 by Ba3, but the price he pays for this is too high. What is that price? A gaping hole on c3 and a backward pawn on c2. Don't create such weaknesses in your own position! Correct was 10.c3!, letting Black dissolve his doubled. pawns. Black could then play either 10. . . dxc3 1 1.bxc3 when White's two Bishops and mobile center give him a clear advantage, or 10 . . . Bg4 l l .h3 Bxf3, when White possesses two Bishops versus two Knights. White was caught up in the idea that doubled pawns are bad, and so the idea of letting Black rid himself of them never occurred to him. However, why are those doubled pawns bad? The pawn on d6 is safely defended by the Queen and gives useful support to eS. The pawn on d4 is like a rock, and it gains quite a bit of space. 10 . . . Bg4?! What does this have to do with the newly created weaknesses on c3 and c2? From this point on, every move Black plays should be aimed at those two targets in the White position. ll.Ba3? Still barking up the wrong tree. White should play 1 1 .Bb2 followed by 1 2.c3. If White wanted to insist on his chosen course, then l l.a4 first would have been better, creating an artificial support point on c4 for the Knight (Nf3-d2-c4 is in the air). ll . .. Qf6? The real targets lie on the queenside, but Black can't resist staring at the opposite wing. This illogical desire to seek out a mate at all costs is known as "kini:rsirlP rlPmPntki " , fi � , T H E AMAT E U R ' S M I N D

12.h3 Bd7

13.Nd2

White heads for the tasty c4-square, but now Black is virtually forced to play a good move.

[diagram]
14.Rcl b4??

Much better was 14 . . . a5 with the idea of 15 . . . a4. Note that 1-4 . . . a5 15.c3 isn't possible due to 15 . . . dxc3 16.Rxc3 b4, winning fJlaterial. Black's actual move ends all thoughts of a c2-c3 advance, but i 1 also gives up c4 to the White Knight. By allowing this, the c-file i> neutralized and White is free to seek out kingside play by f2-f4 ""'ithout fear of a queenside reprisal. By not making use of his queenside chances (and 14 . . .b4?? 1'ills Black's queenside play), Black allows White to take over the 1\ame on the other wing.

15.Bb2 O-O

t6.Nc4 Bc8? I can't comprehend this move. .Qe2 Nce7? Black's last couple of moves seem to be setting up a kind of "help-problem" (Black to play and hang his a8-Rook).

18.f4 exf4??

Completing the picture set up by . . .Bc8 and . . . Nce7. When you don't follow your correct plan (and Black ignored his queenside chances), you often end up with no plan at all. When this happens, random puttering about, mixed with blunders, often ensues.

19.e5 dxe5

20.Bxa8 and White won.

[diagram]
Ann otate this game and then go over my notes and see how your ideas and comments measured up. 1 .d4 Nf6 2.Nf3 c5 3.e3 e6 4.Bd3 Nc6 5.c3 cxd4 6.exd4 d5 7.Nbd2 Bd6 8.O-O O-O 9.Rel Qc7 10.Nfl h6 l l.Qe2 Nd7 12.Bc2 Re8 13.Qd3 Nf8 14.h3 Bd7 15.Nlh2 a6 16.a4 Rac8 17.Re2 Bxh2+ 18.Nxh2 Na5

19.Nf3 bS 20.NeS Nc4 21.Nxd7 Qxd7 22.Qg3 Kh8.

S o l u t i o n Suveg-Cota (1700-1800), Los Angeles 1998. Colle System.

1.d4 Nf6

2.Nf3 c5

3.e3 e6

4.Bd3 Nc6

5.c3 cxd4

What's the hurry? This move exchanges a dynamic c-pawn for White's passive e3-pawn. On top of that, Black lets White open up the e-file for his Rooks and also frees the blocked cl-Bishop.

6.exd4 d5

White can be very satisfied with the result of the opening. His pieces stare ominously at Black's kingside. Though we can clearly see that White will be playing for a kingside attack, Black's correct plan might be less clear. Kudos for those who noted that the second player should be preparing a minority attack via an eventual . . . Rb8, . . . b7-b5-b4. Don't forget the pawn-pointing theory here: White's pawns aim at the kingside and Black's point to the opposite wing.

7.Nbd2

[diagram]
Not bad, of course, but a tad inflexible. Why hurry to block your cl-Bishop? And why put off castling, which is a move you know you must make? 7 ...Bd6

8.O-O O-O

9.Rel

White later reali2ed that one key plan called for an early NeS followed by f2-f4. If this is realized, White would prefer his Rook to stand on fl . Due to this, he could have tried 9.Qe2 with the threat of Ne5 and f4. However, 9.Qe2 Qc7 would have forced JO.Re l , with a likely transposition to the actual game. 9 . . . Qc7

10.Nfl

White tries a different, but good, idea. The Knight gets out of the way and heads for g3 where it will participate in a kingside ;ittack.

[diagram]
This move weakens the kingside and sets up various themes involving tactical explosions on h6. It's clear that Black is worried :tbout his kingside and hasn't begun to consider his own play on the queenside (not hurrying with your own plans is a real recipe for disaster). ll.Qe2 The immediate l l . Bc2 followed by 12.Qd3 made more sense. l l. ..Nd7 If Black intended to do this, why did he waste time on . . . h7- h6?

12.Bc2 Re8

13.Qd3 Nf8

Black led White to believe that he would try . . . e6-eS at some point, but now we see the second player settling in for passive defense. He still hasn't started his queenside counterplay.

[diagram]
(152) White to play.

14.h3?

Too slow. Why not speed things up with 14.Ne3 (threatening NxdS) 14 . . . Bd7 15.Ng4 with kingside threats? Note how the Knight on g4 not only eyes the tactically weak squares on f6 and h6, it also keeps tabs on the key e5-square. 14 .. . Bd7

15.Nlh2 a6?

What's this? Black has finally figured out that his future lies on the queenside, but he seems happy to go about his business there as slowly as possible. The immediate 15. . .b5 is much more to the point, since 16.Qxb5? Nxd4 won't be to White's tastes.

16.a4?

White wanted to stop Black's play before continuing with his own. A noble idea, but 16.a4 doesn't stop anything. In general, attacks on opposite wings call for speed and a sense of urgency. Time becomes very important, and one wasted move often makes the difference between a win or a loss.

16. . .

RacS? Creating the cheap threat of . . .Nb4. However, Black should continue with his queenside expansion with 16 . . . bS since l 7.axb5 axb5 18.Rxa8 Rxa8 (giving Black the a-file) 19.QxbS? is still very bad due to 19 . . . Nxd4.

[diagram]
.Re2 Bxh2+? Giving up the dark squares and the two Bishops. It's hard to guess what prompted this decision.

18.Nxh2 Na5

19.Nf3?

[diagram]

19.Ng4. One fanciful (but quite possible) line is 19 . . .bS 20.Qf3

bxa4? 21 .Bf4 Qb6 22.Qg3 Kh8 23.Nxh6! gxh6 24.BeS+ and mates. Black would have been in terrible trouble after 19.Ng4. 19 ... b5

20.Ne5

The Knight looks pretty on e5, but it has nothing to do with h6 or f6.

[diagram]
20 ...Nc4 Now Black is going to exchange Knights and deprive White of a key attacking unit. This makes a lot of sense. Queenside play usually bestows the better endgame on its employer. If you're defending against a kingside attack which requires several attack ing units to succeed, an exchange of pieces weakens his attack and brings you closer to that promising endgame.

21.Nxd7

White cashes in for two Bishops versus two Knights. Consid ering the circumstances, this is a good decision since it gives him something to play for in the long run. 21 ... Qxd7

22.Qg3 Kh8 and White's time pressure eventually led to a

Black victory. In this final position, White should continue to pursue his kingside dreams with 23.Qh4. Tips * You can't find a proper plan if you aren't able to recognize the imbalances in the position. * In general, attacks on opposite wings call for speed and a sense of urgency. Time becomes very impor tant, and one wasted move often makes the differ ence between a win or a loss. * Queenside play usually bestows the better endgame on its employer. If you're defending against a kingside attack (which requires several attacking units to succeed), an exchange of pieces weakens his attack and brings you closer to that promising endgame. £1 1

[diagram]

[diagram]
P r o b l e m P o s i t i o n (153) White to play. What are allthe imbalances? What side of the board should both you and your opponent play on? What is the best move or plan based, naturall y, on the answers to the first two questions? S o l u t i o n Okay, so you see that the fl-Rook has to be moved. But don't you dare touch it until you have answered those three questions posed earlier! Need a bit of help? All right, let's do them together. Our first question is: What are all the imbalances? Black has two Bishops, but the g7-Bishop isn't very active. The a6-Bishop looks good at first glance, but it's not working with the rest of it's army to fulfill any goal or plan. Other imbalances are pretty obvious: White has more central space and he also has the better pawn formation. The next question is: What side of the board should both you and your opponent play on? The center is closed, so neither player can initiate action in that sector of the board. White's pieces are aimed at the kingside, and his eS-pawn hits the weakened f6- square. So kingside play will be a definite part of White's future. Who is master of the queenside? Black's pawn weaknesses in that area don't inspire confidence for the second player. For

[diagram]
example, the hole on c S might make a nice home for White's Knight someday. Finally, we're forced to come up with a specific move or plan. Since we have plusses on both wings, wouldn't it be nice to dominate everywhere? Black won't be able to get anything going Otl the queenside if we can stop him from playing . . . c6-c5. So we have to keep an eye out for that (a timely b2-b4 freezes those doubled c-pawns!). The kingside is our domain. Bishop moves Uke Bf4-g5-f6 are possible, and the simple Bh6 is also in the air. That only leaves one problem: our threatened Rook! Where to nove it? The answer is 1 .Rfel. This innocent-looking move does a couple of very important things! Aside from getting the Rook to a safe square, it overprotects the eS-pawn. Overprotection is a 11rophylactic maneuver, and its point here is to stop Black from c:ver getting frisky in the center with . . . f7-f6. With our Rook, 1\ishop, d-pawn and Knight bearing down on eS, we ecstatically :answer . . .f6 with e:xf6 when Black has a weak pawn on e6 and a

1.uge hole on e5 (our Knight spends its spare moments dreaming

[diagram]

[diagram]
P ro b l e m Pos i t i o n White to play. Is White doing allright in this position? What would you recommend? This position arose (White was an 1800 player while Black had a 1 900 rating) after 1.d4 Nf6 2.Nf3 g6 3.Bf4 (the Boring Variation of the KID) 3 • • .Bg7 4.e3 d6 5.h3 O-O 6.Be2 c5 7.O-O cxd4 8.exd4 Qb6 9.Nbd2 Be6 10.Nc4 Bxc4 11.Bxc4 Qxb2

12.Rbl Qc3 13.Qe2 Rc8.

S o l u t i o n The imbalances should be pretty easy to read if you make use of the imbalance list in the first chapter. White has two Bishops, active pieces and a nice lead in development. Black is up a pawn and is threatening to chop off our c4-Bishop. Aside from that, the second player has nothing to crow about. Since the position is so open, and since White's pieces have influence everywhere, White can get something going on the queenside (Rxb7), in the center (Qxe7) and on the kingside.

[diagram]
The most important thing to understand is that White MUST make use of his favorable imbalances. Since he has a lead in time (development), he must play dynamically and try to get the most o-.it of it-once Black gets his own pieces out, White will be in tr<>uble due to his pawn minus. With this in mind, you should be looking for sharp, forcing continuations that keep your opponent off-balance. In the game, White found the nice:

14.Bxti+!!

Initiating a powerful attack against a Black army that isn't really ready for a fight.

14. . .

Kxf7 1 5.Ng5+ Ke8 This wasn't what Black wanted to do, but 15 . . .Kf8 16.Qe6 (:also winning is 1 6.Ne6+ Kf7 17.Nxg7 Kxg7 18.Qxe7+) 16 . . . Qc4 (1 J7 7.dS also led to a depressing result for the second player . . . QxdS allows 18. Qxc8+). Even worse was 15 . . .Kg8 16.Qe6+ Kh8 17.Nf7+ Kg8 18.Nh6+ Kh8 19.QgB+ Rxg8 20.Nf7 mate.

16.Rfel

Not the only move. White could also play 16.Bxd6 Nc6 1 7.Rxb7 with a quick crush. t6 . . .Nc6 17 .Qe6 and White won due to the decisive double threat of l 8.Qf7+ and 18.Bxd6. Yes, some calculation was necessary here, but you certainly dldn 't need to work things out to the end. Your lead in develop rnen t and the fact that you could make the enemy King very insecure was all the provocation you needed! #13

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]

[diagram]
So, how is White going to get some play, where is it going to be, and how should he deal with Black's upcoming demonstration? If I was White, I'd look for ways to get some central play (I LOVE to play in the center!). This can be done by 1.NdS followed by 2.c3 and 3.d4. Another idea is mixing central play with a kingside block by l .Ngl fS 2 .f3 with Nge2, Be3 and an eventual d3-d4 to follow. One other plan is 1.Nh4 fS 2.exfS gxfS 3.f4, starting a hand-to-hand fight in the same basic area. In the actual game, White showed that he didn't care what Black wanted to do. All he could think of was starting a "mating attack." Thus, the crazy (and completely unjustified) 1.h4? fS

2.Rhl? appeared on the board. At this point Black should probably

try 2 . . . h6, keeping White's pieces off of gS and preparing to meet

3.hS with 3 . . .gS (when it finally becomes clear that Black is boss

on the kingside!). Nevertheless, White did end up going down in flames. Hopefully he won't set himself on fire in the future. One thing I insist on when teaching a student is that he/she always plays for a win. This is obvious enough if your rating is 1500 and your opponent is only 900. However, courage starts to deteriorate when you get paired against someone with a 1900 rating! At that moment, you no longer play the opponent, you begin to play the rating and often give the person sitting aCrol;iS from you superhuman capabilities. The first thing every chessplayer must learn is that human beings make errors. If you go all out to give your opponent problems, an error can easily appear and a big, fat scalp can fall into your lap. The second key point for the winning player is that all non titled players (IMs and GMs being the titled guys) are capable of playing very, very badly. Why fear somebody who is quite capable of going berserk at any moment? Simply put, don't give respect to anyone due to rating. Make them earn that respect by waging all-out war!

[diagram]

[diagram]
S o l u t i o n This well-known position from the Torre Attack was new territory for the 1600 player and he took a long time here trying to figure out what was going on. Finally he realized that his chances were on the kingside due to his advanced pawn on eS and chances for a g2-g4 advance-this opens a file for his Rooks and follows the advice: Always play on the wings with pawns when the center is closed.

1.h4!

A great move that stops Black from advancing with . . . g7-g5 and also gains kingside space. I was proud of him for finding this far from obvious idea. 1 ...c4 This move attacks the White Bishop, gains queenside space and prepares a general queenside pawn advance (since White is going for the Black King, Black must stake out territory on the other wing). Its only flaw is that it creates a hole on the d4-square. Of course, Black has no intention of taking the h-pawn by 1 . . . Bxh4 since that would only open lines to his own King. 2.QhS would make Black extremely unhappy.

2.Bc2

An obvious move that took too much time to play! Instead of just making this simple retreat, White went into a panic about Black's space and sat there for ten minutes before giving in to the inevitable. 1600 often suffers from time pressure and this shows us why-he wastes time on moves that should be made quickly. Why? Because his lack of confidence makes him see ghosts around every comer. As it turns out, this seemingly innocent bit of hesitation was the first step in complete mental surrender! 2 . .. b5 Black grabs more queenside space and prepares to open lines on that side with . . . b5-b4. Notice how Black is trying to generate counterplay in the quickest way possible. This does two thinl!S'.

3.a3?!

[diagram]

4.h5?

A completely useless move that wastes time and actually weakens White's hold on the g5-square (if it doesn't open lines to the Black King it shouldn't be played). 4.hS? was White's one stab at attack but we must wonder why someone would play it if he originally planned g2-g4. The reason is purely psychological: White was so frazzled that any move that got near the Black King made him feel empowered. Thus White becomes another victim of emotion and panic . Naturally, both 4.g4 or 4.Nf3 were superior moves . 4 . . . a5 Prepares to worry White by preparing the . . . b5-b4 advance.

5.Nf3

#16

[diagram]
Finally a logical move that actually improves his position. After his first fine move, White has been in a complete nose-dive. 5 ...Ba6 The immediate 5 . . .b4 failed due to 6.axb4 when the Black a pawn is pinned to its Rook. Now this pin doesn't exist and White can start to worry about Black's threats again.

6.Nd4

Improving the position of the Knight and eyeing both c6 and e6. Has White gotten back on track? 6 ... Qb6 This keeps the White Knight out of c6 and prepares to play . . . b4.

7.Rbl??

White snaps. Faced with a concrete threat, White goes bonkers and plays a move that actually does nothing at all. He really had to throw caution to the winds and play 7.g4 when Black would be forced to react to White's gestures of aggression on the kingside.

7... b4

Threatens to win a piece by 8 . . . b3 (courtesy of 7.Rbl??). Black's attack is much further advanced than White's so we won't look any further at this rather sad game. # 1 6 Riese-Carter (1482-1537), Continental Open 1996. Ruy Lopez.

1.e4 e5

2.Nf3 Nc6

3.Bb5

The venerable Ruy Lopez is one of the oldest known openings. 3 ...Bc5

[diagram]
A rare line (3 . . . a6 is more common) that prompts White into initiating a tactical flu rry.

4.Nxe5

A common tactical device. White knows that he can regain his material after 4 . . .NxeS by S .d4, forking Black's Knight and Bishop. 4 . .. Bxf2+

5.Kxf2 Nxe5

6.Rfl

White prepares to castle by hand with Kgl . 6 ...Qf6+

7.Kgl Qb6+

[diagram]

8.d4 Qxb5

9.dxe5 Qxe5

P 1 o b l e m Po s i t i o n (158) White to play. Would 1.Bf4 be foolish here?

[diagram]
S o l u t i o n In a way, this position was more or less reached by accident. Black got carried away with his material desires while White had no choice after missing . . . Qb6+ . Black is a pawn up but things are not all rosy. His King is still in the middle, he will lose time due to the vulnerable location of his Queen and he is considerably behind in development. All these things are dynamic in nature, though, and if Black can get castled and consolidate, his material plus will weigh in his favor.

10.Nc3!?

A logical move that brings a new attacker into position. Also interesting (and most likely strongest) was 10.Bf4!, a move White rejected due to 10 . . . Qxb2 (much worse is 10 . . . Qxe4?? 11 .Rel. Safest is 10. . . QcS+). However, White should not worry about the loss of another pawn or two, if Black is willing to keep moving his Queen, ignoring the needs of his other pieces. After l l.Nd2, White would be fully mobilized and ready for action.

10. ..Nf6

The Knight turns out to be vulnerable here. Preferable is 10 . . . Ne7 followed by . . . O-O. I don't think Black realized the danger he was in. l l.Bf4 White's final piece comes out and does two things: it attacks the Queen and prepares e4-e5. l l. .. Qc5+ This gives Black a crucial defensive tempo.

12.Khl d6

Black didn't like 12 . . . O-O 13.eS when the Knight is forced back to the poor e8-square. Now, after 12 . . .d6, White must find a way to keep his attack alive. If Black is able to castle and develop his Bishop, White's initiative will dissipate.

13.Nd5?

[diagram]
This isn't the right medicine. Much more energetic was 13.eS!, blasting open the center and keeping Black on his toes. After 13 . . . dxeS? (Black has to try 13 . . . Ng4) 14.Bxe5 Black doesn't want to allow 15.Bxf6 . If 14 . . . Ng4 (and not 14 . . . QxeS?? 15.Rel, picking up the Queen) 1 5 .Bxg7 Rg8 (15 . . . Nf2+ 16.R.xf2 Qxf2 17.Bxh8) White wins material with 16.Rel +! Be6 17.Qxg4. 13 ...Nxe4?? Black goes berserk and opens lines to his own King. Correct was 13 . . . NxdS 14.exdS O-O when the King finds a safe haven. White now finishes up in a very efficient way:

14.Rel f5

15.b4

This makes use of the fact that Black's Queen has to keep an eye on the c7-pawn. 15 ... Qc4

16.Qd3!

Simple but pleasing. White would be quite happy to go into a piece up endgame after 16 . . . Qxd3 17.cxd3. 16 ... Qc6

17.b5 Qc5

18.Be3

Suddenly the Black Queen is trapped and the game is won. Black resigned in a few more moves. #1 7 P ro b l e m Po s i t i o n (159) K .t.

A I. A

[diagram]

[diagram]
It should be noted that 1 . . . fS would have turned out very nicely for White after 2.exfS BxfS 3.Bd3 when White gets to use the e4-square as a home for his Knight.

2.Be2

This move jumps on the fact that g4 is no longer defended by a pawn. White doesn't mind the doubled g-pawns because he sees that the g3-pawn keeps the enemy Knight out of f4 and h4. I love White's mentality! Instead of seeing Black's kingside play as a threat, he is looking at it as a weakness! 2 . . . hxg3

3.hxg3 Kh7

Black has opened the h-file in his eternal dreams of mate. White continues to ignore his opponent.

4.Rfl

Clamping down on the fS-square and getting the Rook into a more active position. Also tempting was 4.Qdl . 4 . . . Rhs Black's Rook hopes to make the acquaintance of the White King. Will this worry his opponent?

5.Nb3

Laughing in Black's face! I'm not sure if the Knight is optimally placed here but White's desire to continue his queenside buildup and ignore his opponent's unsound kingside demonstration is admirable. Alternatives are S.aS, 5.Nc4, 5 .Qdl and S .c4 followed by 6.c5. 5 . . . Bh6 Black exchanges off his bad Bishop for White's good one. This trade was not prompted by positional acumen, though. Instead, Black realized that he could not mate with his Rook alone and, by getting rid of White's dark-squared Bishop, his Queen would have access to the gS-square.

6.Bxh6 Kxh6

7.Qdl

#18

[diagram]
Black has a very bad game due to his inferiority on the queenside and his weak pawns on g4 and f7. The immediate threat against g4 forces Black to either give up the pawn, play the groveling 7 . . . Qd7 or allow a Queen exchange by 7 . . .QgS 8.Qcl. 7 ... Kg7

8.Bxg4 Qg5

Black has placed all his hopes in this final attacking gesture. A5 usual, White just goes about his business and ignores him.

9.Bxc8 Qe3+

Also hopeless was 9 . . .Qh6 (which really doesn't threaten anything at all!) 10.Bh3. Even the scary 9 . . .Qxg3 doesn't give Black enough after the cold-blooded 10.BfS.

10.Rf2 Raxc8

11.Qf3. Gin! The double threat of 12.Qxe3 and 12.Qxf7+

forces a winning endgame. White went on to score the full point after l l . . .Qxf3 12.gxf3. Piacenza-Winston 0713-1265), Continental Open 1996. Queen's Indian Defense.

1.d4 Nf6

2.Nf3

White avoids the main lines with 2.c4 and instead plays a quiet system known as the Colle. 2 .. . b6

3.e3 Bb7

4.Bd3 e6

5.Nbd2

White eventually intends to advance his pawn to e4, gaining space in the center and preparing for a kingside attack via e4-eS.

[diagram]
6.c3 Nc6

7.O-O

So far, Black has handled the opening well. His next move, though, gives us the first hint about his true King-hunting psychosis. 7 . . . Bd6?? Awful. Black is so intent on aiming everything at White's King (I originally thought Black was trying to gain some control over e4 with his . . .b6 and . . . Bb7. Now I see that he had something much grander in mind!) that he ignores such "minor" things as central play and castling.

8.e4

Threatening a big fork on eS. White doesn't need an invitation to grab the center with gain of time! 8 . . . cxd4

9.cxd4 Be7

Black admits that his first idea wasn't very good. It looks like he's going to settle down and play a real game of chess now.

10.a3

A very useful move. White keeps the Black Knight out of b4 and prepares to gain queenside space with a later b4 advance.

[diagram]
Black unleashes the full fury of his subconscious! Where he got such hatred for royalty is beyond me, but it's clear that only the White King's head will make him happy. This move demonstrates the desire to attack without any justification whatsoever. In the end, all it really does is weaken the gS-square, waste time and ignore the center.

[diagram]

12.Bb2

White continues to develop and build in the center and on the queenside. I often see amateurs react to Black's kingside gestures with moves like 12.h3, keeping Black's pieces off of g4. Why waste a tempo on a non-threat and why give Black something to aim at when he advances his pawns by . . . g7-g5-g4? Don't give Black's plan more respect than it deserves.

[diagram]
12 . . .Rg8?? Yet another subtle move. I imagine flecks of aggressive foam fol'Clling on Black's lips as he looks at his opponent, hoping to see a q-uiver of terror or eyes wide with fear.

13.Rcl

White yawns and improves his position. Showing such a lack of .respect for your opponent's ideas often unnerves him and undermines his confidence.

[diagram]
This stops White from winning a piece with b4-b5.

14.Rel?

A nice building move that misses the win of a piece by 14.dS! exd5 15.Bxf6 gxf6 16.exdS. 14 ...g5?? Black lets out a roar as he jumps into the abyss. He should have played 14 . . . dS, trying to keep the center locked up.

15.g3?

White finally shows some fear and makes an unnecessary defensive move. Far stronger was 15.d5! (meeting an attack on the wing with a counterattack in the center) 15 . . . exdS 16.Bxf6 Bxf6

17.exdS+ when Black should quietly resign before rushing off to

l ick his wounds. In the actual game, White went on to win (despite his mistaken 1 5 .g3), but I would like to say that White's attempts to stand fast in the wake of kingside attacks struck a freeing blow for amateurs everywhere. #19 P r o h l t• m Po s i t i o n (161)

[diagram]
8 � :8 .t n Goldberg-Royal (1700-1800), California 1996. White to play. How should White handle this position? S o l u t i o n White is behind in development and will have problems getting his cl-Bishop to a good post. He was not happy here and instead of trying hard to give himself something to play for, he let his poor mood affect his choice of move.

8.Nxc6?

[diagram]

[diagram]

10.exd4?!

[diagram]

10. . .

Bd6 ll.h3 Bf5

12.b3 O-O

13.Ba3

Trying to exchange his bad Bishop for Black's good one. Unfortunately, White continues to fall further and further behind in development. 13 . . . RfeS l 4.Bxd6 Qxd6

15.Qb4 Qc7

t6.Nf3

[diagram]
Now it's Black's turn to get excited. He has a huge lead in development and must be feeling the desire to throw some kind of knockout punch. Remember: a development lead is a tempo rary advantage and must be used before the enemy can catch up. These facts should have told Black that a key moment has arrived; how will he punish his opponent? The correct move (which Black failed to find) was 16 . . .eS!!, ripping the center open so that the Black pieces can reach the centrally placed White King. Then 17.NxeS Rx:eS+ 18.dxeS QxeS+ gives Black a raging attack since 19.Be2 Re8 picks up material while 19.Kdl Ne4 creates overwhelming threats against c3 and f2. Tips * You have to keep your eyes open for key moments in the struggle. * A key moment has arrived if you are poorly placed and need to find a move that gives you a new lease on life. * A key moment has arrived if you are in charge of the game and sense that it's time to search for a knockout blow. * The exciting moves that often arise from key posi tions can only be found if you make a conscious decision to look for them. This means that you must turn off the automatic pilot and try to make the position conform to your will. #20

[diagram]
An ciersson-Flaherty (1 588-1707), American Open 1 996. Dutch Defense.

1.d4 f5

The Dutch Defense is an aggressive opening that tends to do bener on the amateur level than on the international scene. Black's first move gains kingside space, fights for control over the im.J>ortant e4-square and prepares to place the g8-Knight comfort ably behind the f-pawn on f6. Its flaws include a weakening of the a2-g8 diagonal and the blocking of the c8-h3 diagonal (this often leads to difficulties for Black in developing his c8-Bishop).

2.c4

[diagram]

3.Nf3 d6

Black shows his interest in a line known as the Leningrad Variation (if he plays 4 . . . g6). White's move order was mainly designed to punish the popular Stonewall Variation, which arises after 3 . . .e6 4.Nc3 dS, -with 5.Bf4! followed by 6.e3 when Black will always be a little worse. The flaw in this order is that 3 ..e6 4.Nc3 can (and should!) be met by 4 . . . Bb4! S.Qb3 Qe7 with a difficult, more or less equal, game in store . .

4.Nc3 c6

All right, now Black's saying that he will play a rare Hort Antoshin Variation (this line would arise after 5.g3 Qc7). Does he know what he's doing or is he as confused as White is at this nnint?

[diagram]
5.e3

White avoids main line theory (a wise decision if you don't know the lines!) and decides to develop his pieces in an intelligent and logical fashion. 5 . .. g6 Black decides to go back into Leningrad-type positions. He intends to fianchetto his dark-squared Bishop and then strive for an . . . e7-e5 advance with subsequent play on the kingside where he owns more space, or in the center.

6.Bd3

Now the plans for both sides are becoming clear! I've already mentioned that Black intends to play for . . .e7-e5. White will strive to get play in the center with e3-e4. If he achieves this, the open e file will give him good chances to take advantage of the hole on e6 and the backward pawn on e7. 6 ... Bg7

7.O-O O-O

It's always a good idea to get your King safe before you open up the center.

8.Rel

White begins to prepare for his dream advance to e4. This is a logical idea, but the immediate 8.e4 also deserved serious consid eration (why dream of ice-cream when you can buy some and stuff it in your mouth right away!?). 8 .. . Qc7 Black prepares for his own advance (i.e., . . . e7-e5). However, another idea is 8 . . . dS!?, trying to make White's last move look silly. If White had played e4 on this eighth move, Black wouldn't have had this possibility. The moral here is: Don't endlessly prepare to actualize a plan when you can just do it and get the ballrolling!

9.Qc2

[diagram]

10.dxe5

This is too obliging. Faced with the threat of . . . e5-e4, White should have tried hard to come up with some sort of counter action in the center. Look hard at this position . . . what would you ha-Ye played? If you found 10.cS! you should give yourself a big pat on the back. Now (after 10.cS) 10 . . .dxcS l l .Bc4+ Kh8 12.NxeS leaves Black in difficulties, while 10 . . .dS?? Is impossible due to the obvious 1 1 .NxeS . The real question about the merits of 10.cS rP nters around Black olavinl! 10 . . . e4. In that case, White must

[diagram]
avoid ll.Bc4+?? due to 1 1 . . .dS when Black wins a piece. Instead, 1 1.cxd6 exd3? (better is 1 1 . . . Qxd6 12.Bc4+ Be6 though 13.Qb3 is promising for the first player) 12.dxc7 (and not 12.Qb3+?? Qf7 when White remains a piece behind) 12 . . . dxc2 13.cxb8=Q Rxb8 and now 14.Bd2 followed by 15.Racl and 16.Rx:c2 leads to the win of a pawn for White. White missed this move because he became overwhelmed by Black's apparent threat of . . . e5-e4. If you focus too hard on what your opponent is going to do to you, it is easy to exclude your own possibilities out of panic and blindness. In simple English, I'm saying: always try hard to find something positive for your side to do (actually, you should insist on it!). Try to avoid any kind of obsession on enemy threats. 10 . .. dxe5

11.e4 f4

Black has carved out a lot of space on the kingside and will soon launch a kingside attack by . . .h7-h6 and . . . g6-g5-g4.

12.b4

Realizing that things haven't turned out as he originally planned, White calms down and comes up with an excellent plan. His intention is to follow up with 13.cS (gaining queenside space) when Bc4+ or Nf3-d2-c4-d6 (making use of the hole on d6) may follow. By the way, I would probably have preferred the immediate

12.cS (another case of just doing your plan instead of preparing to

do it), since 1 2. . . Nbd7 can be met with either 13.b4 or 13.Na4. 12 ... a5

13.c5

White has suddenly begun to play with great purpose and, as so often happens when you act like you know what you're doing, Black cracks under the strain and just reacts to his opponent's queenside threats. 13 ... Na6?

[diagram]
This turns out badly. He should have played 13 . . .axb4 1 4 .Qb3+ Kh8 15.Qxb4 when queenside files have been opened (vvh ich will make White happy) but Black will get some counter chances against the potentially weak White pawns on a2 and cS.

14.a3!

A great move. White is now playing with confidence and ve JVe; his control of the queenside is growing with every move while the a6-Knight is no longer taking part in the game.

[diagram]
Black doesn't fall for 14 . . . axb4 15.axb4 Nxb4?? 16.Qb3+ Kh8 17 .Rxa8 .

15.Bc4+

Is this definitely the correct square for this Bishop? I would ha-ve voted in favor of 15 .Qb3+ Kh7 16.Bb2 when al and b4 are both defended and e5 is coming under some pressure.

15. . .Kh7

16.Rbl axb4

.axb4 Qe.7

18.h3

[diagram]

18. . .Nc7?

[diagram]
Black shows that he's mentally beaten. Instead of trying a hopeless defense (he has no chance of survival on the queenside), the second player should have gone all out on the kingside with 18 . . . gS. This would have terrified White and gone a long way towards challenging the wisdom of 18.h3 (after 18 . . . gS, White could try the very interesting 19.NdS!? when 19 . . . cxdS 20.exdS+ Kh8?? 21.NxeS is devastating. However, 20 . . . e4 allows Black to keep fighting).

19.Bb2 Nfe8

Black didn't like the look of 19 . . . Be6 20.NxeS!. His 19'h move shows that Black has completely given up on his kingside aspirations. His passive play is really nothing more than a form of suicide.

20.Na4

The clamp grows tighter. The Knight is heading for the juicy b6-square. 20 ...Na6

21.Qc3

This defends b4 and piles up the pressure against eS. I would have preferred 21.Bc3 followed by Nb6 and Qb2 (it's safer to lead with the Bishop, not the Queen). Black's game would then be completely hopeless.

21. .. Nec7

22.Nb6 Rb8

23.Redl

Announcing his intention to dominate the d-file. Shame on you if you wanted to play 23.Nxc8?. Why trade off your super Knight for a passive Bishop unless you have to? 23 ...NaS

24.NxcS

Now this makes sense. White grabs the two Bishops and leaves the Black Knight looking silly on a8. 24 ...RbxcS

25.Rd6 N8c7

[diagram]
26.Radl Rcd8

(163)

27.RxdS??

[diagram]

[diagram]
3) He suffered a blind spot and thought that Black could trade on d6, not noticing that this would lose to the pawn recapture and the fork that comes with it; 4) He lost his sense of danger and thought that "any thing would win" (you always have to concentrate fully until the opponent resigns); 5) He got carried away on the wings of his two Bish ops. This means that he felt his two Bishops would grant him a winning endgame so he played directly for that situation; 6) He might have felt that he was winnin g the eS-pawn and then had misgivings after the exchanges took place. 27 .. . Rxd.8

28.Rxd.8 Qxd8

All of a sudden the passive Black Rooks are gone and the once-passive Black Queen is sitting on an open file.

29.Qb3?

Feeling disoriented by the change in position (which he initiated!), White denies Black the check on dl. Now he's no longer playing against the enemy targets and calling the tune; instead White has sunk back to the unfortunate "reactionary" level. His last chance to take the game by storm was 29.NxeS (at least grabbing some justification for his trades on dB) 29 . . .Qdl +

30.Kh2 Qa4 (this is what he feared) 31.Qd4 Qxb4 32.Qd8 h5

33.QgB+ Kh6 34.Nf7 mate.

29 ...Qe7

30.BgS+?

White is still much better but now he loses his mind by thinking that Bishops are always better than Knights in an endgame. Though his Bishops are far superior to the enemy Knights at the moment, this is due to the fact that he has taken them out of the game by depriving them of any useful support points. White's unfortunate transition into the endgame lets the horses jump back into the battle and show what they are capable of. 30 ... Khs

[diagram]
31.Qt7??

!his completes his slide into oblivion. Why exchange the dyn:amic White Queen for the passive one on e 7? Evidently he felt that his Bishops would eat Black alive! 31 . . . Qxf7

32.Bxt7 Nxb4

::Reality check! All of a sudden the Black Knights are showing alar:rning activity and the White pawn on cS is isolated and weak.

33.Bxe5

[diagram]

34.Nxe5 Kg7

35.Bb3

:Even worse is 35.Bxg6 Kf6 when White loses a piece. 35 ...Nca6

36.Nd7 Nd3

37.e5 Naxc5 and Black went on to win.

Tips '* Get your plans in action as fast as you can. '* By making unnecessary preparatory moves, you will give your opponent time to carry out his plan. '* If you focus too hard on what your opponent is going to do to you, it is easy to exclude your own possibilities out of panic and blindness. In simple English, I'm saying: always try hard to find something positive for your side to do (actually you should insist on it!) . Try to avoid any kind of obsession on enemy threats. "* When you play with confidence and purpose, your opponent will often react to your threats and com pletely crack under the psychological strain.

[diagram]
* Try not to make moves on your opponent's side of the board. If you do, make sure that you are not needlessly reacting to imaginary threats. * Take away as many squares as possible from the enemy pieces when you possess a spatial plus. * If you only chance is to play on one side of the board, go all out and do it! Don't waste time trying to wage a hopeless defense. * Whenever you are going to make a trade, always ask if your pieces are better than his. If they are, only go through with the exchange if you are making some other kind of major gain. * The way to beat Knights is to take all their advanced squares (support points) away from them. The further they advance down the board, the stronger they become! P ro b l e m Po s i t i o n (164) Two unrated players. White to play.

[diagram]

[diagram]
Creating a scenario where your imbalance is superior to your opponent's: This is the key to the position! White should take all the information given earlier and mix it together in some palatable form. Here's the way I would approach this position: I already have a small advantage in space, so quiet development by Be2 and O-O is an option (in other words, I can simply nurture the imbalance that I already have). I can also play h2-h3 (a useful move in itself) with the threat of d4-d5, winning Black's Bishop. More interesting, however, is a plan based on gaining the two Bishops. I could try and hunt Black's Bishop down by d4-d5, but why close the position if I intend to get Bishops? Wouldn't it be more logical to open the position? With this in mind, the immediate 5.Ng5 comes into consider ation (yes, I'm breaking the rule that tells us not to move the same piece twice in the opening!). Another way to do this is 5.dxeS (didn't I just criticize this move? No, I just pointed out all the things that were wrong with it and said that I normally wouldn't take it into serious consideration. In this case, though, White intends to grab the two Bishops, so opening the position as wide as possible makes a good deal of sense.) 5 . . . dxeS 6.Ng5 when 6 . . . Qf6 7.Nxe6 QxeS 8.Qd5! Oess clear is 8.NdS O-O-O 9.Bc4 Qg6 10.Qf3 NcS) 8 . . . Qxd5 9.Nxd5 O-O-O 10.Bc4 when White has the preferable position thanks to his two Bishops. White would be doing well if he chose 5.h3, 5.Be2, 5.Ng5 or

5.dxe5 followed by 6.Ng5. Just remember one big thing: don't

grab an imbalance if you feel the resulting position (and all the factors that make it up) is at odds with it (e.g., striving for Bishops in a closed position; striving for Knights in an open position. Both these errant plans might prove harmful to your health.).

5.d5?!

White goes for the closed position, not realizing that he is simultaneously making his fl-Bishop a poor piece by placing the center pawns on its color. 5 .. . Bg4

6.h3 Bxf3

[diagram]

7. Qxf3 f6n

[diagram]

[diagram]
Another rule worth following asks you to trade off your poor pieces for your opponent's good ones. In this case, Black would love to exchange his bad f8-Bishop for White's fine cl-Bishop. This can be done by 7 . . . Be7 followed by 8 . . . BgS or by 7 . . . g6 followed by 8 . . . Bh6. Most logical is 7 . . . g6 since it prepares for an eventual . . . f7-f5 advance and also prepares to trade the Bishops. Black's actual move caters to none of these positional de mands and, therefore, is an abomination of the worst order. More of this game follows in problems #22 and #23. P r o b l e m Po s i t i o n (165) Two unrated players. White to play. This pos1uon arose after 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 d.6 (the Philidor Defense) 3.Nc3 Be6?! 3 . . . Nf6 is better. 4.d4 Nd7 5.d5?! Bg4 6.h3 Bxf3 7.Qxf3 f6. Ust the imbalances and then find a plan that helps White make use of his main plusses. What is White's best move?

[diagram]

[diagram]
The light-squared Bishop rules! Putting these ideas into elementary perspective, it is enough to say that when you see a weak square, try to find a way to occupy it. If you have a bad Bishop, fight tooth and nail to get it outside the pawn chain so it can become active. Both these plans are very advanced, so don't feel bad if you have trouble fully understanding them. 8 .. . a6

9.Bxd7+ Qxd7

10.O-O O-O-O

Something new has happened. We now have Kings castled on opposite sides of the board. This usually means that both sides will launch attacks against the enemy monarch and seek a knockout. No more subtlety, just brute force and endless aggression. l 1.Bd2 Nh6. The rest of this game can be seen in problem #23.

[diagram]
P ro l1 l e m Po s i t i o n (167) • .I .t .I .l At 'iV A .l

A ·.A -

[diagram]

6.h3 Bxf3 7.Qxf3 f6 8.Bb5 a6 9.Bxd7+ Qxd7 10.O-O O-O-O

ll.B42 Nh6. A bi1i question comes to mind: should White capture on h6 and open up the g-file for Black's Rooks? o l ut i o n S b.ould White capture on h6 and open up the g-file for Black's Rooks? The answer is a resounding yes! The reason for this decision doesn't lie with the win of a pawn (which White won't take) or with attacking considerations. Instead, the reason centers around the creation of a hole. 1 2:.Bxh6 gxh6 Frankly speaking, this position is completely hopeless for Black Normally White would strive to attack the Black King by b2- Black his

[diagram]
b4, a2-a4-a5, Rfbl and b4-b5 ripping open lines to the enemy monarch (of course, Black would be doubling on the g-file and trying to create his own attack). However, White has a way to kill all enemy counterplay and virtually tum the game into a lock victory.

13.Ne2!

This is it! Instead of eating a pawn by l3:Qxf6 (which gives Black some counterplay with 13 . . . Be7: 14.Qf5 QxfS 15.exfS Rdf8

16.g4 hS 17.f3 hxg4 18.fxg4 hS 19.Rf2 hxg4 20.hxg4 Rfg8 2 1.Rg2

Rh4), White swings his Knight around to the dominating fS-squre where it rules the Black Bishop and kills any chances Black may have had for an attack (place the Knight on f5 .and White's pawns on h4 and g3. Such a set-up would give Blatk no hope at all). Once White takes control of the kingside with his super-horse, he can then proceed to play for a queenside attack without fearing any resistance whatsoever. Several students have asked how to know when it's all right to move a piece several times in a row. "Can't the opponent do something to punish you?" If the position were open, then long maneuvers would be of doubtful value since development and speed of operations be come critical. However, the closed center in our present game means that play will be more ponderous and thus conducive to productive Knight journeys.

13. ..Be7

14.Ng3 Rdg8

15.Nf5 and White went on to win the game.

[diagram]

[diagram]
tion. Doesn't this suggest that he seek play in that sector? > Neither player has any aggre ssively placed tro<Jps on the kingside. There are also no weaknesses in that area which tells us that no kingside attacks should be considered for either side. > Both players have solid central positions so active play there is also doubtful. > White's Bishop (it happens to be agood Btshop its central pawns are on the opposite color and thus don't block it) is less active than Black's Bishop. What can be done about this? How can White turn this piece into a useful member of his "society?" > Neither side has any clear weaknesses to attack. This is the key idea in the position! How can White create targets in the enemy camp? To summarize, you (as White) must ask the following ques tions and then demand an answer from yourself: 1) how can I make my Bishop stronger? 2) how can I get both my Rooks into the game? 3) how can I initiate queenside play? 4) how can I create weaknesses in Black's queenside fortress? 5) how can I get my Knight's into the action? Don't forget: each and every piece (other than the King) should play a role in the coming plan. Never leave anyone out!

1.a4!

The only correct decision! Suddenly White is challenging Black for queenside space. He is also hitting the Black b-pawn and, by doing so, is turning his passive Bishop into a strong attacking piece. Finally, the Rook on al, which seemed so useless a moment ago, shows that it is actually beautifully placed on its original square. 1 ... b4 Black doesn't like l . . .bxa4 since 2.Rxa4 lets White build up strong pressure against the new target on a6 (White will double

[diagram]

2.a5!

[diagram]

1.d4 Nf6

2.Nf3 e6

3.1Sg5

This line, the Torre Attack, is very popular in amateur events. 's easy to learn and carries a lot of sting. 3 . . . Be7

4.Nbd2 d5

5.e3 O-O

6.Bd3 Nbd7

7.O-O

[diagram]
A common mistake. White doesn't want Black to play . . . c7-c5 followed by . . . Qc7 because then the second player would gain control over the eS-square. To prevent this from happening, White should play 7.c3 when 7 . . . cS 8.NeS gives White a grip on eS and real chances for a kingside attack. For example: 7.c3 cS 8.NeS (threatening 9.f4) 8 . . .NxeS 9.dxeS Nd7 10.Bf4 (if White had already castled then 10.Bxe7 followed by 1 1.f4 would be correct. The fact that White is not castled allows him to use his kingside pawns in a more aggressive fashion) 10 . . . fS ll.h4 when a later g2- g4 will give White a strong attack. 7 ... c5

8.c3

This lets the White Bishop calmly move back to c2 in case of . . .cS-c4. 8 . . .h6 Missing his chance to play 8 . . . Qc7! followed by a quick . . . e6- eS. Note that 8 . . .Qc7 9.Bf4 would be met by 9 . . . Bd6.

9.Bf4 Nh5

10.Ne5

I was very pleased to see that White wasn't afraid to have his pawns doubled (it doesn't matter if the move is actually good or bad; the fact that he embraced the concept is a very encouraging sign). These doubled guys are not weak at all; in fact, they give White a half-open e-file and firm control over the eS-square. 10 ...Nxf4 ll.exf4 Nxe5

12.fx:e5 c4??

Absolutely horrible. What does Black gain by this obvious attack? Yes, he threatens White's Bishop, but is the first player going to leave it there? A bribe might induce him to do so, but aside from that I would guess that any semi-intelligent life form would slide the wrl,; J.

[diagram]
Bishop back to c2. So the threat really should not play a part in Black's decision to push to c4. Instead, the gain of queenside space and the closing of the center should be the main points of interest. In the present position, Black closes the center with 12 . . . c4 and thus forces both sides to play on the wings: Black will play for . . . b 7-b5-b4, opening queenside files and creating attackable targets in that sector, while White will play for mate with f2-f4-fS. Since White's plan is more threatening than Black's, 12 . . . c4 shouJd be rejected (with a shudder of disgust!) because it takes away Black's chances for central counterplay! Remember: Cen tral play almost always beats wing play. Place your bets on the <:enter whenever you can and don't get drawn into maklng useless one-move attac ks on enemy pieces. By the way, 1 2. . . Qb6, attacking pawns on b2 and d4, would have been quite annoying. White would have been so busy trying to hold on to his stuff (the word "how" comes to mind!) that he wouldn't have time to even think about a kingside attack!

13.Bc2

J'.,"ow White's happy. The d4-pawn has turned into a rock! 13 . . . Bd7

14.f4 t6

[diagram]
In the game White played 15.Bg6. Is this a good move? If you don't like it, what do you think he should have played? S o l u t i o n In this position, White became obsessed with his control over the c2-h7 diagonal and the attacking chances that this brings. Seeing a hole open up on g6, he played 15.Bg6? (all this does is let Black eventually offer a Bishop trade with . . . Be8), but didn't have anything after 1 5 . . . fxeS 16.fxeS Rxfl+ 17.Qxfl Qf8 18.Qe2 Qf4

19.Rfl QgS 20.Bf7+ (much better would have been 20.Bbl

followed by 2 1 . Nf3 and 22.Qc2) 20 . . .Kh8 and suddenly White realized that his Bishop had gone too far into hostile territory. Bishops are long-range pieces! They don't need to stick their noses in places where they can be cut off. Going back to the diagram, try to find a way to add new advantages to the ones you already have (kingside space, good light-squared Bishop versus Black's poor Bishop on d7, central space).

15.exf6

A simple move that carries a big punch: > It opens up the e-file for White's Queen and Rooks. > It exposes the e6-pawn as a backward pawn on an open fUe. In other words, White created an attackable target! > It gives the White pieces access to the e5-square. > It begins a minor piece fight because now the White Knight willbe better than a Bishop once it reaches the juicy e5-square. White still possesses those other plusses that he was mesmer ized by, but now has a plethora of other blessings also. 15 . . . Bxf6

[diagram]

1.5.Nf3, and White's plan of 17.Qe2 followed by 18.Rael

:don 't forget to get all your pieces into play!), 19.Bbl and 20.Qc2 eaves Black in sad shape (poor Black is getting killed on the bl- 17 diagonal and is also facing pressure against eS and e6. Girlfish-Langer (2071-2279), Reno 1998. Sicilim Defense, Alapin Variation. ::l.e4 c5

2.c3

[diagram]

4.exd5 exd5

5.Nf3 Bd6

[diagram]

9.h3 Bh5

10.Be2

[diagram]
So far we don't see any ill-effects from hated pin, but her true inner turmoil only shows itself on the twelfth move.

10. ..Nf6

11.O-O O-O

12.Nfd2?

What a strange move. Here we see how personal psychosis can make us make moves that other people would never consider trying. Of course, those "other people" tend to have their own hang-ups: the prospect of a doubled pawn could easily send one player into a fit, while another person's inner demons might only come to light if they allow their opponent to gain two Bishops versus Bishop and Knight. In the present game, Girlfish's pin-fear colors her every decision.

12. ..Bg6

13.c4

Having dealt with the pseudo-pin (clearly the object of her most primal fears), Girlfish now begins to play aggressively again. 13 ...Nc6

14.Nc3 Bb4

Black had no interest in giving White mobile center pawns by 14 . . . dxc4 15.bxc4.

15.Nxd5

Not falling for 15.Rcl?? Ba3!, winning the Exchange due to

16.Ral Bb2 .

15 ...Nxd5

16.cxd5 Ne7

17.Bf3 Nxd5

A very interesting position has been reached. Black is telling White that the d4-pawn is isolated and weak, while White is saying that the d-pawn is passed and strong.

18.Nc4 Bc3

[diagram]

22.Rel

White is no longer employing a plan. Instead she places her eces on nice-looking squares while simultaneously ignoring the :ed to break the dS-blockade. 22: . . .ReS

[diagram]
P r o h l P m P o s i t i o n (170) White to play. In the game, White played 1.Be4. What do you think of this move? Is it a logical choice? S o l u t i o n

23.Be4?

This move doesn't make much sense because the light squared Bishop is White's best piece-it kept Black worried about the d5-square. By exchanging it, all the pressure is off Black and he's finally able to create some threats. There is also a tactical flaw: White's Rook on e4 is unpro tected. This turns out to be very important, and Black tries to take immediate advantage of this fact. Whatever the correct outcome should be, you must be aware of the inherent positional and tactical dangers when playing a move like 23.Be4. 23 ...Bxe4

24.Rxe4 Ba3!

Threatening both 25 . . . Bxcl and 25 . . .f6, taking advantage of the unprotected e4-Rook.

25.Ral Bb2

[diagram]

[diagram]

27. Qf3?

Missing her big chance. White could have jumped right back o the game with 27.Nxf7! Qf6 (27 .. . K.xt7 28.Rxe8 Kxe8 29.Bxc3 .ves Elack in a bad way) 28.NeS Q5 29.Qe2 Bxd4 30.Rxd4 RxeS :.tQicda.3-. It seems that Black's attempt to refute White's 23.Be4 lJy was incorrect.

27. ,.Qf6

28. Qg3?

.QGbi2rlQish snaps. Also bad was 28.Qd3 Nb4 29.Qxc3 Nxa2 a6. However, 28.Be3 Qxf3 29.gxf3 would have allowed 1ite t:D put up some resistance.

28. , .Bxd4

[diagram]

GLOSSA RY

[diagram]

[diagram]
Bind To have such a vise-like grip on a position that useful moves are difficult for the opponent to find. One often speaks of a crushing space advantage as a bind. The diagram shows an extreme example of a bind; Black is bound hand and foot and can undertake nothing positive at all. Bishop Pair To possess two Bishops versus the opponent's Bishop and Knight or two Knights. Two Bishops work extremely well together and are usually an advantage in open positions. Bishops ofOpposite Col.or A situation in which each player has only one Bishop, each being of a different color, and thus the Bishops can never come into contact. This is usually a good attacking imbalance for the rniddlegame, since one can't defend what the other attacks. However, these Bishops are known to be rather drawish in the endgame, due to the fact that the defender can place his pawns and King on the opposite color of the enemy Bishop, whereupon they are impervious to harm. From an attacking point of view, a general rule for Bishops of opposite colors is that they are at their best with other pieces to back them up. On their own, they are often impotent. Blockade Conceptualized and popu larized by Aron Nimzovich (1886- 1935), it refers to the tying down (immobilization) of an enemy pawn by placing a piece (in particular a Knight) directly in front of it. In the diagram, the Knight on d6 is blockading the pawn on d5. Blunder A horrible mistake that hangs material or makes enormous posi tional or tactical concessions . Book Published opening theory. A "book player" is one who relies on memorization of published analysis rather than on his own creative imagination. "Taking someone out of book," refers to sidestepping published analysis by playing a new or unorthodox move. This denies him the chance to make use of a good memory and forces him to find good moves on his own. Break The gaining of space (and thus more freedom of movement) by the advance of a pawn. In the diagram, White intends to open lines of attack on the queenside by the break c4-c5 (pre pared by b2-b4). Black will strive to attack White on the kingside by an . . . f7-f5 break. Breakthrough A means of penetrat ing the enemy position. This can be done by a pawn break or by a sacrifice involving pieces or pawns. In the diagram, both sides are attacking each other's King. At the moment White is safe, since . . . gxf3 can be safely answered by Bxf3. So White uses the time given him to effect a breakthrough on the queenside by l.bxcS dxcS 2.NxcS! bxcS. If Black does not capture the Knight, White willsimply retreat it to d3 and rip Black open by c4-c5, Qb2 and Black will be mated.

[diagram]
White to play. Brilliancy A game that contains a very deep strategic concept, a beautiful combination or an original plan. Calculation The working out of variations without moving the pieces physically. Though this book has taught you to talk or reason your way through a game, there are many positions that have a purely tactical nature. In such situations, the player's ability to calculate variations accurately takes on great importance. The way to train your cornbinative (calculative) vision is to study the games of attacking players like Alekhine, Tai, or Kasparov. Follow their opening moves and then cover up the rest of the game score. At this point you should endeavor to figure out all the imbalances, the plans, candidate moves, etc. When this is done, calculate each candidate move as deeply as you can, writing down ail this information as you go. All these things must be done without moving the pieces around. When you have done all that's possible (take as much time as you need, we are looking for accuracy; speed will follow with practice), look at the move played, make it on your board and keep repeating the process until the game is complete.

[diagram]

G LO S S ARY I 431

[diagram]

[diagram]
pawn on c4 increases White's con- Jt. ' 'if trol over the important d5-square. : n

[diagram]

[diagram]
Fianchetto An Italian word meaning "on the flank." Though you will hear many different pronunciations, the correct is fee-an-ket-to. When a Bishop is developed on QN2 or KN2 (b2 or g2 for White and b7 or g7 for Black), it is called a fianchettoed Bishop. This term applies only to Bishops. FIDE An acronym for Federation Internationale des Echecs, the World Chess Federation. Fil.e A column of eight squares. An open file is a file that is not blocked by either side's pawns. Fish A derogatory term denoting a weak chess player. Flank The sides of the board-the kingside and queenside. Flank Openings are openings that deal with flank development. Typical starts for such systems are 1 .c4, l.Nf3, l.b3, 1 .g3, etc. Force All pieces and pawns are units of force. For example, if White has four attacking units on the kingside to Black's two, White is said to have an advantage in force in that sector of the board. Forced A move or series of moves that must be played if disaster is to be avoided. Two examples: 1) You face a forced move when your checked King only has one legal move to get out of check. 2) A Knight (or any other piece) is attacked and has only one safe square to go to. Moving it to that safe square is also considered to be forced, even though other moves could legally be played. Gambit A voluntary sacrifice of a pawn or a piece in the opening with the idea of gaining the initiative, a lead in development or some other compensating factor. GeneralPrincipl.es Basic rules of play designed to serve as guidelines for less advanced players. As one's experience grows, one learns that rules are meant to be broken. For example: the old rule of "always capture with a pawn towards the center," is widely followed, but a good 30% of the time it is correct to capture away from the center. Other rules (such as, avoid doubled pawns, castle as early as possible, develop Knights before Bishops, etc.) are also just as suspect. The simple fact is that every situation must be looked at with an open mind--dogma is not something to be nurtured in life or in chess. Ghosts Threats that exist only in your own mind. A fear of your opponent or a lack of confidence will often lead to the appearance of ghosts and the cropping up of blunders in your play.

434 I THE AMAT E U R ' S M I ND

Grandmaster The highest chess title (aside from World ChaQlpion) that one can achieve. Conferred by FIDE, it is awarded to players who meet established performance standards. Other titles (in order of importance) are International Master and FIDE Master. Once earned, these titles cannot be taken away. Grandmaster Draw This label, originally used to describe a quick, uninteresting draw between Grandmasters, is now employed co describe a fast draw between virtually any class of players. ffack A derogatory chess term meaning a state of chess ineptitude. ffanging An unprotected piece or pawn exposed to capture is said to be hanging. Hanging Pawns Two adjacent friendly pawns on their fourth rank, separated from other friendly pawns, and subject to frontal attack on one or two half-open files. Though often objects of attack, they also possess a certain dynamic potential. Thus, the battle rages around the question, "are they strong or weak?" The diagram shows a common hanging pawns situation. The hang ing pawns on c5 and dS give Black an edge in space, good control of the central squares and pressure down the half open b-file. However, they are also exposed to attack. .Mog See Pig . .Mold A defensive term meaning to "hang on. " "Such and such a move would have held out longer," means that the move would have offered tougher resistance, but would most likely have ultimately failed. "Such and such a move would hold," means that the mentioned move would have allowed a successful defense. lfole A square that cannot be defended by pawns. Such a square makes an excellent home for enemy pieces (especially Knights) . For example, the opening l . c4 c5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.e4 is playable, but leaves a hole on d4 that, after 3 . . .g6 and 4 . . . Bg7, can easily be used by a Black piece. Eutcb A special room set aside for players in a tournament to analyze their games and play skittles. Such a room allows various kinds of

G LOSSARY I 435

activity to go on without disturbing the unfinished games in the tournament. Usually used by the non-masters (called Rabbits), the term hutch becomes easily understandable. See Rabbit and Skittles. Hypermodern A school of thought that insists that indirect control of the center is better than direct occupation. In particular, Reti and Nimzovich successfully propagated the idea of central control from the flanks. Unfortunately, they took their ideas to extremes-just as the classicists did. Today it is recognized that both schools of thought are partially correct, and a blending of the two is the only truly balanced method. Imbalance Any difference between the White and Black positions. Material advantage, superior pawn structure, superior minor piece, space, development, and the initiative are all typical imbalances. Initiative When your opponent is defending and you are attacking or putting pressure on him, it is said that you have the initiative. Innovation A new move in an established position or opening. Intuitive Usually a sign of experience, it enables a player to choose a move or plan by feel or common sense as opposed to detailed analysis. Isolated Pawn A pawn with no friendly pawns on either adjacent file: A common opening that allows an isolated pawn is 1 .e4 e6 2.d4 dS

93.. Nd2 c5 4.exd5 exd5 5.Ngf3 Nc6 6.BbS Bd6 7.dxcS BxcS 8.O-O Nge7

Nb3 Bd6 10 .Nbd4. The negatives of an isolated pawn are its inability to be guarded by a friendly pawn and the fact that the square directly in front of it usually makes a fine home for an enemy piece since no pawns can chase it away. On the positive side, it offers plenty of space and the use of two half-open or open files on either side of it, with the result that one's pieces usually become active. Kingside The half of the board originally occupied by the King, K Bishop, K-Knight and K-Rook. The kingside is on the right of the player with the White pieces and on the left of the player with the Black pieces. Liquidation A series of exchanges that are initiated to quell an enemy attack or to trade off to a drawn or won endgame. Luft Literally meaning "air. " In chess it describes a pawn move in front of one's King that prevents back rank mate possibilities. Major Pieces Also called heavy pieces. The term applies to Queens and Rooks. See Minor Pieces and Pawns.

[diagram]
Maneuver A series of quiet moves that aim to favorably reposition one's pieces. JNaster A player becomes a master when he reaches an Elo rating of 2200, though he will lose this title if his rating drops below that point. JNate Short for checkmate. It means that you are threatening to capture the enemy King and nothing your opponent can do will prevent its loss. When this happens, you have won the game. Material The pieces and pawns, excluding the King. A material advantage is obtained by winning a piece of greater value than the one you gave up. For example, giving up a pawn towin a Rook means that you have an advantage in material. Mating At.tack An attack on the King that is expected to lead to a checkmate. Middl.egame The phase of the game that sits between the opening and the endgame. Subtle plans and exciting attacks are generally seen in the confines of the middlegame. Grandmaster Tarrasch once said, "Between the opening and the endgame, the gods have placed the middlegame." Minor Pieces The Bishops and the Knights. Minority Attack A plan based on the use of two or more pawns (the minority) to act as battering rams against the opponent's three or more pawns (the majority) in order to create a weakness in the opposing camp. Here is the most common opening sequence by which a minority attack is reached: 1 .d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5 Be? 5.cxd5 exd5

6.Nf3 O-O 7.e3 c6 8.Bd3 Nbd7 9.Qc2 ReB 10.O-O Nf8 1 1 .Bxf6 Bxf6 12.b4

Be7 13.b5 Bd6 14.b:xc6 bxc6. White has carried out his minority attack and has left Black with a weak pawn on c6 and a weak square on c5. After a further Rfc l , Rabl and Na4, White will have great pressure against Black's queenside. This plan is very important to understand, and situations for its use constantly arise. Mobility To have freedom of movement for one's pieces. Mysterious Rook Move A move with a Rook that seems to have no threat or purpose, but which actually discourages the opponent from a certain type of action (see Prophylaxis), or sets up a very deep, well concealed plan.

G LO S SARY I 437

Occupation When a Rook or Queen controls a file or rank, that file or rank is said to be occupied. Occupation of a square occurs when a piece is safely placed upon it. Open A type of position (see open Game) or file (see Open File). This term also refers to a type of tournament in which any class of player can participate. Though a player often ends up with opponents who are much higher (or lower) rated than himself, the prizes are usually structured around classes and, for this reason, opens are attractive to players of every rating. The open tournament is extremely popular in the United States and is beginning to be seen more and more in Europe. Open File A column of eight squares that is free of pawns. It is on open files (and ranks) that Rooks come to their maximum potential. Open Game A type of position that is characterized by many open lines and few center pawns. A lead in development becomes very important in positions of this type. Opening The beginning phase of a game. This usually encompasses the first dozen moves but it can easily go much further. It is often written that the main opening objectives are: 1) develop your pieces in a quick and efficient manner; 2) occupy as much of the center as possible; 3) castle early (King safety). While I can say that these objectives are basically correct, the real purpose of the opening is to create an imbalance and develop your pieces in such a way that they all work together in making the imbalance a favorable attribute. Opposition In the endgame, a fight between Kings often occurs that ultimately determines which one is stronger. This face-off between the two monarchs is known as the opposition. Outflanking An endgame maneuver with Kings which makes forward progress on the board while: 1) Simultaneously preventing your opponent from taking direct opposition; or 2) Temporarily giving up the opposition for a higher goal. Overextended When a player tries to gain some advantages by starting a major advance or offensive, and then this offensive fails, he is often left with various weaknesses and nothing to compensate for them. His position is then said to be overextended.

[diagram]
OJerprotectwn A term coined by Nimzovich. I t refers to defending a strong point more times than appears necessary. The idea is that a certain pawn or square may be causing the Black (the opponent) considerable problems. By focusing so much energy on it, the Black player would be unwise to break that point because that would unleash the latent energy of the White pieces. In the diagram, White is overprotecting the e5-pawn. The reason for this is that the e5-pawn spearheads a kingside attack by White. Normally Black might wish to close lines there by . . . f7-f5, but nowWhite would answer this and . . . ti-f6 with exf6 when all of his pieces have increased their scope and have be come extremely active. Thus Black is unable to do anything that would allow White to remove the e5-pawn. As a consequence, his defensive resources are greatly reduced. Also see Prophylaxis. lassedPawn A pawn that has passed by all enemy pawns capable of capturing it. In the diagram, White has con nected passed pawns on g5 and h6. Black has a passed pawn on a7 and a protected passed pawn on e4. E!assive An inactive move that does nothing to fight for the initiative. A passive position is a position with out counterplay or active possibilities. • Patzer A derogatory term that denotes a hopelessly weak player. Pawn The least valuable unit of force in a chess game. Pawns are not considered to be pieces, they are simply called pawns. Fawn Center Pawns placed in the center. White pawns on f4, e4 and d4, for example, would constitute a large pawn center. A common opening that allows White to build such a center in the hope of attacking it later is l .e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.f4, etc. Fawn Chain Two or more like-colored pawns linked diagonally. The weakest point of a pawn chain is the base because that is the one pawn in the chain that cannot be defended by another pawn. Pawn Island A group of connected friendly pawns. In the diagram, Black has three pawn islands to White's two. It is usually considered to be advantageous to have fewer pawn islands than the opponent. Pawn Structure The positioning of the whole pawn mass. Also referred to as the pawn skeleton. This posi tioning of the pawns is what usually dictates the types of plans available

G LO S S A RY I 439

in a given position due to open files, space, pawn weaknesses, etc. Pig A slang for Rook. "Pigs on the seventh" is a common term for Rooks doubled on the seventh rank. Also known as "Hogs on the seventh." Plan A short or long-range goal on which a player bases his moves. Point Count A system of figuring out the worth of the pieces by giving each of them a numerical value. King = priceless; Queen = 9 points; Rook = 5 points; Bishop = 3 points; Knight .. 3 points; pawn = 1 point. The flaw in the system is that it does not take into account other factors (such as position, tactics, etc.) that often drastically change the relative value of an individual piece. Poisoned Pawn Any pawn that, if captured, would lead to serious disadvantage is considered to be poisoned. Positional A move, a maneuver or a style of play that is based on an exploitation of small advantages. Post Mortem A Latin term borrowed from medicine that literally means, "after death." In chess it refers to the sessions that often take place after a tournament game has finished. Both players discuss the game and attempt to find the reason why someone lost-the "cause of death. " In particular, those with huge or delicate egos love post mortems because they can show that they saw much more than the opponent (who was undoubtedly lucky to gain the victory). For those of a more open nature, if you have played a stronger player than yourself, you can sit back, ask what you did wrong and hope that the mysteries of the universe will unfold. Premature A hasty move, maneuver or plan--to take action without sufficient preparation.

[diagram]
Prepared Variation A deeply researched opening variation that is often strengthened by new moves. It is a common practice to prepare certain lines and new moves for particular opponents, refusing to use it against anyone other than its intended victim . ..Problem Child A reference to a Queen's Bishop that is trapped behind its pawns. For example, the French Defense (1 .e4 e6 2.d4 dS) is an attractive opening. Its one flaw is the Queen's Bishop, which is blocked by its own pawns and unable to reach an active square . .Prophylactic Move See Prophylaxis . .Prophylaxis A strategy explored by Nimzovich. Taken from the Greek word prophylaktikos, meaning to guard or prevent beforehand, prophylaxis (or a prophylactic move) stops the opponent from taking action in a certain area for fear of some type of reprisal. Overprotec tion is a form of prophylaxis . .lromotion Also called Queening. When a pawn reaches the final rank it's usually turned into a Queen. However, the pawn can be promoted into a Bishop, Knight, or Rook (it cannot be turned into a King). When a pawn is turned into something other than a Queen, the pawn is said to have underpromoted. l:'rotected Passed Pawn A passed pawn that is protected by a friendly pawn. See Passed .Pawn. Queening See Promotion. Queenside That half of the board made up of the four ftles originally occupied by the Queen, Q-Bishop, Q-Knight and Q-Rook. The queenside stands to White's left and Black's right. Quiet Move A move that is neither a capture, a check, nor a direct attack. Rabbit A humorous (slightly insulting) term for a non-master. Rank A horizontal row of eight squares. The seventh rank in particular is the subject of much activity, especially when a Rook settles there. Control of the seventh rank is considered to be an important advantage. Rating See Elo Rating Refutation A move or series of moves that demonstrates a flaw in a game, move, variation, analysis, or plan.

G LOSSARY I 441

Resigns Realizing the hopeless nature of a position and not wanting to insult the intelligence of the opponent, a player can surrender the game (resign) without having to wait for a checkmate. Resignation occurs in the vast majority of tournament games, while actual checkmates are quite rare. Risk A double-edged sword. A move, plan or opening variation that aims for advantage while canying the danger of a disadvantage. Romantic The romantic era (macho-era) of chess was a time when sacrificing and attacking was considered to be the only manly way to play. If a sacrifice was offered, it was a disgracefu,l show of cowardice to refuse; thus, many beautiful sacrificial games were recorded simply because proper defensive techniques were not understood. That was in the 1800's. Today, a player who is termed romantic is one who has a proclivity for bold attacks and sacrifices, often throwtng caution to the winds. Sacrifke The voluntary offer of material for the purpose of gaining a more favorable advantage than the material jnvestment. Unlike a combination, a sacrifice is not a cut-and-dried affair--there is usually an element of uncertainty associated with it. Though a combination always has one or more sacrifices, a sacrifice need not be associated with a combination. Semi-open Game A position with some closed and some open qualities. Typically, 1 .e4 e6, l .e4 c6 and l.e4 d6 lead to semi-open games. See Open Games and Closed Games. Sharp A bold, aggressive move or position. A sharp player is one who enjoys dynamic, explosive situations. Shot A strong move that the opponent didn't expect. Simplif.y An exchange of pieces to reach a won ending, to neutralize an enemy attack or simply to clarify a situation. Skittales Chess played in an offhand manner, often at a chess club or fter a tournament game. Sound An analytically correct move or plan. A safe, solid position. Space The territory controlled by each player. Thus, whoever controls the most territory has a spatial advantage. Speculative An unclear or risky move or plan.

[diagram]
Strategy The foundation of a player's moves. The way to achieve a particular plan. See Plan. Style The preference for certain types of positions and moves. It is typical to have one player who enjoys open, tactical positions while his opponent may cherish semi-closed structures of a positional nature. Thus, the first part of the battle will be to determine who gets the type of position in which he excels. Support Point A square that acts as a home for a piece (usually a Knight). A square can only be considered a support point if it cannot be attacked by an enemy pawn or if the enemy pawn advance (attacking the support point) would severely weaken the enemy position. Suindk A trick from an inferior position. Symmetry A situation ln which both armies are identically placed on their respective side:s of the board. For example, l .c4 c5 2 .Nc3 Nc6

3.g3 g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5 Nf3 Nf6 6.O-O O-O 7.a3 a6 8.Rbl Rb8 9.b4 cxb4

10.axb4 b5 11 .cxbS axb5 is a well-known symmetrical position that

comes from the EngJish Opening. Tactics Traps, threats and schemes based on the calculation of variations (at times rather long-winded). A position with many combinative motifs present is considered tactical. Tempo The unit of time represented by one move. For example: 1 .e4 d5 2.exd5 Qxd5 3.Nc3 gains a tempo, as the Queen must move again if it is to avoid being captured. Territory See Space. TlJeory Known and practiced opening, middlegame and endgame variations and positions. Opening theory is also referred to as boo k. TlJreat A move or plan that, if allowed, would lead to the immediate depreciation of the enemy position. TErne Can be used in several contexts. One meaning is the amount of thinking time as measured by special clocks (see Time Control) It is also used in reference to the ability to stop a particular action by the opponent, i.e. , "Black does not have time to coordinate a successful defense against the corning attack." Thus time also measures devel opment (an advantaEe in time being a lead in development) and the rate at which an attack is pursued or defended.

[diagram]
Time Control The amount of time given to reach a certain number of moves. In international competition this is usually 40 moves in 21/2 hours (extra time is given after 40 moves have been played). If a player uses up his 2 1/2 hour allocation and he has not yet made 40 moves, he will lose the game by forfeit no matter what the position on the board is like. Time Pressure That period of the game when one or both players have used up most of their time and must make many moves with little deliberation. Naturally, this should be avoided since it often leads to mistakes or game-losing blunders. Transitions The changing of one phase of the game into another-the opening into the middlegame and the middlegame into the endgame. Transposition Reaching an identical position by a different sequence of moves. For example, the Dutch Defense (1 .d4 f5) can be reached by l.d4 e6 2.c4 fS or by 1 .c4 fS 2.d4 e6. Trap A hidden way to lure an opponent into making an error. A trap should only be laid if it is part of the overall strategic plan. This way, it does not matter if your opponent falls for it or not; you will still be improving your position. Uncl.ear An uncertain situation. Some players never use this assess ment, insisting that every position is either equal or favorable for one side or the other. It has even been said that "unclear" is a lazy way to avoid figuring out what's really going on in a position. Variation The first two to five moves of a game lead to the bare-bones structure of a particular opening. All divergences from that point on are known as variations. Variations also occur in analysis of middlegame and endgame positions. Weakness Any pawn or square that is difficult or impossible to defend. Wild Extremely unclear. A sharp situation or move with unfathomable complications. Zugzwang "Compulsion to move." A German term referring to a situation in which a player would like to do nothing (pass), since any move willdamage his game. Zwiscbenzug "In-between move." A German term for an often unex pected reply thrown into an expected sequence of moves.

<<<END_TEXT>>>

<<<END_CORPUS>>>
